Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, my sons, as you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the completion of its content it has reached its end, and due to its explanations, and its demonstrations, and its declarations, I believe you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the greatest operation, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For surgery, considered the most complex of medical operations in our region and in our time, is fraught with great peril due to the lack of knowledge about it, and the study of it has ceased; and there remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have led to many errors and misconceptions, as the understanding of its principles is closed, and its power and art extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it has appeared to me that I should revive the order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be included as an addition to the declaration, and for the preparation of them, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The cause for which there is no longer a skilled artisan with their hand in this our time is because the art of medicine is long, and requires that its practitioner be well-versed in anatomy, understanding the youth of the members and the shapes of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of those, and their extraction; and also of the pulsating veins and the static ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, as he was small in stature but great in the art of medicine.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	We have already spoken of this at the beginning of this book; for those who are not aware of what we have told you about anatomy, they are not exempt from falling into errors that will lead to men's deaths, as you have seen many of them, some well-formed in this science but lacking in knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	When you see a foolish doctor who has cut an abscess on the breast of a woman and cut some arteries in her breast so that much blood flows inside, causing the woman to die from it among others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And you see another doctor who tried to remove a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state; the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with part of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And you have already called for help to remove it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you see another doctor who was paid a stipend by a duke in our land to perform surgery; he took a black crust that was supposed to be cut from the patient's thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture above the wound with pincers and pliers with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then, according to their wishes, loosen the bandages, rest, and apply a cold compress for some days, and command that the inflammation be reduced; and thus, while the matter is still fresh and the wound open, it can heal and avoid destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And they will call upon him, and he will loosen the bandages, and success brings calm and thus reduces their pain.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, so that it cannot be restrained, and does not cease to spread the corruption throughout the member until the patient comes to danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And see another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes ulcerated after some days, until the fire of his malignancy is increased over him by his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Which causes is because the pain in the bone is purely from melancholic humor, then it does not cover that it will come to him by a ferrous weapon, but rather it should be in the member which suffers that it is completely destroyed.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation should be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and another in work which poses danger to the most important dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are performed with error and fear; it is therefore necessary for you to keep this and set that aside, so that the foolish do not take advantage to speak against you and slander you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method for the grace of God to achieve salvation and glorious success, leave behind the terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and set aside your tools that make you afraid, so that cowardice in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, both now and in eternity, for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	They already slice open some of their wounds:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad ailments badly, lest bad doctors become famous.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first, the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter organized within the book's sections is about foot care, in the forms of instruments and the use of cauterization tools, and anything else necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and the use of cups, plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects. It is organized according to the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered on the internal parts of the foot, and on the shapes of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	With fire cauterization and sharp medicine, and recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	At that point begins the treatment of all the book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents of it is a long and prolix topic, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and many scholars have spoken about it, and there are disagreements among them, and I am satisfied with a small part of their discourses, fearing prolongations.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery will confer relief to the entire universal connection, which is of material or its material, except for two connections, which are connections with their own material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the connection that is dry and lacks material, opinions differ; some say that cautery is beneficial for such conditions, while others claim the opposite, stating that cautery is not suitable for ailments caused by dryness and lack of moisture, as the nature of fire is dryness and heat, and it would be counterproductive to treat a dry and barren condition with something hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite claim that cautery is beneficial for all dry and barren ailments in the body, as when you compare the human body and its moisture to the connection of fire, you find the human body dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And he says through the argument of those who claim this, that he has personally discovered this through experimentation.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not advisable for anyone to attempt this procedure if they are untrained and unexperienced in the art of cautery from prior study, as they must be familiar with the variety of human compositions, the disposition of diseases within them, their causes, and the circumstances of their occurrence, as well as the passage of time.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other circumstances, there is no cause for fear, especially in cases of pain and swelling, as all doctors agree on these treatments, and they are consistent in applying cautery to relieve them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery as a medicinal flame, for fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without causing pain to other members adjacent to it, but rather, with a slight discomfort.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The action of the medicinal flame reaches those members from which it diverges, and it strongly promotes healing in a member suffering from a difficult-to-heal disease, aiding greatly.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Kindle the fire, due to its subtlety and the excellence of its substance, does not cause harm but rather serves as a superfluous aid. It is already known to us through experience and the long service of studying the art regarding the truth of causes; for this reason, I excuse you from the length of my speech. And if it were not that this secret fire, hidden in this brief moment, cannot be freely read by you, I would have revealed its nature and the quality of its operation in the body, as well as its expulsion of ailments, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would benefit your understanding.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know this, my children, that the best time for making cautery and applying pressure is in the season of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And you say that cautery is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by time's passage is overshadowed by the healing effect of cautery, especially when cautery is for pains or necessary pains, severe and acute, which do not suffer from tardiness, lest one fear those that bring evil, which is better than allowing further harm to enter through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus, do not sit on your feet, my sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who believe that this illness, which is healed by cautery, will never return, and they pause at its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not so much as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its strength and virtue in operation and the grandeur of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the constitution of the illness and its location, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in their bodies from the addition of superfluities and humors, and what has been acquired by them from food and similar causes; for the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in members with few superfluities and humors, so when dent cautery is performed for pain and similar reasons, it is possible that that pain will not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is said in popular speech that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a false saying, as those who understand it believe there is no cure that surpasses medicine or any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when one applies the methods of healing in some ailments, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it proves beneficial for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here onwards, it becomes clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, but according to the understanding of popular opinion and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that hot cautery is better than cold cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of heat and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and proven that it does not do so in every body but only in certain ones; cauterization with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; however, when you make cauterization with fire, it is not declared to you, because the gold is consumed according to the amount you want due to the heat of the fire, and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts into the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the artisan can catch them by the occupation of that task.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, cauterization with iron should be made more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have organized those from the beginning within the feet, so that now I am asking him what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	With a hot cautery for head pain caused by cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers upon the patient the benefit of heat and moisture, two remedies for accidents caused by cold, which is the root of many fluxes, known as rheumatism, from the head to the extremities, and flu-like symptoms, and also sleep disturbances, toothache and throat pain, and generally all illnesses that arise from cold, as well as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cautery is as follows: first, you must evacuate the illness with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command them to shave their head with a razor, and make that incision between your legs on a clean bench, and place their hands on the afflicted foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the edge of your palm close to the razor's blade, between the patient's toes, and press down.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, if the inflamed area of the middle part of the foot has been determined, mark it with a sign and take the olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the healthy area marked with a sign, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is slowly constrained, and you turn it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then slowly lift your hand and examine the area, and if you already see any bone exposed, as well as the quantity of gravel-like matter, raise your hand again, and if it does not return to that position against the instrument, or another one from that side, cool it down until you see the bone, as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then apply pressure to the engorged area at the border and leave it, ensuring that the scale of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with an ointment containing four ingredients until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the better the limb gets, so it is better and more rejuvenated.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the flesh and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then remove what is adjusted to the bone and clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they say others that the pointed cautery should be used on the rear, as it first penetrates strongly into the bone, and then envelops it, and this is the form of the small cautery:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, the vapours of the head escape.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I do not see these two types of cautery suitable for everyone, but rather for certain individuals out of necessity; and indeed, when it comes to health, better is the natural cure when possible; for the head is exposed due to the solution of continuity of its parts, as we have witnessed in other members, especially when the head of the malady is of a fiery nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the specific type of cautery that comes first is safer and better for me; from this one, and through this work, health is achieved.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	On cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and persistent pain occurs throughout the head, and these symptoms prolong the illness, one uses weapons, splints, tourniquets, emplasters, poultices, hot water, dogs, cats, feathers, and similar things; but especially if a cautery has already been applied that does not heal or benefit from any of those causes, then consider this: if the nature of the head illness is strong, it is not necessary to apply another cautery on top of it.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on the side of the head where the skull is cracked using an internal cautery.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the skull open and expose the amount we have found, then cauterize that area with a cautery on the back left side of the head at a place called the "vas" – it is the location where the wind is stopped.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And apply your hand to it, do not expose the bones, for the disease finds great pain in this place, unlike all other cauterizations on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you should apply this cauterization in its proper place, because you know that the cauterization with which the horns of the head and the occiput are treated is a more delicate cauterization than the one applied to the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capital chapters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the treatment of old migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe pain in the head or a pain radiating to the eye occurs, it is necessary to use purifying medicines for the head and administer other treatments as mentioned regarding the various ailments; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with acute, burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	You might use burning medicines or cautery, take a hot cloth and cut off the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you should incise the place of pain in the temple with a scalpel until it is felt to be in the right place, as long as it remains hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply pressure to it as it is relaxed due to the release of constriction, and leave it for three hours; next, remove the compress and let the pain subside for two or three days, then apply a warm bath to the affected area until the pain disappears.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice to it until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you choose to do this using some of the burning medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines, then...
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Apply the cautery according to this manner: take a fire from the cautery whose shape is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a clavicle, because its head has the shape of a clavus (clover) with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small eminence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the painful area, holding it in such a way that the pain does not become more intense, and slowly turn the cautery at a controlled speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of blood that is clotted by the specific nature of the wound is equal to or greater than the capacity of the vessel, raise your hand so that the artery that remains below is not clotted, in order that no more blood flows out.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak it in salt water and place that over the area for three days; and afterwards apply a poultice with hot compresses until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you see, burn the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to make an incision into an artery in this newly formed wound.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization of old wounds.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When treating an old wound as we have discussed in the previous section on cure and dividing maladies, and if the treatment does not take effect and the pain persists due to a lack of appropriate medication or fire cautery, you should ignite the cuticular cautery until it turns white. Then place your hand over the area for a moment as you make an incision along the length of the painful line, identifying the source of the greatest discomfort.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the mandible, which is badly affected by chewing, and that the wound is not adhered and the nerves which are damaged, and that there is no muscle spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is concerning the care and prevention of the flow of blood from an artery that is cut, for in the cutting of it there is fear, especially to him who ignores what he does and is unstudious and impatient; and leaves the operation on him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And come to the remembrance of the regulation of the flow of accidental blood from the artery according to your manner in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness that does not respond to these cauterizations and you see the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you find, administer the cauterizations that we have said in the chapter of artery constriction with cauterization having two blades, this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear caused by friction and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery. This is known as a "puncta," which has this form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the puncta close to the heat source, and it should be rotated around the entire ear, or in any pattern that relieves the pain.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Use the cautery along the edge of the ear pain gradually, until the area is relieved from the pressure.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with the three points is applied all over the ear, and when it is removed, care should be taken of the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	**On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.**
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are precisely those that come from varicose humors, as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Cauterization should be avoided for this species that is caused by drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that species of tortuous vein with shaking and splashing and do not apply your treatment, know that you cauterize the illness in three places: first, you burn the tip of the auricle; second, a small portion on their temple; and third, the connection of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And hold the hot cautery against the opposite side of the afflicted part, for relaxation is only seen in the area that appears to be healed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is that you apply the hot cautery to the base of the earlobe, slightly above the ear lobe, and on the temple, its length corresponding to the length of the finger, and hold your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the substance in the vein is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of the cautery, and it is special from the knife, whose shape is placed flat on the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it may be even more subtle, as you will see with your own eyes; and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what we have mentioned does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize at four points: above all the joints of the head; also cauterize at the middle point of the head, as we have said; and cauterize the joint (or gland) under the chin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more difficult to treat; and then apply what you have processed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter .VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	About the cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	You should give the patient in the beginning small doses of herbs and pills, the servants will then administer them.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply the plaster to his neck as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of those methods I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus, if for those methods healing is good, otherwise make three cauterizations to him in the last part of his head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part behind it.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And between each cautery, he should ensure the thickest part of the skin is held, and then carefully perform the cauterization as it progresses.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the patient tolerates the pain, and the illness permits, perform the cauterization on the middle part of the body; but if greater relief is sought, cauterize both the upper and lower parts.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Ensure the care of what has been healed, and perform the cauterization with olive oil according to the shape previously indicated.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Understand that you should proceed with the softening of the head as we have discussed; then carefully shave the patient's head, and cauterize it in the middle part with a cautery, and cauterize all parts of the head, and cauterize over the last joint of it, and cauterize three times over the spine of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the case of severe stiffness and pain in the body, and the pain persists, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back, and later with cautery until the burning sensation of the patient disappears, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then carefully tend to it until it is healed, and this cauterization should be with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but that kind of epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is important to purify the patient's brain from the beginning of their illness and, for other remedies, as we have mentioned in the previous division when the disease is severe and does not yield to medical treatment.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to them for several days, improving their diet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and apply a cautery to it in the middle part of the head as previously described, and another cautery on the back of their head, and over any corners of the head that have been cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then apply cauteries as mentioned, having a paralyzing and softening effect on the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the olive cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted by excessive moisture and gross phlegm, cauterize it with the cautery that we have spoken of when it has led to paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of moisture declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then he should drink water that purifies their brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the patient's head, make a decent cut from the hairline down to the circle, and pause it in the middle of the scalp.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should feel relaxed, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy of being done before shearing sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that above the fire for tempering in measure, which causes them to suffer more when placed in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then take that in the middle part of his head in a circular manner, and loosen it within so that it becomes cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient once a week for an entire week, following his diet as mentioned above until he is healed; or if you wish, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery, too. This type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then apply that warm compress on the edges or in the form of a cloth made from lupine.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	About the treatment of water retention in the legs.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the onset of water retention in the legs is indicated by the symptoms previously described in the section, then begin and cause the patient to drink a substance that purges their head, and pay attention to all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And perform the sudorific bath with degu (a purgative substance) for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command the patient to scrape their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize twice with two irons over two temples if it is the onset of water retention in both legs, or on one side if it is the onset in one leg.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterize in that length in the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further medication that is within your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come to knowledge that is derived from arteries and amputation of those, and caution against blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes, the cervical region is cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing instruments.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When eye tears are ancient and frequent, and through veins and arteries in the manifest location of the head outside, it is verified that this is a sign of fluid excess, tighten the fleckmatique muscles, cauterize that which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of hot water in the eyes, cauterize in the middle part of the head, and two cauteries below the temples, and two cauteries below the cervix between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is additional indigestion, cauterize that on the entire length of the coa (hair) of the eye above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	**On the Cauterization of Nose Bleeds**
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When treating the condition we mentioned in the previous section and your treatment is not effective, prepare a drink with medicinal herbs for the patient to consume over three nights; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize with a midget cautery or olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then apply a cautery to that, using a clavified cautery on both sides of the eye, leaving the hairs intact.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the shape of this clavified cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the softening cautery of the eyelids of the eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, apply a cautery to that eyelid with a lunate cautery; and this is the shape of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, apply a cautery to both eyebrows with a small amount of two cauteries along their entire length, and they should be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI**
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and close the eye, apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inside out and close the eye, apply the cautery in two ways: either by making incisions or by using a medicinal cautery that burns.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a fire cautery, command the patient to look away from where the hairs are being cut, ensuring they do not see; and if you must hold them in place, tighten the bandage around their eyes until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore as they become heated and engorged, place the patient's head in a low position, and then apply pressure over the eyeballs with your hands, indicating according to the shape of a dead leaf, and be the beginning of the sign close to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply a cold compress or a thick paste of owl's egg or bird droppings on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And shape the cautery according to this form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize over the indicated figure, little by little, in repeated passes, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were covered with myrtle leaf, appearing healthy.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of healing of the eye work is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hairs raised at the site of the eye's puncture.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then continue to apply pressure to the affected area until the swelling subsides.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply care to that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cautery over that just as you had done originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hair is on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and healed so that the hair does not remain.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with medicinal fire is that you order the patient to remove the hair until it is prolonged and healed, and then make a bandage in the shape of a fir-leaf from cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known soap and a living fire, or whatever is at hand, and mix those causes together, making it into a paste so that it is not cooled; and spread this from it over the cloth which is made thus in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on the affected joint or joints; and leave the fragrant part steeped in lard, and keep the head of the patient raised.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And then cease speaking of the medicine and apply it gently, not forcing it, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, as you continue to apply this, if the patient perceives the medicine's bite, then cease it and change to a better-spoken word; thus, when the bite ceases, again apply the medicine and wash away the odor with water. And consider whether several times the eyelid has been lifted, as is done for a constriction from fire or incision, for this is good. If it does not return to that of the medicine in the place where the medicine was not absorbed and does not become discolored until your operation is concealed and the wound is contracted, then continue with this.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of adhesion is eradicated, and treat it with a definite ointment or some other remedy until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls out, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days due to the cause of hair in the eye, continue your treatment on that area where the eyelid is softened, and precisely as you did at the beginning, and envelop it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape, and therefore your treatment should be adapted accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And let not the method of treatment be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of the fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula using the method we have described for dividing maladies and your treatment does not work, then know that you should cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place a minister's head between their thighs in such a way that it is neither moved nor shaken by the patient's own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some hot compresses made of lard or a paste of chickpea flour on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And shape the cautery as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, similar to the shape of a cane or a spiral pen, from one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you see, they penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish to get out this way, try it with caution.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet, he who is experienced is better at the task at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And place the hot cautery on it, and with your hand, gently but firmly, press against the cautery at the root of the nose, so that you do not burn your hand or disturb the patient's distress, and then apply the cautery to the grooves of the nose and soften that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of the burning cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply a poultice with drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and cut as required in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	There is another method of cauterization for fistulas that some ancient physicians mentioned: go to the place of the fistula and burn it, then apply a thin layer of molten lead; hold your hand with good pressure, avoiding harming the patient from the heat of the molten lead so that it does not enter the wound; cover the area where you have applied the lead over the patient's wound with cloth soaked in honey or water, as the molten lead will adhere to the fistula and heal it through miraculous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the nose according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	**Chapter XVIII**
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	**On the Cauterization of the Hernia**
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	**Various accidents cause fissures on the lips, especially in children's lips.**
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, if you treat those fissures as we have said in the previous sections and do not benefit from your treatment, then take a hot iron with a sharp point and make incisions according to this form that I will show:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	and the cavity of him according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Place your hand carefully over those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully remove the cautery when it has healed.
Capitol .xix.	**Chapter XIX**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When, during the extraction of the uvula, or the palate, or the teeth, an abscess forms and it bursts, and it becomes chronic, and a fistula appears, and you treat it but do not allow proper healing, then you must ignite a cautery according to the extent of the fistula, and insert that flame into the opening of the fistula, and with your hand guide the burning flame to its depth, doing this once or twice; and then attend to the treatment as we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the wound is clean and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and treat the corrupt bone as it will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	**Capitol XX.**
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and these conditions do not yield to medicinal treatment, then place the patient's chin on their knee, and shape the cautery so that it approaches the tooth. Then, place your finger over the tooth and insert the burning cautery swiftly, holding it for a very brief moment so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, which has been reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which they should spit it out, because the painful tooth will be numbed and the softened gum will be tightened, and the corrupt moisture will be dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery should be performed in two ways: either with cow's dung cautery or with fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with cow's dung involves taking cow dung and forming it into a ball, then inserting it into the hollow of the ferrule (a type of dental device), and holding it there until the tooth pain is numbed by the cold.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this process several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you see, dip a cloth or piece of fabric in the hot water on that side, place it over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the use of fire for cauterization only suits the eration or extraction of iron, and it should not be too rough on the tissue, nor should the heat of the fire reach the patient's mouth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then shape the cautery as required, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times as the pain may resurface on the same day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide with ease and holds the cautery for about an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And apply the cautery where you have made the incision as best as you can.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of extrophules.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophules are filled with phlegm and cold humors that are resistant to digestion by medicines, and you wish to drain them slightly, then apply the cautery in a curved shape following this method: have two heated ends so that the smoke from one end can ignite the other. Place the burning tip over the affected area once, and if more is needed, repeat on the other side until the swelling subsides.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the swelling. Then bind it tightly for three days and place a warm compress over it until the affected area is healed by the heat.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that medicine, bandages, and compresses until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the catheter or cautery for such use should be conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On cauterization of wounds and on the constriction of vessels.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity appears on the surface of the lung, especially when it is chilled from compression, then it should be evacuated through the use of purgative medicines at the beginning, and then cauterize that place with a hot iron in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to burn the lung with the hot iron nor to inflame the patient's bowels, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that or another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last spinal bone of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery of him is to be done as described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of that as described above until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIIII. (or Chapter 23, if numbering is as per a modern system)
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On cauterization for lung diseases and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung diseases are caused by humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an ancient illness, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with a cautery over the furcula (the bone in the base of the throat) at the places where the lion's teeth and tongue meet; and another cautery halfway up the foot between the two mamillos (breast bones); and cauterize both in the manner described above.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, your puncturing cautery may be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of the pain of auricles.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make punctures within these; and then carefully apply those things that are mentioned above so that it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that area: once you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On cauterization of the tongue, which is the help's head.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slick humidity and does not stop in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it is to its usual place, and then with a slight movement, it should be displaced as it ought to be, as we have witnessed. First, reduce the dislocation, and then return the patient to their back or side; and raise the ribcage which was in the opening within the tongue to the parts above using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated within.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, which has two points; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Then apply the cautery to the opening through which that one penetrates into the other part; and the figure of cauterization will appear when two cauteries are used.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so it is subtle according to the quantity of attempt; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility; the member will not be harmed for any length of time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, make this done, cauterize over the muscle with a hot iron cautery or with pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed, the humidity is broken, and the malady is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When inflammation of the stomach occurs and moisture fills what was previously a space within its folds, and if you continue with treatment methods without consideration, soon you will find that the disease buries itself in the patient's back, extending their arms and legs, and cauterize that area with three cauterizations: one leaving a mark on the foot approximately the size of a finger, and two others on either side of the spinal column, forming a triangular shape; for those who are not properly aligned, this will cause pus.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. If you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery at the center of the stomach in this shape; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it in the place that this cautery frightens: and you know how much point you want to try, then cauterize that with cautery on the points; and then care for that which is left of the cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Chapter XXVII.**
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	**On the Cauterization of Veins.**
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the vein arises from coldness or moisture or excessive wind, and the disease is treated as we have said, and it does not subside, then place the patient in a supine position, and apply three cauterizations according to this form and with this quantity on the vein below the hipbone, which will bring about the patient's decubitus.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not be tempted by the sharp cauteries.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of this (substance) that is adhered to the quantity of the nature of the wound, and it is not adjusted properly; and if the illness stands on the patient's feet; and if it is not standing, then it should sit, which has already extended its parts and raised its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cuttlefish cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and focus the gaze of all present so that the whole body is heated and penetrates within the intestines, for the bowels here are delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is in the flesh or around it (the tunic), if it is in the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on greater severity and the pain becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is around the flesh of the leg (the tunic), as the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is reversed; then identify the location of the abscess to be treated; and apply the pointed cautery similar in shape to what was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with these cauteries until the entire wound is healed, so that it reaches the bone, and until the infection disappears.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And take care of this one for the healing of other abscesses until it is cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use these cautery techniques except those studied in the art of medicine and practiced by experts who have learned from experience; however, for this operation, it is better to follow the instructions we have given and choose a safer method.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Ancient cauterization techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin point from a dried-out arrow and inserting it into the size of the affected area.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse them in oil and apply heat, cauterizing the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery; place two small cauterizations below, slightly declining from the part where the beard is, and two cauterizations at an angle between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly declining towards the back parts; another cautery in the middle part of the leg; and one over the stomach, and three cauterizations at the back parts; and one cautery in the area between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on each side of the leg, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And take care that your hand does not burn with the cautery, but rather on the visible part of the cord in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	They also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauteries that burn like a ray and ignite this, and insert it into the space between the ribs, as long as it alleviates this pain and heals the wound, as we have said about the cautery for the foot.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation with cautery, there is no cause for fear, as it often happens in the fystula site where healing does not occur.
Capitol .xxx.	**Chapter XXX.**
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	**On the Cauterization of Ulcers.**
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When treating the illness of the ulcer using what we have said about treatment in the section and you do not apply your cure, then cauterize it in one of three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the ulcer according to the figure of the cautery on the leg, the shape of which has been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the manner we have described in the cautery of the flesh entirely.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand against the cautery; and the patient should lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, where you ignite the cautery with two points, which we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, raising the cord that is in the straight part of the membra, so that it holds the patient's left side without pain.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then bring together the two points, ignite the fire, in that place where they penetrate each other with the cord from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; thus are made four incisions.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you see, cauterize with a cautery that has three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then dress the wounds of the cautery so that they do not become inflamed for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of gout.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization should not be applied directly to gout but specifically to the inflamed joint.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating gout using the methods discussed above and you do not achieve relief, then make four incisions in a circle around the affected joint, and place one cautery on the abdomen, another on the thigh, another on the ankle, two between the spinal bones, and one directly below the foot, and another cautery on the abdomen.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the case.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then apply the cautery gently so that it does not burn for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient of treatment with the cautery alone, but add two intentions to it, and it will be celebrated in them as aids for healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery that is applied to the stomach should be according to its form from before, and it is that which is used for cauterizing the back, being olive-shaped as per its previous form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter", with ".xxxii" indicating the specific chapter number)
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the Cauterization of Feet and Other Parts:
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are immersed in water and filled with amber liquid, cauterize them on the sole of the foot between the big toe and little finger, and hold the cautery with your hand without twisting it; then raise your hand slightly, but do not withdraw it completely, as the amber liquid will drip.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Make the cautery in this manner: Then apply two cauteries to both sides; on each side, make a cautery with the tip of the cutting cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on each side, leaving one and placing the other in the middle of the thigh; and two cauteries on each thigh.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then address those causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	**Chapter XXXIII**
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	**On the Cauterization of Abdominal Parts**
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When abdominal parts are infected and swollen due to cold and moisture, which affect the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with healing methods and not by confining them. Sometimes, during severe illness, patients endure painful cauterization of these affected parts, first applying a large cautery on their stomach as mentioned previously regarding gastric cauterization, then using circular and four cauteries around the subtle abdominal openings, or a fine-pointed cautery; and also cauterizing over the alcatin (a term for a specific condition or organ, perhaps) with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humidity and illness persist and the patient endures it, then cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries near the stomach and around the groin, as this is a perfect cure for a condition that would otherwise persist.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are of a natural origin, stemming from thick humors or corrupted moisture, and are not cured by the means mentioned in the previous section, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the pus at the base of the spine in a small, triangular shape, and another cauterization on the navel below by two cuts.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If it appears that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face becomes pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; also cauterize on the tongue with one cautery, and on the belly with another cautery using a nail-like cautery, leave the cauterizations open for some time, and then tend to them until they heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cauterization of hernias, they should be treated with excision.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you excise the hernia, you use the cautery that is shaped like a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Insert that ignited instrument into the excised hernia, and secure the patient's hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the sanie flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply some ointment to them so that they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxvi.	**Capitol .xxxvi.**
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	About the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not comply with the treatment we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by that, it is beneficial to apply cauterization.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when one sees a fistula in nature that is ancient, with corrupt sanitation and humidity, it is therefore most appropriate to begin attempting to heal it subtly, and then gradually introduce the amount of pressure corresponding to the depth of the fistula as described in the aforementioned attempt.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Near the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then apply the ignited cautery to this fistula, according to the amount in which it enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to your need's quantity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be mindful of all those places; and do not intervene unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it won't penetrate further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then tend to the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the foreign bodies are removed from it, and they remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the foreign bodies are not removed from it, then know that they are penetrating or corrupting its internal parts, or falling into those causes of which there will be recollection in that place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition deteriorates, it is necessary to cauterize them using a pointed cautery directly on each ulcer, which helps alleviate the discomfort.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we should cauterize strongly according to a slight delay, so that three cauterizations will come in succession, and thus they will be more deeply healed.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and moisture such that the disease does not retain urine, apply a cautery at the outlet of the urethra on top of the bladder; the hairs of the penis begin to fall out, and cauterize with a cautery at the right outlet, and another at the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery at the lower part of the back, or two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery should be driven according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On cauterization of the breast.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the breast becomes irritated and moistened, and by these means conception is forbidden, and the menstruation of the patient is corrupted, and excitation is delayed, and pain occurs with the coming in of their menses, then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said concerning the cautery of the bladder; or two cauteries, and they should be driven firmly.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist mucus is infiltrated at the site of the ankle dislocation, and it causes the displacement of its parts, a sign of this is that the affected area appears longer than the other when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is compressed within it, drawing blood.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	So, you should cauterize the patient over the dislocated ankle using a circular cautery, as you will have already tried to realign the joint by its surroundings, and thus, the dislocation falls into its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned previously also has its shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the severity of the inflammation in all the vein; and take care that it heals properly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain appears in the area of the ankle, caused by cold, wetness, the patient is treated with the method we have mentioned and it does not help, then know that you should remove the bad humor from the body through foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of the cautery on that area follows two ways: either with cautery using burning medicines or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two methods of knowledge, one of which is to cauterize that on the opening of the anus with three triangular cauteries according to this form and make them go deep enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the said part, and if the cauteries are olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, four cauteries may be placed on the most painful areas around the anus' opening.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the shape in the cauterization of the hernia opening, one that is circular and burns away all the spasms.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in such cases where pain is fixed around the anus and not spread throughout the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	If it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where you direct the pain; and apply a cautery to the ankle for four days from the inner side.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the pain in the joint.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain shifts to the area near the feet, then cauterize that place with a cautery at three, four, or more points if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain shifts to the side of the thigh, then cauterize that place with a cutaneous cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cautery so that you do not finish with the cautery as you irritate nerves or cause great harm, and thereby against the patient's illness aggravate or constrict.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And you have already seen one after another of those which are cauterized on the leg and finally in the cauterization, and the hot bed inflated until the swelling reached the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all over the foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and do this with death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said about the cauterization of water cautery, which is this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circuit is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or perhaps a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And they drew inside that circle another one-third; and they made the space between them equal to the length of a night's rest; and those circles were two in number; and the length of those lines was a night or two nights, and they made on the margin of that iron ring decently decorated in the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Near the fire, it is ignited so that it rotates and sparks, then it is placed over the water's edge, the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore, it is cauterized with three pointed cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then, it is left like that for three days; the wound is dressed with a border and left open for too many days; and care is taken to heal it within.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: O, my sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of looking at it, and because few of us have found those that look at it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	One should apply the best cautery to him who suffers from it, and find a way to ease the pain in that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Maybe cautery and medicines should be used so that you make two circles with a perforated armor on which the hook of the iron gate can be inserted, with the length of the wall in its narrowest point equal to two nuts or something like them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between some parts is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part, they should be placed above and below, and joined together in this manner.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then place your hand over the affected area where the patient feels pain from the water, and take some cold water, forming it into two circles, and apply heat to it little by little, for a duration of an hour, allowing the patient to endure the burning sensation and the tightening — for that burning sensation is as if fire is biting.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument, and remove all cold water from the affected area with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then place a bandage over it for three days and rest on the edge until the swelling subsides, leave it for several days, and it will heal; this is later in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, place him in a position that holds water as it is done with the anvil immersion.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Prepare a mixture of alkali and cause no extincted from both parts, cut them, and place in a new container, making a small hole in the middle through which the desired amount will enter.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the base of one wave against another, and rest upon that firm surface a living caustic of hot water, which by its power seeps through these tissues, and as you compress them with your hand firmly but gently, allow the hot water to flow from the wave into the space left between them.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust the amount of water, and rest upon another living caustic and renewable base, as this will provide a strong and acute force, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterizing other parts of the body, for it acts as fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And there are certain medicines that are cauterized with wide fire, quickly and skillfully, combining them in such a way that they become more effective.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Now let me relate the operation and cure by which a man of olden times treated pain in the legs and sciatica, and how admirable was the simplicity of that method, and I say that no other treatment is needed, for it healed him completely, as he immediately soaked himself in hot water and rested.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it should be taken from a certain green herb, and if it is not available, a recent fig should be used; then it is squeezed with a little grey and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the object, or on the leg, and it is heated.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for three hours or as long as the patient's condition allows for the reduction of the adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse it in water and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert that into the sun, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless the evacuation of the body is appropriate.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	It may already be said that when the narrow vein of the goat is cauterized, it will heal well; and the cautery should be applied to it in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dried goat's gut, inflame it with fire until it is charred, and place it over the wound until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, ceasing only when the pain and swelling from the bite disappear in the water.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the "cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the chapter number, not a translation.)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cauterization of joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the back is caused by various factors, such as muscle strain or injury, or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, due to the infusion of foul, wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery does not cut except in this single species which is made by the effusion of hot material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, in this manner, evacuation of the malady is done with pills that resemble it, which are placed on either side where the pain occurs three lines according to its latitude, so that you make points in each line, with cautery or otherwise, depending on the quantity that is suitable from the tolerance of the malady and the strength of the pill.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cautery is done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four, using the claw cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the onset of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Symptoms of this illness are seen in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that their tight muscles cause elevation and limitation of motion in the evening.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	It is found in the last segment of the spine and in the nerves associated with it, which begin to rise above the other spinal segments.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore, when you observe this and wish to prevent it, use a pointed cautery to make an incision in the shape of a circle as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that takes the cautery over the entire segment of the spine without cutting through it.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, use the pointed cautery to make two or three lines around the spine.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And the points should be appropriate between them.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And then attend to the area until it heals through what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Beware that cauterization should not be administered to a bleeding wound caused by the spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with the proper method and the pain does not recede, then severe cauterization should be applied.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize this immediate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot with hot cautery.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the olive cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain increases within the toes or other joints, and this becomes severe, then cauterize over any affected toe with three or four hot cauteries from this olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if these hot cauteries that you use are sufficient, then cauterize and do not press too hard with the cautery, just enough to affect the specific area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains pierce into the bones, apply the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the joints, it is called rheum, then pierce along the course of the filaments as they twist, puncture at those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in these places, then pierce along the course of the filaments on each node and on the pinched nerve of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains pierce into other joints or muscles, apply cauterization to any parts of the limbs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not empty the body of bad humors and medicines, for if good regimen is followed and inflammation is drained through this cauterization, it will be healed by God's grace.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a fracture in the angles and it exposes the hernias against the abdomen, then it begins, at this point, to be necessary to return the intestines or hernia to its cavity, and you must order the patient to fast for the day and use gentle remedies so that the gap does not open from his stomach.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then continue to support the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his breath in so that no air enters or hernia appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return the patient to his original position and attempt to open the fracture over the bone of the thigh, indicating its end by showing the similarity of its shape to a circle in the upper parts of the body that have been broken.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery, whose shape this is:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	As it enters the skin, it causes itching and redness.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then apply the cautery over that sign with your hand steady, and when you feel the bone of the toe enter into the socket, repeat this again if at first you did not succeed in getting it into the socket.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the position of the hernia during cauterization, so as not to damage it, preventing further complications or serious harm from occurring.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And you should know that when you perform cauterization, you must not touch the bone, as it will affect your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And be careful that the cauterization of children is subtle according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the cauterized area for three days, applying fresh bandages until the wound from the heat is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And tend to those with other burns until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for ten days until the area is sealed and the plague (presumably a wound or infection) is healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to prevent the flow of food to them according to the duration of their cure, so that they do not protrude from the abdomen due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is appropriate to lift after approximately 10 days, administer treatment properly and maintain that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And it should also reduce work, and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing entirely, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And let me explain the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, which begins at the start, and that they do not remain, cauterize the rupture with a red hot iron according to the amount of it, and so it is expelled from the body just as the third part of the intestine; and then care should be taken regarding what we have said, and it should not be overlooked.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And they already said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is indicated and tried.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is stopped with a line that they hold for the width in the wound from above and below; then place your hand with a pointed cautery; but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On cauterization of twists.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain extends to other parts of the body due to an injury or blow and continues for a long time without yielding to treatment with medicines, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to every member according to its size and extent, nature and severity of the wound, location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the first cautery is successful, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on him; for usually, in those pains, members are punctured to the member that is closest to it, so that you should succeed with these pointed cauteries until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	**Chapter XLVII**
De cauterizacio de lepra.	**On the Cauterization of Leprosy**
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers sometimes need cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is acute and if it responds to treatment as described in the previous sections and not to others, or if it does not improve and you fear that the corruption has spread throughout the body and all its members, then cauterize it on the head with pointed instruments: first at the center of the head, and second behind it, beginning at the temples and extending down to the nape, or serve it in other ways.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, with the cautery, make a slight incision within the skin while pressing on the bone, thereby releasing the tension of the bands, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is facilitated; and cauterize over the wound as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, you should know that you cauterize those with these cauteries which we have mentioned above; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and make two cauteries on each eyelid, and make two cauteries on both sides of the spine at the nape of the neck, and make six cauteries on the spine, and one large cautery near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx itself, and make two cauteries on each thigh, and one on each leg, and two on each arm, and one on each hand. Cauterize over all the joints of the bones of the hands and feet, and on every talon of their feet, and on the soles of their feet, and on the tendons of their legs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole, do not irritate them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And in some cases, it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis, and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the intestine.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And you know that the more precise the cauterization, the greater its effectiveness and the less painful it is for the patient; indeed, since the disease lies in the cautery, the body is already stunned.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And take care that the cauterizations be of appropriate size or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies as long as it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a member is stabbed or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unhealthy, you should cauterize the stunned member with a cautery according to the severity of the member or the lightness of it.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And the hot cautery should enter the depth of the skin slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then take care so that the wound heals properly.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases, the stupor is cauterized from the roots to the hands and feet, and the spinal columns of the back, as well as the surroundings of the nerves which supply that member, and thus the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not attempt to treat this unless he who does so is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the body's members and the emergence of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX**
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	**On the Cauterization of Hemorrhoids**
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When hemorrhoids are old and do not respond to any of the common medical treatments, then you cauterize them with a hot iron, according to their size, until the white and red color of the hemorrhoid is reduced and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then prepare a cure from flour of wheat and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnoses, or dove dung or eagle dung, each in equal parts, and wrap it in a cloth and place it over the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization of cracks.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins to form and it wishes to spread, cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may be ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more accurate to cauterize it around its circumference in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Capitol .li.	Conclusion.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abrasions.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abrasion takes time to heal, it may be due to excess moisture, the state of the injury, being old and weak with little blood flow, or time; if you want to hasten the healing of the abrasion, cauterize around it with small pointed cautery tools; then apply a dressing to prevent further irritation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you choose to pierce the abrasion with cautery, then heat the cautery tool whose shape is thus: and rest it on the middle of the abrasion until the needle penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to that spot which is deepest, in order to relieve pressure on the arm; then take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii. (This seems to be a chapter number, not a translation request.)
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it as if fire were eating dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place where cauterization with fire is necessary, then you should use hot cautery pins, small or large as appropriate for the place where it is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it completely from all sides, ensuring that you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then bind it for three days, and apply oil mixed with ash repeatedly over the cauterized places until all scaling is completely eradicated and all corruption removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then apply a warm poultice to that moist flesh wound.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	If, after three days, the flesh does not heal and become sound, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery over what is broken in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is treated with certain medicines some times instead of cautery, for those are half-measures in place of burning.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is more suitable for removing the pus of young wounds.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And you have already stated the cure for it with sharp medicine in the incision, so take that when you find it necessary to heal the wound.
Capitol .liii.	(End) Chapter IIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of closures and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	When swelling occurs in the parts around a foot with malady, which is called a 'clau' (toenail), and it causes severe, protruding pain, it is treated as follows: cauterization using fire or water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization with fire involves lighting the cautery instrument shaped like a feather, made of iron according to the size of the nail in all parts, and with subtle edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then hold the flame over the nail and carefully rotate the cautery around the nail's perimeter until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a poultice of wild mallows, triced with salt, and leave the poultice on that for a night, so that it may be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if these remedies do not help and harmful occurrences manifest on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must apply cautery to those affected areas with water, and for this, take a needle or a sharp knife or a pen-shaped instrument, and place it over the nail; then pour a small amount of hot water into the needle, and with your hand, compress that area thoroughly, pushing the edge of the needle into the root of the nail, and you will see the water flowing out from under the nail. Wait for the patient to feel a little bit of a burn from the hot water for an hour, then remove it, because the nail's roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus they also make those cuts in such a way that everything of their own is within their bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then they should take care of those pustules that the roots of the hairs have been eradicated with the application of ointments that the flesh rejuvenates.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from a related cause, or any other similar reason, you should know that you cauterize it with four cautery instruments or with a hot iron on each spinal joint, between each spinal bone with one cautery; and cauterize on the patient's foot, and over their stomach with olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of him rests and hastens the healing of the sick disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On cauterization for accidental burns on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When burns on the body have appeared and caused pustules that are filled with corrupt gross matter, at the beginning, when treating them, cauterize over all parts of the fistula with a delicate iron or a wooden stick, whose tip is heated by fire; or cut with a long razor; or cauterize with a lenticular iron.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Sometimes, too, cauterization is applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they are not broken, and by eliminating excess matter, these are healed.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, be aware that this should be done with an appropriate evacuation through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	**Capitol VI.**
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	**On the cauterization of flux of gangrene through incision of the arc (or vessel).**
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	**Observations regarding flux from arc (vessels) that should be incised near the infection, which must be drained, or at the onset of abscesses or cauterization on a limb, and it appears similar, but it is difficult to control.**
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, you should use both your hands on the orifice of the vessel, and press over it, holding firmly until the flux of gangrene stops, so that it does not escape.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply to the fire a few large and small olive cauterizes, by number many, and blow upon them until they become hot embers.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those a small or large one, according to the location and the disease in which the artery is broken, over that vein quickly pushing the pus that you have drained as mentioned, and cauterize it until it is completely cut off and restricts that flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the clot is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you drain the pus and extract the cauterize, take another cauterize carefully from those prepared in the fire, and thus continue doing so until the clot is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to injure the nerve here, which may bring about another misfortune for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict the flow there, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four means: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are cut off, the clot is restricted and the flow is stopped, or by using thread or bandage to apply a strong constriction, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to restrict the clot; and these should be firmly applied with pillows or compresses.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	He who administers a proper restriction of it with bandages or by positioning opposing causes and similar ones, does not relieve but aggravates.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this should happen to anyone and neither a doctor nor medicine is at hand, then open the aforementioned wound on the affected part as we have said, and understand that great pressure within it is necessary to stop the flow of the malady; and on the armpit, do not hesitate to apply hot water of extreme coldness until the swelling is frozen and thickened; and seek out what cautery or medicine is required.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second phase.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	From incisions and punctures, and from veins and phlebotomy, and from plaies and their likes.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have discussed in the first chapter all illnesses in which fire cautery is appropriate and medicinal combustibles useful, as well as their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them according to the forms of cautery; I have arranged the chapters on the ascending order from head to feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you will proceed in this chapter in such a manner that the one who seeks it may be relieved, when he has requested it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, know, son, that this chapter is about fear, as it is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you must be extremely careful, for in the operation which is in this chapter, one often sees the evacuation of catarrh that is harmful to life; therefore, the application of the vein or incision on the abscess, or the perception of discharge, or purification of the wound, or extraction of an arrow, or beginning of a fever, and similar things.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And from all of these, fear and trembling accompany them, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that it should not fall on you in which there is a state of flux, for sometimes you must handle with the ways of men, or rather, the erratic ways of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And it is from them that you must learn about their illness and you must lighten it for them lest death overtake them, and because of the urgency of their illness, and its longevity, the illness itself means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is of these that one gives to you the name of hope and says, "You must hope for health," while their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you of this nature, but let your caution be greater than their belief and their greed; and do not presume any cause regarding them unless through certain knowledge that verifies it for you, to which commendable succession has occurred.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	Use in the treatment of all your illnesses the prognosis and indication of that which is to be made whole, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, my children, may God inspire your understanding and do not let you stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And you have ordered this distinct chapter according to the preceding chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in what you ask regarding this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this illness often manifests in children during teething, and when the blackness enters the child's head, its vitality is affected.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And some times it appears suddenly for a hidden cause that is unclear.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This disease is sometimes seen only in children, and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work left on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always so magnified that he could not lift it up over his great head, and more than this, the moisture increased within until fire death resulted.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the skin and bone or it is added beneath the bones on top of the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that one, if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the swelling is slight, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its width, and the length of this fissure should be two fingers deep so that the moisture can escape, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is further increased and the swelling is greater, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity leaves the bones, it is a sign that you must open the compartments of the head completely and the water is squeezed out when you press with your hand on the affected area, which should not be hidden from view.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Ensure that you make three cuts in the middle part of the head according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the humidity; and tighten the cuts with bandages and downy cushions; and drill over them daily with wine and oil within five days, and loosen the adhesions and treat the wound with ointment and poultice, and keep the head at an equal level; and feed the patient with dry bread containing little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left side; so pay close attention to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and act accordingly as best you can.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery, and seek to drain blood and pus from the disease through that flow of pus during the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	**Chapter II.**
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Regarding the incision of arteries close to auricles, called hilary cuts.
Capitol segon.	**Chapter II** (or **Second Chapter**)
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is an acute or severe pain in the ears or feet, and this condition is long-standing, and medical treatments do not help, then the final treatment involves the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus you cover when you want to incise those that the disease has made its head, and then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arterioles appear, and then tighten the collar of the patient with another cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the places of each over the places that are appropriately depressed, and they remain hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then you should focus on the artery with caution, and incise each one with the blade of each cut as it enters the bone, and this is according to the extent of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you wish, insert the blade between the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are made on it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is incised, the blood is immediately exposed to exit pulsating, which jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the arrow does not appear in the joint, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully attempt to insert it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what you must get from the wound is a quantity of wine one ounce, and do not force it more or less, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the severity of the disease and the depth of the arrow in the bone.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the infection, and if there remains on the bone some cause of decay, then sever it so that it does not spread gangrene.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen the infection with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When ancient or sudden migranes occur due to seasonal humidity and the state of the membranes in the temples, or sudden old age that resembles these, and it is not relieved by medical means, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those is to target the malady that affects the membranes in the temples; and understand the visible artery in the temple where it is indicated by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its intensity.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the malady with a cloth; and then rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with boiling water until the artery appears visibly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the sponge that has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then, with your knife, you cut the thread as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and extract it completely from the flesh and remove it from the wound, taking care not to touch the threads that remain inside, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is thin, you should wrap it with your finger at its end, and then cut through it in a single slice according to the amount by which its ends are spread apart and contracted, so that no blood flows out, for if they are not cut, the blood will not stop from flowing.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then, empty the vein of blood within three cycles.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or string, and do not let it rot before the wound heals and the blood flows out.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it after they have been cut, and hold in place that precise work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has fever or a condition of heat; for cauterization is for those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cover the extraction of the tendons that have been removed from their original place, and they should be placed over it properly prepared, and treat them with dry medicines to promote healing and alleviate pain within that it is cured.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another complication arises in the form of pus from the tendon, then you must restrict that pus, either with a cauterization or by filling the cavity with something, and tighten your hand over it until the pus is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of those is not present to you, then apply your finger over the area until the swelling is reduced, and drill the area with very cold water until the pain subsides, and tighten as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more lightly extracted from archery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, having already felt the two places to be tried, and then apply some fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, as it is not consolidated by all this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of both edges is an example.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, it may be better to have two edges of greater sharpness rather than just two, because if they are both sharp, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of the fire is held in them and the flesh is separated slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and is most gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the space between the two bones is such that it corresponds to the thickness of said bone.
Capitol quart.	Final chapter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic heart conditions in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the condition is acute and acidic, affecting those veins just above the temple on the head, and no medical cause can be identified for it, the patient's face becomes discolored and they experience a sensation in their forehead akin to walking on ants, and their eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point that their eyelashes become uncomfortably soft, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears. Traditional remedies for this condition include thorough cleansing.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which are on their forehead, and then inscribe on the forehead three incisions equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids which are at the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful with the incision of the arterioles which are in two layers, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth at hand with which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the knife between the two acute ends, which is the form of the incision.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	What is removed from the temples during the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the phalanges, and then make this cut from the first incision to the second.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then strike with this knife in the first incision, and insert another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the tendon, and press it into the bone, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and cut all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	It may be continued the incision to this appears of the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And as the flow of blood increases, press the locations of the frozen parts of the sanction.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure a certain amount of warm wool, and place over those powdery substances mixed with wine and oil, and let it not develop an infection cautiously.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the bandages and administer a great infusion of water mixed with nettle or rose oil, and carefully tend to it until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Conclusion.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of wounds through catharsis and the flow of liquid from the openings in the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute purging and continuous vomiting occur, the patient's feet become exhausted from excessive urination, their sight is debilitated, the eyelids are ulcerated, and their hair falls out, causing severe pain in the head and subsequent exhaustion; then you will know that these accidents do not come from matter or purgation but from veins constricted within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to open their mouth wide, then make an incision in the middle of the front teeth at the most central location (and begin with the incision on the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and extend your hand from the jaws of the teeth, which are best removed after mastication), so long as the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Absorb all the discharge with a sponge or dry cloth, then gently fill between the two lips of the wound using warm compresses or bandages.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply to them a poultice soaked in wine and oil, so that they do not contract gangrene quickly.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the gangrene has already decreased, then you know to rub the bone that begins in the deepest part of the flesh, and soon after apply a dry cure that dries out the flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from this mixture make a paste and apply it to these wounds, both on the new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI.**
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	**On the Treatment of What Bites the Ears.**
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that bite the ears are one of four kinds: either it is a mineral or cause similar to a mineral, such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant, like rye or beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and wine mixed together and similar substances, or by some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a cat's paw touches the ear or any other cause resembling those that do not adhere to or swell in the ear, and the ear is pressed against the sun, and if the pain occurs, it will distill into that certain cause of violet oil or hyssop, then administer the extraction from it, and make it cough with a condition, and oppose the nose to prevent the coughing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the circumference of the ear, and stretch the ear away from the affected area, as these causes are often forgotten to these remedies.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction from it using the instrument called the delicate epicyclic gear of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is forgotten about the gear, then it is; otherwise, administer the extraction from it using a thin piece of cloth with a slight folding.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a cannula of thread and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, sealing it around the cannula with melted wax and oil so that only the cannula is opened.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the small wind with strong attraction, as we have seen with these cases.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If this method is not forgotten, take a piece of hot coals or some old cloth with which to hold the external part of the body, press it gently, and then wrap it around the affected area decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if all the causes we have seen are not forgotten, then tie off that which causes abscess or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of dissection is that you begin by making an incision into the vein and extracting the blood according to its virtue, then close the opening between your fingers and turn the flap back to its original position, and make a small slit in the base of the flap where the darkness of the blood has pressed against it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the fracture is of a lunar shape that reaches the bone, and once the bone is exposed, you can use appropriate instruments; then act quickly with the fracture and treat it so that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the inflammed fats that are swollen, then administer treatment and extraction; but if you do not obey these instructions, then take some gentle spatulum according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by the heat of the aura, and place it on heavy objects, or extract it with incisions or subtle movements, or through incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In water into which the aura has entered, the disease uses sneezing as a means of beginning, and fills the aura with some very cold liquid, then throws itself over the aura in which the water is, and if it is thus expelled, it is good; otherwise, take a few hot stones and lions according to their length, heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his aura and jump on it with all his strength, striking another stone against the one next to the aura.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	So do not cease this until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already water has been drawn out in such a way that you use paper or cloth, and place one extremity of it on the ear and extend the other extremity towards the fire until the whole length of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then place another cloth and do this several times until all the water is drawn out, and remove that with a cannula as it is said of the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a stone from that ear, if it is small, it should be done with ease and similar methods as we have said in the previous division; however, if it is a large stone causing apparent pain in the sense of the word, then an extraction should be administered with care and precision, and the cause of the stone is often lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of worms grown in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the division and distillation treatments, and your care does not improve the condition, then guard the ear towards the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus, if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract that with a gentle or subtle gesture, but if no cause appears, take a thin cannule and make it wide on one end, the shape of which is as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Then insert the extremely thin tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the disease; then suck it with a strong suction, and do this several times, until all worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not adhere to the above instructions, then close and seal the opening of the cannule with wax as we have said; administer distilled liquids that have already been tested in ancient treatments for worm diseases, and you will find this described in the treatise on distilled liquids.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your application of the oils with medicinal properties into the ear should be with this instrument, the shape of which is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make a small incision in it, leaving a narrow opening, and apply a plaster over it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it is to be used when it is in the cavity of the hernia here, it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a reed and wrap it around the end of it neatly, and then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing aid (or any herb or liquid from these medicines) — this is in the ear —, and insert the reed into the ear while applying gentle pressure with your hand to ensure that the oil is expelled into the concavity of the hearing aid and the patient feels relief inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is inserted into the ear should be heated slightly with fire beforehand.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause you are distilling into the ear is not too harsh, as the ear medications do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter .VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear inflammation.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, children have inflammation of the belly from their parents' stomachs that is not perforated; this occasionally happens to some men due to an infection or an external wound in the ear tissue. This inflammation can sometimes be felt in the region where the earlobe joins the head, a location often not noticed, and sometimes it occurs outside the body.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And those that occur in the region (of the ear) where one does not perceive the wound, are the most difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where one can perceive the wound, make sure you lift the patient's ear towards the light and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if there appears an excess, open the thin spatula from which this form comes:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extreme of the spatula where its width is narrow, with one edge acute and the other not; and the spatula itself has two sharp edges so as not to harm the auricle.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the pressure is due to flesh grown in the auricle or within the meat of the spatula, then use those fine scissors and cut with a sharp ease so that all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the pressure is on the edge of the auricle, take a thin blade and heat it slightly with fire, then carefully insert it into the flesh of the auricle.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you feel pressure as the patient describes it as easy to remove, due to urgency, exert pressure to relieve the oppression; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the auricle.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the aromatic bandage over it according to the extent of the wound you have covered with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the ulcer or until you take some and immerse it in water, sprinkle it on the affected area three times a day, and apply it; and if the ulcer has already formed a crust, be careful not to damage the liquid and replace it with another liquid that you cover with cerot made from oil or something similar, as long as the sore heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If bleeding occurs from an ulcer, immerse a clean cloth or bandage in hot water, wring it out, and place it on the wound; use another treatment that you know from the distillation tractate to stop the flow of blood.
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII.**
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of atherosclerosis affecting the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Moisture that inadvertently gets into the eyelids of the eyes sometimes becomes cloudy, sometimes dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	So understand that you must have these hot compresses or poultices, and remove the thick mucus from their roots, and then place your hand over the areas marked with a cross.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If sharp pain flows from a vein, then you use a fine, rounded cautery to treat it.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is to make incisions and carefully return them when there is no cause for their roots; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for severe inflammation of the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Clumps visible on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some underlying condition, are characterized by great strength and hardness, hence their designation as cataracts.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And a thick addition of moisture is observed on the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them considers when the enlargement proceeds from within the part that appears from the eyelid and is painful throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, open that small fissure with a knife, and extract it entirely with ease, and then suspend it from above and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the beginning of it does not appear by simply penetrating the eyelid with a small incision, then it should not be attributed to any specific cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, you will adjust it with a suture; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is minor, you will not suffer greatly because the heat of the poultice restores and incarnates it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must explore the surface within, then lift the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, except as you initially judged necessary, and press on it from all sides. If the eyelid itself is enlarged for some reason, this should not be noticed in any case.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with incarnated water until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the treatment of the inflammation above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is an inflammation that is generated in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it most often affects children, aggravating their eyes and leading to their clouding; and because of this, they cannot see the clarity of the sun due to tears forming at those places.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you apply those things to their faces all the time, and also while they sleep; and as a result, the eyebrows over their eyelids become moist, already covered in inflammation, and the imminent occurrence of catarrh is evident in the eye; and when you press that place with your fingers, you feel catarrh within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And there is a certain method of operation in which the patient holds their head on the thigh, and then drapes cloth over them, applying cold to it, and makes circles with it according to the amount that contains the discharge from every part, and also places that over the circle and presses with the fingers on all sides so that catarrh is added in the middle of the circle, and then ends in the middle of the other humidified areas by incidentally touching the fissures, so that the fissure does not become larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Place the poultice over the wound until you reach the depth required, for in the most advanced stages, arternach (scab) forms through an opening in the white, grainy flesh.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Remove the cloth that you have wrapped around it and placed outside the openings, and twist with your left and right hands until it comes out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to press on the fissure so that the spatum (a medical instrument) does not reach the wound and tear it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If your arternach (scab) does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, you may adjust the fissure with a little ease until it forms; then remove the cloth as we have said, and immerse it in water and vinegar, and apply it over the area, covering it with fresh poultices.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some who bleed stop it by placing that in the cavity of the fissure to prevent what comes from that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that inside so it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	If it happens at the infected site, carefully cure it with plastered bandages until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the ways of feeling pain.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyes' eyelids are born with defects or have become antiquated, and these imperfections cause pain in the eye, one experiences various ailments, such as persistent tears, soft eyelids, and inflammation, which lead to the destruction of sight known as 'tactile blindness'. It is treated in four ways: either through cauterization with fire; or acute medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and stitching; or using canes, as explained earlier.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore place the patient's head in a comfortable position; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, it is good; but if not, insert a needle into that place where the fold of the eyelid is attached, and make the needle penetrate through the fold onto the eyelid, close to the edge where the hairs are, and pull the thread from its attachment on the eyelid towards the fold.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then open the gap within the eyelid, adjusting the hairs with a scalpel carefully; and afterwards extract the thread and place it outside the eyelid using small forceps or cloth, and then press over the eyelid with your finger, shaping it like a mitten.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is important to consider that the shape should be adjusted according to the amount of swelling in the eyelid; for some individuals, a significant amount must be cut from the eyelid due to its softness.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then cut open the spatula along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fracture is near the natural hairs, it should be treated with the same thickness as the king's.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place the onion at one of the angles of the wound, remove all of it, and adjust the stitches to both lips with silk thread or fine wool, clean the discharge, and allow what is superfluous from the dyes to adhere above two eyebrows for certain reasons, if you wish, otherwise, do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then change the bandage of the dyes every three days or four, and take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the scar of the stitches and treat it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of matter; closer stitching is better. And thus, these are the ancient practices of the taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	Nevertheless, be careful in attending to the patient, for it is a delicate operation, and there should be no fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way to treat it, which is to notice on the eyelid a figure like a mint leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three precise movements, separating and gathering it according to this form.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, having the needles, and it is not comparable, then take an agule with a thread and insert that into the middle of the figure, and then insert the other two threads close to the lacrimal glands, and adjust between your fingers so that the threads are equal, and then lift your hand at an equal angle, lifting the whole eyelid as we have recomposed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is cured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you encounter an abscess after your incision or opening, dress it with cerate and similar materials, and apply heat to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases, the eyelids themselves become converted, so you must use what we have mentioned about the incision; but stitching is more artificial in some.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Inserting tubes is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the substance inside as I have described; then, by art, insert two tubes or two fine needles whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width is measured according to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made an incision at the ends of each severed part, where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Nearby, add some subtlety under what is superfluous of the eyelid, constrict the canals of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, for the cord will die due to the tightness and become neglected until it falls by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, break open the abscesses, and then treat the infection until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	So when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two canals according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and it should have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the elevation of sharp hair points on the skin with an agule when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp hairs in the skin, the operation on them requires that you take a subtle needle and apply it to those fine threads of silk and leather, and then adjust the limbs carefully and gently.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be the amount of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle thread beneath it briefly, adjusting the limbs of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a small position, near the sun so that your work is declared, for it is a subtle and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then carefully insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it as needed, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then carefully pull the hair out from its root and insert that into the oil, taking care that it is one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then gently pull your hand away from the hair once it is completely removed from the oil and the eyelid, along with its natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the oil is not removed along with the hair and it remains stuck to the eyelid, re-apply the ointment to the parts where it is stuck and let it heal over time.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus, when you have finished applying the ointment and bandage, gently massage the affected area, pressing slightly with your fingers, and leave the bandage for two or three days, so that the hair adheres to its place and grows back healthily.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, adjust a longer natural hair, raise it to that level, or cut it so that it stretches over some space, and then raise that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a condition that occurs on the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When you notice a condition on the eyelid, which is characterized by contraction of the eyelid when it becomes narrowed to the right or left side, due to poor healing from wounds, sections, or cauterization, and it is called leukocelia, this inflammation or eczema can be either natural or accidental, caused by the healing of wounds, sections, or cauterization, or similar conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the edges of it, place in it a piece of lint fabric, and bind them together so that they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out; for if you do so, it will only increase the pus and in no time at all there will be even more infection.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use one of those causes that soften, as fennel, and immerse in water in which the seeds are boiled and mixed with vinegar, which should be liquified from some oil, and submerge the affected area in it, and cure it thereby.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate every engorged part that is not solidified according to its original shape as you find it at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of the excess of pus that does not return the original shape of the area as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of a condition affecting the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This condition affecting the eyelid, which is commonly called "blepharitis" (though it is not truly blepharitis), is either of natural origin or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	An accidental cause could be an infection, a cut, a cauterization, or other similar factors.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operation is as follows: take a needle with a double thread and insert one end into the flesh, then pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, ensuring the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart using the needle and cut with a scalpel, making an ample incision.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And thus, return the shape of the eyelid according to what it should be; if not, take a thread and hold that on the cut shape, and with that, turn the eyelid, and make two slits in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of the two slits should be at two angles of the incision you made, where they meet; and when these come together, their shape forms a figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter Lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then press the flesh with your thumb as much as the width of the eyelid allows, which is what closes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and bind them with a thread; and take care of those with the help of what we have mentioned about softening medicines and cold compresses, so that healing occurs.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to make an incision or suture or cauterize, be careful to create a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate the calgue (or tissue) between two eyelids as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the entire discourse on the treatment of incision when it is elevated or left open, let the operation proceed according to how the incision is prepared, and that varies in many ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artificer always prepares a device in some way that allows him to return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats that malady according to what is suitable for the operation and the instruments at his disposal.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many people, it solidifies the eyelid so that it is no longer flexible and prevents its natural movements, making it necessary to insert the tip of your finger between the eyelid and the eyeball, and raise or extend the eyelid away from the eye.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut through the adhesion with a thin blade, which is not sharp enough to cause further damage, slightly blunting it so that the operation does not disturb the eye, and remove the blade that has lost its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should cut through that adhesion with ease, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural position, and ensuring that all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put salt water on the eye, or distill steam into it, dissolving in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a warm compress, and place on the eye some wool soaked in egg albumen, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	**Chapter XVI**
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	**On the Recognition of Inflammation and Protrusion of the Lacrimal Glands.**
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	You know that inflammation can occur in two ways: either as a nervous condition, resembling a subtle hard bump; or non-nervous, appearing as white moist ice, which when pricked becomes separated and the bump does not remain.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both conditions do not begin until the larger lacrimal gland is involved, gradually covering the vision and preventing light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of working in the incision of the hernia is that the patient holds their head in their hands, opens the hernia's orifices, raises the eyelid with one hand, and then grabs the edge of the hernia with the other, gently pulling it outward to separate the layers.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into the hernia using the tip of a horsehair or similar fiber, gradually doubling the length of the needle, placing it in the middle of the nail, and then piercing the nail through with the needle; extend the needle to separate the layers above, and remove the hair that is blocking the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you also remove the hair inside the hernia's opening.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you incise the membrane at the root of the tear duct using a fine spatula or small scissors, removing the natural tissue of the tear duct to prevent continuous bleeding during the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And some times the ungual (nail) is stuck to the skin or to a string, as we have said, and then it should be carefully extracted with a sharp instrument of which this is the form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware not to touch the corneal tunic with the instrument, lest it rupture and the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	After the incision is made, apply a little salt or some suitable paste to it, and leave it for another day; then take care that everything inside heals properly.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not infected and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it firmly attached to that part of the finger, then other attempts are made to cure this type of nail with medicines, and thus it is healed as well as it can be in that condition.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to sever it, then open the wound of the patient and take a sharp instrument with a curved tip, according to this form:
am subtilitat.	With subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that the swelling is hardened and twisted in that place, then it exudes from your skin in the form of clear liquid or foul-smelling pus, and you should apply the liquid to the wound every other day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is infected is removed, otherwise, a foul odor will develop in the wound, and if you leave it, the infection will spread, so begin treatment at its onset until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that wound until it heals.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The urgency of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the wound causing great pain, should be suspended immediately; incise it from that one side, and do not close the incision so that tears do not flow.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distil in the tear duct a strong and effective remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	**Chapter XVII**
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of scrofula and things that originate from flesh that has decayed in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the wounds of certain individuals, corrupt flesh is born, and it is so swollen that it covers the pupil or pushes close to the edges of the eyelids, causing great pain. It hardens like a bullet and presses against the openings of the eyelids, and it is assembled with rough scales like a battlement.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	However, the operation on them is that the disease holds its head in the small spaces of the body; then open the wound of that person and collect all the flesh with scissors as is appropriate, and do this with forceps or baskets; then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful not to lacerate the wound that you should not spoil your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And make your incision, which you incise those or remove the spatum we have discussed in the incision of the fingernail, or small forcps with which it is collected carefully according to the shape that comes next in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt trissa (a mixture of salt and herbs), or sprinkle it with a powder made from medicinal herbs that resemble corrosives, and place a bandage over the wound gently until it is certain there will be no infection.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of inflammation is noticed and a hot wound becomes infected, and you fear an abscess, leave the wound and treat the abscess with what fits it, and then repeat this operation until it is healed, and make the flesh around it firm, which occurs in the wound of this particular kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	You may nevertheless cover completely all treatment of the acute wound by natural or accidental means, using steel and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the member is able to withstand this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of swords in the vault.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Swords come with sharp edges that are protected over the vault and prevent access to their operation, and after some days, the vault opens on its own.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you should consider whether the vault containing the swords is strong and has no other ailments besides the swords, then you collect those swords.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to hold their head in a certain position and then suspend those veins with a pin or two, according to your discretion. And make that pin of subtle construction following this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two pins gradually in the body following this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gently compress those veins with subtle force, at the right moment, until you see the veins filled with blood and pulsating.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not touch the pain in the edges of the wound; and if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, be very careful in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, gently distill hot or cold water into the wound to clean and corrode what is left of the blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	If it is not possible for you to collect all of that in the same time, then apply a poultice to everything that relieves the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides and ensure it is free from infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeat this process according to the healing process until it is completely healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the shears:
Capitol .xix.	**Capitol .xix.**  (Capital X in the Roman numeral system, representing the 19th chapter)
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	**On the Reduction of Swelling in the Nose.**
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating swelling with a cautery or sharp medicine, as is preceded by the narration of its condition and it is not healed, then do not apply any treatment to it unless you make incisions over the affected area after assessing its severity, and extract all the moisture present within it, ensuring that the bones are exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore, when the bones are exposed and there is corruption or blackening in the tissue, then use the following instrument, whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named the sharp fork, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded, so that a hole is made by piercing with a lime or aluminum point (thus, in the following shape).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then return it between your fingers, and press your hand gently until you know that the corruption is removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this is done at times, and then the place is restored using drying and astringent agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh around it, and the body parts are separated from the sound and healthy ones for forty days, and it is not renewed or inflamed or affected by any accidents, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	If that is not the case, then it is not about widening the fissure but reducing it to its natural shape, and according to this manner: and it is that you expose the bone according to the cut or acute medicine, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument be first extended within the extremity thus with several turns.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand over it, and that is the part of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little from the side, and then rotate your hand on the surface until it penetrates all the bone, and you will feel the pain as it seeks to escape from there when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, you will now restore the area with astringent medicines that have been prepared.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh is no longer infected and the place is hardened, the matter that had escaped from the openings returns to the body, so this is less severe on the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the hernia's protrusion.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and does not occur due to strain or discomfort, it is necessary to relax the patient, then continue with the following: make incisions in the neck for drainage and suction; apply a liniment to the hernia made of alder, aloe, yarrow, and snake root, and tighten the bandage over the hernia with powdered motes.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way of the powder is to take linen cloth with many threads, and each cloth should be folded in four parts; make these threads into powder.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then arrange them one on top of the other according to the quantity needed for the hernia.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And tighten them with a strong, hard cloth; repeat the suction through the incisions; then remove the ventoses and leave the hernia straight both day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then make sure it is tightly bound.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And at night, as well as during the day, hold the ligament as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, repeat the application of poultices, compression, and suction cups until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uvula.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uvula tunic, and it is prominent, you should process the eyelids as if with a fine scalpel, and form the shape of a man for this purpose, and if you want to perform an incision, then the operation on it is as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uvula, starting from below, and then insert another needle through which there is a double fold from the lacrimal part, and cause that one to penetrate and leave the first needle in its place; then make an incision at the point of the double fold and lift that part of the uvula around the needle, and tighten it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in lard, and wait until the thread falls off by itself.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then apply the humid wool to that, which will provide comfort until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, from the entire circumference, cut a circular piece of cloth to fit tightly over the affected area, and then pierce it with a thin spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, allowing the white fluid to drain, and the bandage to be applied.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And hold it tight until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De curacio de alconati.	**On the Healing of Alconati** (or "Eye Diseases")
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alconati is not, as it seems, a sane condition that adjusts itself like water flowing downward and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The manner of working in this case is that you cease the illness upon its appearance on the affected part and right away, and then take hold of its head with both your hands from two different directions, and press it so that you prevent the health from spreading to other parts, and keep it thus, and stop the flow of liquid, and the illness will see its causes in this way as it observes.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow down, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If the flow of health is not prepared for descent as we have said, then stop the illness between your hands and take a fine needle and pierce it into that surrounding the panniculus, just before the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea in the crown (at the desired location), until the health is drained out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is removed, you will distill the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured as the other causes are treated, so that it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Capitol .xxii.** (Capital XXII)
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water coming from the throat.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have discussed the types of water in division and which ones are suitable for treatment, declaring that according to health, this or that should be chosen.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must stop the patient's suffering between your hands on a pillow and bind their throat tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your hand near the patient's eye, if the water-bearing part is on the left, use your left hand; or if it is on the right, use your right hand.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then hold your right hand up if the pain is on the left side; or hold your left hand up if the pain is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of your thumb near the edge of the eyelid, according to the thickness of the swelling in the white part of the eye, close to the inner corner of the lacrimal gland, and gently press the eyelid with your thumb.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the eyelid tissue, and feel that the swelling has already been affected due to the heat.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And observe that the measurement of the path of the swelling to the point where it meets the edge of the black circle (the pupil) within the white part of the eye, which is the coronet of the eyelid; for you will see the pupil clearly through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place a maggic (or magical) substance into the area where the water is, and draw it down little by little, and thus as the water descends, you will observe the disease over which it casts its gaze immediately, and imbue it in its own essence.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will relax that other time before the maggic (or magical) substance is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is evaporated and does not descend, then you extract the maggic (or magical) substance with ease, and slowly turn your hand, and dissolve a small amount of pure salt gem in the water within, and wash the inside of the wound; and then place outside the wounded part a piece of cotton or stop or wool soaked in rose oil and white of egg and mix it with the water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those of our time do not use these things as they should be used with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your magic in the treatment of the bone due to its hardness - for it is one of the men whose bones are hard -, then know that you must take the sponge which is called "alberid" whose shape this is:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce through that joint, and do not end your hand on the track, and it is not until you make a subtle space for the magic.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then properly insert the magic according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's sleeping place, decently made in which they sleep on their back at home in a dark room, and prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And focus on the nature of it so that its natural state is clear, and do not strain their head to the right or left from all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And the ligament should be arranged according to its position within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then return to that place in that dark manner, and examine the affected area, and after observing its causes, return the ligament within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not advisable to do this at the time of treatment or, perhaps, the infusion should be given instead.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It has been observed that this can be achieved because the water is able to pass through slightly and violently due to careful observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess forms cautiously, then it is necessary to drain it after seven days, and straighten that which has bent due to the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now examine the patient's mouth and place your hand over the affected area for several days, existing in the dark place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually, you should be guided by that powerful force, conversing about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And you should know that in alchemy the student is not excused from seeing certain things at times, and then you will be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already learned from some of those who are in the art, and one said that fire should be made in the air with a magnet through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	Yet you may not have seen this in our land that has accomplished such a thing, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the ways of the spices of magic that one should know about those who ignore them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or bronze, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the pointed end being like that shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	**Chapter XXIV**
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When there are various attached flesh injuries in the nose, caused by some swelling of the muscles or polyps within it; this malady is called a polyp because it resembles that very same foot represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, pale, of dark color; and that flesh is leon-like not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of this lion-like flesh that is neither fraudulent nor cancerous, you should cut into it between your fingers and expose it to the sun, then draw out the blood from the veins of it, and prick the tiny vessels in those meats.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and with a precise cut, divide what you have understood from them using a fine knife, knowing that all the flesh is held together; if any cause arises from which laceration is possible, then quickly do this with one of the subtle instruments at hand before some other cause ruptures it.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is a cancer or acute abscess that requires caution, then apply it to what it covers; or if it is of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize it until the cancer is divided and all cavities are sealed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then quickly immerse yourself in the nose with the incision, using either water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is open and you feel humidity in the palate during the process, then know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh nothing over the bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you will understand that insert the instrument precisely into him to whom there is some obstruction, and turn in it most gently, and between each nut, apply the amount of pressure that is appropriate or less, and by means of the illness, and insert one end of the instrument into the nose either through a wound or for other reasons that are possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, that it will have made its smell enter so that it reaches the nasal canals, and be held over their faces, for many times the children in school seem to like this action, and it is a minor cause for anyone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then hold both ends of the instrument, one end that comes out through the nose and the other that is inserted into the nose, and apply pressure with a meat lock to the nuts that are on the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh has already reached the nuts of the instrument.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the gallbladder, place it in a container with salt water, and do this for three or more days until the pus corrodes everything that is broken in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a silver tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If the cure ends, use this method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument, a purge-maker, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small cavity, and attach it in such a way.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube as well with cane, and the tube of the purge-maker instrument should be flat, open; it should have a handle at the end of it, which you hold when you infuse oils or water that you want from the extracted juices and succedaneum.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these herbs are precious: take the bark of castor, white willow, ginger, and saffron piletre, long pepper, hawthorn, and epithymus of anise seed, mixed with beetroot juice and kelp, and make pills, and one pill taken with warm water is effective for the pain.
Capitol .xxv.	It appears that your request is incomplete or lacking context. "Capitol .xxv." does not provide sufficient information for me to determine what text should be translated or analyzed. Please provide more details or the full text for assistance.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They grow on the tips of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Frequent sightings of a growth on the tips of the nose, which initially appears small but significantly grows over some days, warrant close observation to determine its nature.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should pay close attention from the moment you notice its beginning appearance and eradicate it completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then apply the cautery or medicine that burns over the area where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If the operation takes too long, it should be hurried, considering whether it is enlarged, hard, of dark color and with little sensation, then do not touch that part which is infected with gangrene; for signs indicate that this gangrene brings great harm to whoever suffers from it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the gangrene is of a bright red color and not dark, and it is possible to operate in all parts, then evacuate the infection and cut away the affected part without delay, and treat the area with something that draws out and constricts the pus until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the stitching of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to a wound or similar.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You should know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it causes little effect on the operation in some people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So, when you encounter any cause related to those, considering it a fresh wound or an old one, and then you adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and subsequently care for that area until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the rupture are already separated and each part is healthy, then you should extract any foreign body from its place ensuring that it doesn't cause infection.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you adjust the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and trissat on them, and place a piece of fine plaster or some other consolidative dressing over that powder, leaving it for two days or three, and then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the wounds are completely healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The technique of stitching is that you add the solution for continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the stitching of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with silk as it has been explained to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	**Capitol XXVII.**
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Regarding the extraction of those causes that occur in both lips during internal divisions.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	You often observe various individuals in the internal divisions of their lips, some have hard apothems resembling the fat of errors, and others are smaller or larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should manipulate the lips and openings of each of those hard spots from every direction, and then remove the abscess by cleansing the area with a smooth tool while ensuring that the wound is closed, and afterward, wash it with wine and treat the spot with water that has been heated, so that it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On the incision of tissue attached to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Treatment of the attached gum tissue that ancient practitioners called "albulus": it should be suspended or cut with forceps and incised along its root, allowing the blood to flow or the pus to drain.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply over the area a poultice or other stoppers or astringent powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the tissue returns, then incise it again secondly and cauterize it, for the cautery should not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter .xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Because of the tooth's pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth within and between the gums there are tight, rough, hard cuts, some blackened and some discolored, due to this corruption spreading to the gum, the nearby teeth become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must open the space between your legs and place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and extract the teeth in which these hard cuts appear, causing a similar feeling as sand, without any pain, and do this until they are all purified from their blackness, whiteness, and other colors.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if this remains as in the beginning of the reason, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat the reasoning to the other parts on the following days and every other day until you reach your final statement regarding what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various types of precise cuts and shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	For these reasons, the scissors used to extract a tooth from its socket are different from those used to cut between teeth, and these shapes of scissors must be prepared as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Understand that you cure the tooth from its pain using all means and take your time in the complete eradication of it, for there is no reason to delay the moment of its extraction, as it is a sublime substance whose excuse lies in the eradication of itself.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	You may also understand that when the patient is compelled to have a tooth eradicated, you must be firmly certain which tooth is causing the pain, as the deceiving pain may come from the illness and not from the healthy teeth, and you eradicate that one, but the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have seen this in the operation of the barbies.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, once you have determined which tooth is painful and know its location well, you will need to scrape the area around the tooth with a spatula, ensuring it has some virtue, until it is completely separated from the gums, and then apply pressure with your fingers or use small pliers gradually until it loosens.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then apply a strong, firm grip using large pliers or similar tools for good manipulation or extraction, and hold the patient's jaw between your fingers so that it does not move, and treat the tooth according to its position in such a way as not to break it or cause the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if this is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it around the tooth from all sides with ease and effort, and attempt its removal as if it had just begun.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or worn down, be careful to wrap cloth around it and stretch it with a fine, sharp wire so that it does not break off when you apply pressure with your pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And be careful to perform the scarification precisely in the entire circumference of the gum and keep a firm grip so as not to break or tear it, and return to the patient for further treatment if the pain is greater than the first.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and aggressive attempts at extraction; for these often bring on great misfortunes for men, which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of their teeth become completely torn out or extracted by some bones from the jaw, as we have witnessed with our own eyes.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then perform the extraction, washing the mouth with vinegar or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is pus and it flows for some time, as is often the case with these experiences, scrape a little of this pus and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not remove that pus, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The design of the forceps should be fine and delicate, suitable for extracting a tooth from its beginning to the end, with a short handle and thick, so they do not bend when used as intended.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if they have even thicker handles, the longer you use them, the less likely they are to bend, as their ends are shorter.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	These are made of Indian steel with right-angled ends; at the tips of these forceps, some have teeth that mesh with one another and tighten strongly due to their curved shape, similar to the beak of a wood pigeon, which is very strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and fragments of bone from the crushed jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck for any reason, you must place your hand over the area with a border for one or two days until the area is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia or guanta, forming forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them shall be done within thus with lime or alum.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, then you must lie down and expose all the flesh and insert the instrument whose name is a small lever with this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And the long narrow end should be slightly curved, not too thick, so that it is not trapped.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the incision is incorrectly made, this is; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular at its end, with some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a very fine pointed end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And they help with this instrument, having two slopes, the appropriate form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; because gently is done with this instrument resembling a large knife, and its form is:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	from the triangular pointed end, either bent or straight, of any thickness, and not covered so that it is not curved.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing, the extraction instruments for teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled and subtle artisans in this art, by observing the patient's condition and various ailments, can determine what is needed for treatment, as the ancient ones did not have a specific tool or form for all kinds of conditions.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is broken, then its weight should be supported in its proper place using instruments and forceps, as we have described for the extraction of teeth, and aid yourself with the gesture that forms this:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any swelling, little by little, and it is tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not burst out or escape until all the bones are completely healed; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove any debris from that fracture and clean it, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter .XXXII.**
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	**On the Treatment of Prominent Teeth Among Others.**
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth are prominent beyond their natural shape, especially in women and particularly in the most sacred parts, then take care to consider: if one tooth is not properly aligned with another and cannot be corrected or treated, extract it; but if it is not joined to another tooth, then cut it using this instrument that resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And this is your incision tool with which you cut that tooth, over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it should not be used on any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed for filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel that has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be entirely made of Indian steel; the edge must be precisely; and it is in the form of needles, or the file should be like needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then tie it at the end, and cut those away with a razor.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth that is causing the pain and affects the tongue, you must then find a way to clean between the parts that are pressed together so that the tongue is not hurt or the words corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of lost teeth, it is recommended to use gold or silver wire.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens to the front teeth due to a strong blow or removal, and the patient cannot bear it, having tried various medicines, if there is still no improvement, then consider using gold rather than silver wire for tying them together, because silver becomes brittle and may break apart over time, but gold remains unaltered.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the form of the filling is to take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then make it curve in two places between two damaged teeth, or if one or several, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, and use your hand with ease and wisdom so as not to damage it further.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And the tension with which you hold the thread must be such that it does not tear the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Then cut the excess thread with forceps or scissors, and place them at various points with gestures, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then he should tie it up so tight like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it becomes loose or ruptures, tighten it or those parts with another firm hold in such a manner constantly.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two bad ones, thus when these ligatures are done:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done so that a tooth or two returns to their proper place in each location and they grow back as we have recommended, they remain firm.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled artisans and wise ones do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a cause from the bones of a cow is shaped like a tooth and placed in the spot where the tooth is missing, it is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Regarding the incision of the ligament visible on the tongue, prevent its movement.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which is visible on the tongue, sometimes occurs naturally or it may be a result of an accident due to a condition that has already become established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the malunion, freeing its top from the lower jaw; then lift the tongue and make an incision in that nervous ligament according to its extent so that the tongue can be separated from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any hardness or resistance and this has become established due to a condition, then you apply oil and cut it according to its extent until the ligament is incised and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to cause a fissure in the flesh and cut here behind, allowing pus to flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then clean the incision site with warm water or wine or fricative water; and leave the tongue relaxed; it is beneficial for the patient to keep the tongue outside during the night so that it does not solidify again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flow of pus occurs, apply vinegar to the site; if the pain is severe, use a cautery with a poisonous substance suitable for it.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that treatment for the other causes as long as it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On extraction of the ranula, leave the tongue aside.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, the tongue becomes abscessed and resembles a small stone, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function; and when it swells greatly, it is magnified to such an extent that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, looking at it directly in front of the sun and considering the aperture.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is of a dark, hard color, from which the hernia does not feel pain, then do not touch that part which is cracking.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns to white, in which there is humidity, then insert your finger into it, and cut with a delicate spatula, and divide it entirely; and if you have strong wind during the time of your operation, then place a piece of cloth over it, tightly bound, as long as the pain persists.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completely treated it, after having washed it with wine and salt; and take care of the other healing remedies for it until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from two ears and that which is nothing in the throat, and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess forms in the throat, there are glands that are tightly packed together, which break outside and are called two ears, which, when you treat them as mentioned in the previous section, and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and do not touch it with a knife.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the base is thick, then do not touch it with a knife due to the pus; instead, let it mature as it is, and either it will be drained on its own or it will break open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, soft, and the base is thin, then that needs to be cut into.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess in him has rested with complete rest or has been reduced in any way; and then stop the disease before the sun, and let his head be in the low position, open his mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers the tongue of him gently with a noble instrument of which this is the shape.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or brass, and be subtle with a blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on the tongue and show the abscess to your patient, and see that his teeth are loose over that place, then take pliers and hold that in the amen (or groove) and pull that into the parts outside as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you pull out is the cause of the tunic, and then you cut into it with an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It resembles a pair of pincers, yet its extremities are curved, so the sharp points of each are in the opposite direction, one on top of the other, both made of iron but coated.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available, cut a blade with the shape of this: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And having cut one slice, cut another in the same manner, and then close the wound with hot water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, cleanse it with water from the decoction of chamomile or mistletoe and similar herbs until the flow of blood stops, and then treat that wound so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And in some cases, there are other appendices close to those two ears, and you should cut them as you have said in the incision of two equal slices.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And you have already treated a woman with gangrene who was born in the sole of her foot, whose gangrene tended to a dark color, with little feeling, which had closed the sole of her foot, and the woman breathed heavily, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she would have died if more time had passed for one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the gangrene had already infected so deeply that it had formed two abscesses, which would drain through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	So you should listen to them fistula-wise and stay in one of their rooms, remove that one, and throw it away, take a large portion of them, and then you should incise the one from which you understood the other wound, and then you should press on its mouth, grasp its tongue, and then stay with the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you should remove a large piece of it, and there was little or no bleeding from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, it is absolutely essential for that woman, and soon after drinking water, they should also take food, so you must not continue to cut those motas of the wound for a long time, and successive wounds in place of that one, which incision persists as long as it continues.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, you must wash and dress the wound, and thus add to it; and then you should walk and not know that God has done so much for that very person.
Capitol .xxxvii.	**Capitol .xxxvii.** (This indicates the title or heading of a specific chapter or section.)
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incision of the hernia when it becomes infected.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh occurs in the hernia, and it becomes infected and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the opening thin and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When the condition we described in the previous section has been cured and you do not observe any improvement, and it turns out that the abscess has already formed and is very small, then you should know that you need to incise those that are enlarged; but if it is of a considerable length, and is bloody, of a dark color or black, and does not give way to treatment, then be wary of making an incision, for there is great danger in this case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe that according to the method I have described, in its whiteness and length, the disease is removed and you press the tongue of it with an instrument that shapes its form, then reduce the hernia, pull it down and make an incision with one of two instruments used for the operation of two incisions.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And be aware that you should not make an incision except in a place that is suitable according to the natural course of the disease, for if you make an incision too much, you will harm its healing.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then make the incision, using what we have recommended in the incision of two wounds, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the incision and saw the cautery as dangerous, know that the cautery is nothing but hot water, and this is how you should proceed: hold the patient's head firmly in place, press the tongue with the instrument we mentioned, take water as described in the chapter on cauterization, create a strong flow of live steam, and apply it not too thick or too thin, filling the concave shape of the instrument.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The end of the instrument should be concave, where the medicine is placed, just like a spoon's curve, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of the wound. The patient should lie on their back so that saliva or mucus from their mouth comes into contact with the intrinsic medicine, preventing any further damage to the throat and healing it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it from the uvula by making a space of a moment until you see that it is degraded and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, immerse the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap through a channel above so that the wrap adheres to that channel, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then clean the cauterization on the uvula by wiping it with a cloth soaked in the medicine, wash it thoroughly with warm water, apply an external embrocation, and use poultices until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this specific method of treatment is both safe and free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something that is finer than a cautery and incision, as it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scened arabic, chamomile, broad and similar herbs to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in one mixture, and submerge them with wine; let them bubble; and the wave should be well struck against a decently placed tray, on which a pointed instrument of wood or metal is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And then the end of the instrument is inserted into the patient's mouth, allowing the vapor to rise to the uvula, until the uvula becomes significantly obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process on the affected areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment while food is present, as it might excessively irritate the hernia, and you should not do that unless a doctor has examined and declared the hernia.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this tool at hand, take a cane and attach a ring of iron to its end, so that the opening of the wound is sealed, as the iron ring prevents vapors from burning the wound.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On removal of thorns and other substances adhering to the skin, and on other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Various things adhere to the skin, or thorns from feet, or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	So then, when you have removed what is apparent from these things, upon which the eye looks, and pressed your tongue against the tool in front of you, so that what is in the mouth becomes clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the strong cause annexed to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of nap or chopped lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, tie it tightly with string, and make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can take a eel and tie gallstones to it, then immerse it in hot water and extract them; or take a pear, peel it, and soak the seeds and extract them.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If these causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following manner:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be sharp, thick, and slightly curved; at the tip, there is a hollow which you will insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And he raises his head and be careful that you feel the touch of his bone in his throat, so that he may take in air and alleviate the pain caused by the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts in his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Although the illness may seem better, because of his knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and he drives it down and applies his hand with the instrument to it, according to the amount that has been prepared for him, until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter XXXIX**
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of the blood clot attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating the blood clot as we have discussed in the division of treatment by medicines and not with surgery, consider the throat of the patient under the sun, since you will have to remove his tongue with the instrument that we recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you examine the blood, extract that small or subtly shaped clot appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and in the concavity of the needle, place a heated iron, and do this several times (as long as the blood stops flowing and the clot is removed from the wound) and keep the patient on water for the rest of the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of the water and change it every hour for now until the blood stops absorbing the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If we have not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient on the head or with an herb-infused smoke using the instruments designed for suffocating the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so it falls where it should.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of operation through suffocation of that part is that you take a cloth in which there are ignited coals and cover it with a covering in the middle of which is an opening, and place the extremity of the instrument on that opening; then apply the suffocation to the patient; and have the patient open his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his lips so that the suffocation is not discharged until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, because the blood will soon come.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motive vapor again and forbid the patient from drinking, and eating salty foods, and drinking water, and it is also necessary that this regimen be followed until.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to draw blood from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as well, except that it has no curve in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a cicada's beak, which is curved, and it sticks to anything it touches, that's why, when we encounter any cause, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the entire discourse is focused on the diagnosis and treatment of apoplexy.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Apoplexies are special symptoms, of various kinds, as we recall them from this book, each with its own characteristics.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and section in two ways: one is for the specific type of apoplexy itself; and also for what we understand about humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is specifically for the places where bodily accidents occur, because the apoplexy that occurs in the head is different from the apoplexy that occurs in the legs; and the apoplexy in the fleshy parts is different from the one in the joints; and each of them has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some ulcers are such that they do not need to be drained but rather the maturation of the wound in those or completion of their course.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Other types of ulcers are such that they need to be drained when they become crossed, and do not mature according to their course. Similarly, with ulcers that are inclined towards joints, an ulcer forms near a joint, the condition of it prolongs until you can observe something in the circulation of the blood, and its intensity corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, leading to contraction of that member; or if it is close to a major limb, and you delay the perforation beyond its maturation, it will affect the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, so you must perforate one that is not yet matured; and do not perforate it while still in its raw state, otherwise, it may cause the pus to escape and extend beyond the buttocks, creating a fistula, or something formed at the end of its course, which will not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is also important to know the time for draining the ulcer, as it should be done when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you will know that recovery has begun when the pain ceases and fever abates, and there is a reduction in rigidity and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other symptoms.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And be aware that you should know how to make an incision in the location of the pus, left by the abscess, and also coming from the healing of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	This incision is always made through the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the glands, nerves' cords, arteries; and finally, in any location that does not reflect, for in those that do reflect, one should use incision according to that particular member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to avoid making the incision until the digestion of it is confirmed according to what we have said; for if you make the incision there before, it prolongs the course of the disease and increases the pain and hardness of its edges, and deepens its wound.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	You may make some incisions in certain places through the thickness of the flesh or body parts as needed, or according to what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And be aware that you should administer small incisions, and in large apothemas make deep and wide cuts or sections according to the diversity of the size of the apothemas.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other types of apothemas where it is necessary to reduce and incise the swelling, when such a pain occurs as if it were in a pan and is made in such a way that it already stands firm, so with those who suffer from double or bubonic fever.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And regarding those who are incised in a section with three angles, and of those where it is incised just as the figure of a myrtle leaf, so too with the apothemas of the knees.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And regarding their type where a round section and lunar section are administered, they resemble those mentioned above.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	May he who has no such issue with superficial wounds, be sure to pierce with a shallow or flat needle only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the wound is deep and has already collected a lot of pus, do not pierce it at once; instead, extract some of the pus, then pack the wound tightly the next day, and extract more pus in subsequent visits, increasing the amount gradually as it is discharged.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And most especially if the patient is a frail woman, or an old person, or a young child, as the animal spirit's vital force tends to resolve towards the exit of the wound, and they often die from the operation.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter: when you perform the piercing for these wounds, be sure to cleanse them and consider whether the wound of the apostema is shallow or deep; if it is shallow, then administer the appropriate remedies; but if it is deep, and the openings from the piercing are wide, you must apply pressure to each opening until they close together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If, in the abscess, a part of the cord or a concave space in the ring is separated, then cover it with a thin piece of cloth or thread from linen, as when you treat cuts or razor wounds, apply moisture; tighten that area within three days; and subsequently treat and cure it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If, during your operation, there is a flow of blood, you should administer clean water and mix it with cloth, and place that over the area where the bleeding occurs, pressing it gently.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, you must administer remedies and treatments, and apply powders recommended in various places of this our text and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is during winter, and the area of the abscess is full of nerves, you must wrap poultices in hot oil and place them on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then cover that you place powder soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this be rubbed until it is the third day, as we have said, and then cover that you loosen the blister and cleanse it and apply what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the healing of blisters universally, more so according to the method of distinction I have already said about each blister in which way it is a path to its cure, by chapters separately.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xl.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the section of blisters which appear on the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the nape of the neck, there are small blisters, which are of various types with layers that are made of them; and these are called by different names.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from these come drops, and those contain a humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity similar to sweat, and resemble them; and those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those [humors], there is no fear, as the incision of those should not cause any hostility.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you expect those to be received by an instrument in the shape of which they are, which is called a trocar, as long as you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what contains is humidity, then you split that as section according to length by sectioning superficially in this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that through which that moisture passed, and do not leave any cause for it, for troops seen returning may indicate some cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the affected area in hot Egyptian (possibly referring to a medicinal bath) or, if not available, in water and salt; fill it with that remedy and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that is broken off from that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then you repeat the application of that remedy with hot Egyptian (medicinal) bath according to need, as long as you are confident there is no other cause for that skin condition; cure the affliction with the remedy until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess with fatty nodes, then you insert into it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	I have a section without the shape of a cross, and make an incision between two folds of the section and tear it from top to bottom, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If it causes resistance in your arc (or instrument), then do what I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscess of the section with cauterization according to what I have told you; the incision over the abscess that has been cauterized is lighter, as it is of little pain and has little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are certain abscesses of these types that are in the head, on some men, where there is no humidity at all; which causes because you have incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and left it with a hard, sour, white stone that could not be drunk, and if anyone were to touch it, they would be infected.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	In other cases of accidents on the head, except for these, this chapter does not apply, thus the section for all these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their origin so that the matter of the disease is alleviated from the deeper parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply care to those as it suits the treatment of that one.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofulas that occur on the collarbone.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Various cases of these abscesses occur on the collarbone, armpits, and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And so those that occur in the gut, and so motes that are generated within them, and all scrofula of those comes from their own tunic, and thus also with the nodes and apoplexy of the head, as we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofulas are motes; some are stone-like, others contain moisture, and those that do not obey treatment are malicious.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the case where you perceive a good disposition for treatment, of which the color is peculiar to that of the ulcer, and it is painful at all points, not attached to any nerves or veins or tendons, and not swollen, you must incise it along the dry surface of the wound from the edge of the body towards the center of the line G, beyond the line B, remove it entirely from the part, and extract the edges of the ulcer with tweezers, if necessary, as we have mentioned regarding the apoplexy of the head; you must do so little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it requires more caution that neither the vein nor nerve be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the knife should not be too sharp, nor should it suit your hand for cutting, or inquiet the patient, and you should not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, it would prohibit your operation, then the disease would become more severe with vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, and make the plague worse, and leave that which prevents the healing of the fistula and softens the plague, and begins to be putrefied.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the pus is drained.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then carefully examine the said indicated area if there is any cause of the other small scrofulas; therefore, cut and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it concerns a large vein in the region of the scrofula, you must be careful not to puncture that scrofula from its origin.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Be careful not to force the broken thread, as it may fall out on its own.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with fresh gauze that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and tend to it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	If you puncture the scrofula completely, be careful to close both edges of the wound and apply a poultice immediately to prevent any excessive discharge of pus.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to understand where it originates, and carefully puncture its origin. Then drain it and apply a suture as well as the treatment mentioned above.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation at the place where you see the formation of it, and stop the perforation when the pus is drained from the lower parts of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation, using some ointment and similar things to that which corrodes what is broken down by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you see the wound has healed, you apply a treatment made from generative flesh ointment until it is completely cured.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On section of the pilon (bone) of an apoplexy (stroke or sudden loss of blood flow to the brain), take care during the operation.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section in the pilon, and we have not seen anyone in our land who can do such a thing.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of these ones.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In some men, there is a weakness, and the extraction of the stone must be avoided, because by doing so, all the veins and the major ones of the disease are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the teeth, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of stones to prevent loss, which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, cut the stone below three circles of the circles of the stone, or four with a small section due to the thickness in that which is between two circles for quantity, and the section should be on the bone, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the stone are open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the chain of the scalpel to an angle, and then cut the chain until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if they get in the way for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then, insert the blades according to our recommendation; this refers to the section of the channel for the flux that is caused by this condition, which is broken off and removed through the incision.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour arrives that the piercing is to be made, add two layers of the scalpel's edge to the wound, and with this single one, cut through the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then, administer medicines that promote healing of the flesh until it is cured.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of our discourse, which we have collected, is to observe that some of these spots have already weighed down the patient's condition, and the disease has spread throughout the body, and its air is cut off, and some go to incise the epiglot so that the patient breathes on the spot of the wound through some respiration, and thus is saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I will order the wound to remain open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it is for three days; and therefore, you shall command the wound thus, and heal it until it is sane.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen for myself, is that a servant used a knife and scalpel to cut into the patient's chest, incising a part of the lung, and I was called to treat him, and I observed the breathing as if from a dying person, and I uncovered the wound, and treated the scar left by the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, you must admit that he did not cut either a vein or an artery, and the breath still comes from the plague; he treated it with fire until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not cut the servant unless it is necessary in your voice; after a few days, return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv. (This appears to be a chapter number, indicating the beginning of a new section or topic in the medical treatise.)
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the section concerning the abscess that occurs outside the throat, which is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called hernia of the throat, is a great abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And there are two manners of it, either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural, it is not engendered for healing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two manners; in one it is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is similar to apoplexy which is caused by the congestion of an artery, and that is fearful.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not make a diagnosis with haste except for one who is skilled.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then you should examine it and investigate it as he has said, and if it appears similar to gouty nodules, and is not suspended from any vein, you incise it thus with the nodules, and extract that which causes it from within the flesh and bursae; otherwise, you should scrutinize its whole being, and tend to the place in need of cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of nodes' species.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	These nodes have various species, and I have already described all their kinds in the previous division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I explain here the difference between a node and an exit, with due consideration.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an exit is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain, until the ebullition of excess liquid subsides; it is complete putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	A node, however, does not exhibit heat, fever, or pain, and it is that change which indicates the moment for its extraction.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And according to the condition of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two kinds, or they are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a nodule, you must expel that and inquire into the beginning of the stirring which is called an "intrusion", according to how its form comes in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is also a method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this stirring and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your hands about that little by little until you know that the stirring has already penetrated the wall.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then you will close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you will extract the intrusion and consider what has remained in the trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color it may be, then you incise it to the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity from the wound, then you know it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it over the section having no shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus taught, raise it up and suspend it, remove the strings from all parts with ease, and inspect the skin or sac over that area, if possible, and extract the stone from its place.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	If it is broken during the operation and it is not possible to extract the stone, apply compresses here and there, and wait until it comes out on its own without breaking for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If due to any cause, whether little or much, the pain returns, it should be treated according to its nature.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that the pain from the roman (or foreign) body is in a small part, complete the plague with some sharp, corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and place a cautionary bandage over it, and treat the other with whatever cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this (method) that it incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein is pulsatile or not, you should cut and knead the place of healing with a tri-sectioned zigzag that is vitriol (or a sharp tool), and leave this straight for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanction (or injury) decreases; then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, of which one is larger, another is medium, and the other is smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, aluminum, and have sharp points, so that they penetrate the spaces between the joints gracefully.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods of those who have experience, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the herbalist.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of these three spices, one is great, another is milder, and the third is very little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great in knowledge:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, moderate in knowledge:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, little in knowledge:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	So, it is imparted to those who deal with abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, andbuboes, so that among these are bone and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus are made round, thick, leathery bands, also with large needles sewn onto them, and they are prepared from citrus peel, or horn, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are when they are made from citrus peel.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experience of black crow feathers are used, which remember that through these openings in the hollows of which reflections are made, those reflections are reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three species, some of which are long, and others half-length, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the experienced large crow feather:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the experienced half-crow feather:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Shape of the experienced small crow feather:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the incisions are of various species, some of which are simple curves, and they are of three types: large, few, and half.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their bodies' humors, there are three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these, there are two curvatures, which are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curvatures as well, which are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single curve half-made:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single slight curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large wound:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The form of a smaller wound, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a very small wound, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	A large wound with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A smaller wound with two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A very small wound with two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	A large wound with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A smaller wound with three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The form of a nail has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of scalpels that are used to cut and incise nodules and abscesses, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but designed in such a way to make incisions without cutting into veins or nerves, so that treatment of the disease is facilitated and pain avoided by the adjustments necessary for the excorination of abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of maggots, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large maggot:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the medium maggot:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small maggot:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of an ery (scab or ulcer) and resemble a small worm, which is also called maggot.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the outer side with a hidden point (or knife), and as it flows within and without, at will, so it is.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the punctures, which are hidden between these spaces in the piercing of the joints and not perceived by the patient, are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of wounds from which the flow of blood is obstructed, and there are three types; great, medium, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citric erio, either round or of any length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of wounds be great, medium, and small, so that they obstruct the flow of blood at the appropriate speed in case of need, and you will know when it is not the first treatment used for healing.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	I do not recommend using those to obstruct blood flow throughout the body, but only in flesh wounds, as with the lacerations of the legs and thighs, and the injuries of the arms, and the mammary area, and the abdomen, and the groin, and similar to their soft tissue lacerations.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times these instruments are made of small blades resembling scalpels according to this form; by which the vein is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times these cuts are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the mammary glands of men, which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the mammary glands of certain men are swollen due to sleep and begin to feel painful, then they become swollen, and the mammary glands of women are assembled and turn red.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who wish to do this, they should incise those parts of the breast according to this form, from the line B to the line G, then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure that which is healthy.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the nipple recedes from its attachment and becomes softened by its magnitude, as is common in women, then it should be cut in two pieces, one above the other, resembling half-moons, each contained within the other, so that the main line contains the smaller according to this form of the B and G lines. Then remove the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and administer what has been said about sutures and powders, which are necessary for healing until it is cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not perform the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of pus, then fill the wound with a corrosive broth and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the grime, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	About the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are caused by the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a puss that needs to be drained.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity should be incised at the lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then you complete it with a clean bandage and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And keep the bandage clean and treat it with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the lymphatic nodules and scrofula is, then you incise it as we have said about the scrofula in general.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the plague has spread so much that it causes gangrene, then apply cautery to it as we have previously said.
Capitol .xlix.	**Chapter XLIX** (or 49) is the title of this section, though without additional context from the surrounding text, a precise translation or content guess is impossible. Typically, such capitols in medieval medical treatises detail specific ailments, treatments, or procedures. 
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks through the skin and the wound is closed, you will observe abscesses forming at the site, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: for when an abscess is due to an arrow wound, a long accumulation occurs in the preceding part of the body; and if you touch the abscess, you feel a strange sound within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein returns to the visible sign of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the incision on this abscess is incorrect, especially in those located in the armpits, angles, collarbone, and many parts of the body; it is very large, so be careful that its treatment avoids iron, and one located at the extremities or head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Place a cloth soaked in a lotion over the affected area to relieve pain caused by inflammation of the tendons and joints, cut a long section on the back side of the limb; then incise the section and expose the tendon, severing it, and remove the skin covering until it is bare.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then take the needle and make it penetrate between these two parts, and tighten the tendon with a double thread in two places, which will cause the patient to excrete from two tendons located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then apply the pressure to the area between two ligaments using a spatula until the pain disappears completely, and the swelling is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment where pus is formed until the ligaments fall, and care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If the abscess is caused by a cut vein, then you must cover your hand over the area to your best ability near the abscess at the back of the limb, and insert the needle into the spot where you have placed your hand, penetrating it; then make it enter in a double thread until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a suitable ligament as I have previously mentioned regarding the uva4 ligament on both sides of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that the thread might break, insert the needle into the remaining aperture, following the path of the first cut, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the aperture in the middle of it, while it is still fresh, and then incise the excess of the thread, leaving what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice on it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the treatment which is necessary to heal it.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Cap the aperture which occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, when an aperture occurs in the rear and in the veins, and appears to be caused by nerve apertures when they are struck or occur due to excessive work, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the most of it is done in the places of the assistants or the foot, or in any place where the joints are afflicted.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	It is a severe ulcer, resembling the color of another body, and it appears in its most vulnerable parts; when it is narrowed by intense violence, the patient feels a pain resembling stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an ulcer that occurs in the front or back of the body; for this reason, the patient remains bound, and the pain afflicts the entire limb without moving to other parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, concerning those who have pain in the joints, it is not necessary to be cut with a knife, for they will naturally experience contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	One should bind those who have pain in the head or forehead with a cloth.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, cut it open with scissors and sever that part from its root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then open it with a knife, cut it out, and close it up; and secure the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the section of the abscess that occurs from the skin down to the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Even some people observe swelling in the bellies of others and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because they resemble fungi; the root of these is subtle and the head of them is large; and already the lips of these are divided, and it is from these that a great number are produced.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And you have already seen one, and in their belly there were two parts which served as functions similar to each other, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, you should incise those and remove the larger one (18 units) from the foot, and the smaller one (6 units).
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the disease is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, of subtle size; then you make the incision with a broad spatula, and have hot cautery near you, for you must expel the pus from the section with great force; and if you feel the pus, cauterize that part.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is fearful and anxious, be cautious with cutting instruments; then take a fresh piece of lead and make a strong knot on it, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large lead afterward, until it is completely severed and falls out on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If that part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or anxiety in its incision, especially in the case of those in the stomach.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you cut away the bulk of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of it until the disease is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to attempt to incise that which is of a dark color, with little feeling, and moved by the leg, for that is absolutely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And now let us return to the remembrance of the cure.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The hernia (or eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons: either due to fissures in the abdominal wall, from which emerges the intestine or hernia, as is the case with other ruptures; or because of a leak of blood or lymph fluid (sanct), as described above; or because of excessive flatulence confined within.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to an abdominal wall fissure and the protrusion of the hernia, then the appearance of the hernia is similar in color to that of the body; and it causes a sharp pain, and appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is for the exit of the hernia, you must pay attention to the position of that mass which we have described, with greater diversity, and when you press on that mass, it becomes concealed, then return; and it strongly pushes into its own place, and it is glorified by a great deal of heat and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, you will feel a warmth and not occlusion when pressing with your hand, nor constriction or pain.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to infection, then these symptoms will appear as a black, declining abscess.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it accumulates according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it feels hot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from gas; then you must be prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it is taught in the chapter where I have discussed hernias by arteria and vena.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must order the patient to lie still, and gently apply pressure around the entire navel; then insert a thin instrument in the circle of the navel at the place where you have felt the indentation, and extend the extent of the hernia above it with a large finger; and then encircle the area with a strong thread or catgut, and tie it tightly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then, you should break the wall of the hernia over the ligament and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; if it is stuck or held back by the ligament, then carefully extract it and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the affected area, take some ointment; and cut away the excess.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If it is against your practice or vein, then circle that part and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and pass two needles through the loop which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will make them penetrate; and then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, leave the needles and let the location heal until the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or cut it when it has subsided and becomes curable, and then treat it with something that covers the wound until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the bulge of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then cover the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture which you find in it, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	On the cure of cracks.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the previous section, we have discussed the types of cracks and the appropriate methods for their treatment using medicines, and it is wrong to treat them with iron so as not to ulcerate. We also spoke about the causes of cracks and precautions to be taken in their cure.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancient ones said that sometimes cracks appear in places where it is possible to completely eradicate them, such as the crack which is on the breasts or on the thigh, and similar ones on other parts of the body, by removing everything around it, especially when it has just begun and is small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and deep, it may not be curable on its own, for I have neither seen nor heard of any remedy that has succeeded in such cases.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is as we have said, you must precede and remove the disease and purge it of black cholera in several instances, and then drain that, if a manifest filling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in the preparation that is placed there; and carefully cut around it, covering all parts with a good cloth for further protection so as not to cause any damage to the roots of it.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, but do not abruptly stop it; press on the spots, and with your hand or an instrument that is at your disposal from among the available tools, extract the thick blood.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If it is against your will to make a thick blood clot cut of a vein or an artery, cauterize that until the flow of blood stops, and then take care of it with the other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the cure of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops and the signs of each, as well as their treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitres or the species of yposarcha, for that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanitre with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the patient's illness has been strengthened or it is another malady, other hydrops, just as in those cases or abdominal pains and similar ones, then be careful not to administer iron, for there is fear of that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you examine the disease of an exuberant growth, and it is nothing but hydropic only, not child or old, then the manner of operating on it is that you lift up the malady between your hands, and apply them properly to press the patient's belly, draw out the water at the opening left by the foreskin, and take a sharp spoon according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	both of these parts should be sharp and long, with an acute end like the spoon; however, in performing the operation on it, do not make any sudden movements, so as not to let it enter the cavity, and take care of it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider whether the generation of hydropics is from the intestines, for you will see that by cutting through them away from the navel towards the foreskin, they open up in three places.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of hydropics is due to a disease of the vein, then your cut should be on the left side of the navel towards three openings.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is through the mesenteries, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And be sure that your incision is on the side where the malady wishes to flow, so as not to cause excessive effusion at that place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then completely perforate the ring with the instrument, insert your finger into the opening, and raise your hand with the spatula between the ring and the anus, and extrude it; and if it is of the size of a thumb or smaller.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the anus until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract it, and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a fine silver tube; it is made of silver or bronze or iron, and in its opening there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and its end is cut according to the shape of a pen, thus:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, the ring will immediately adhere to the instrument, thus evacuating a considerable amount of water in one go; for if you evacuate less than necessary in one attempt, the patient's condition may worsen due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or they may suffer a heart attack that is close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	You should evacuate according to the amount that is necessary, based on your understanding of the patient's condition, the strength of their vital spirit, and the benevolence of the treatment.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And upon removing the instrument, retain the water that is caused, for it is often held back by the knot that holds the opening over the patient's chest, and it is recommended that you perforate it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And on the following days, if the patient tolerates it, repeat the procedure and extract a small amount of water each time, doing so for several days with caution, and avoid errors as not to empty all the water at once.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with a burial in sand, followed by a bath and exposure to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines as long as it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and with ice and heat, return the water as previously described in what has been said above.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 25.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose places of urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some times a child is born from its mother's stomach, and the head of its mixture is not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, one should make an incision into it as soon as it is born with delicate, moist spurts in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then, with a delicate lead pin, close the opening and bind it with tape, for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And as for urination, let them pass urine gradually and slowly; then return to the previous state.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not close the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area, will not be blocked by this closure.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But if the opening is narrow, it should be treated with a lead pin, as we have said, for too many days until it widens.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	When those in whom the urinary tract is not in its proper place are mentioned, it is said that this condition arises because of those who are born with it, and they are called "born with an infection" and require the doctor to lift the penis over the opening to allow urine to flow; and it is not due to generation, so that sperm cannot reach the mother properly according to its rectitude, and it becomes a disease that causes pain.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The surgical procedure involves turning the patient's back, extending the penis with the left hand while applying strong traction, and incising the tip of the penis at the opening of the urethra using a sharp instrument, similar to cutting a quill, or any other device that creates a small opening, so that the semen flows from the middle part, resembling the shape of the penis, and the infection is expelled from its original location.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be cautious in your operation to free the flow of urine, as you may encounter complications; stop when you cut the cord binding the bladder, and treat the infection until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the albaster that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis due to corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Various spots (or pustules) occur on this albaster on the penis, and there is an emission of flesh that is raw.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And some are malignant, while others are not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, take a delicate unction and remove it entirely; then apply pressure to that part submerging in Egyptian (or some other) ointment; and afterwards, cure it with the ointment as it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albaster is malignant, it turns black, then you must administer cautery near its incision and ration it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the foreskin of an uncircumcised man has one split part inside and another outside, you must keep the inner part covered until it heals, for when you treat the outer part, there is a risk that the inner part may be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have also observed accidents in the genitals and foreskin, black and swollen, so take care to clean everything that is already discolored and likely to corrupt or is corrupted; then apply a line of medicine to it, made with flour from ground millet and mixed with dried roses and crushed spices.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat it with the other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	If there is a need for bloodletting, administer cauteries monthly according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Where a cautery is beneficial for two purposes, it aids at once in the flow of blood and in the healing of a corrupt ulcer.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely at that moment, you must insert a platinum cannula into the inside of the foreskin so that the infection urinates through that opening.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; and when adhesion occurs due to an ulcer or abscess), you must carefully cut away with an obtuse spatula until the adhesive substance is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them skillfully, you must cut away gently with a spatula from the head of the foreskin and the prepucium itself; this is because when the prepucium is thin, its delicate nature makes it easily perforated.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, having previously washed it in water to prevent adhesions in the future.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then, once the fracture is healed, apply a stopping agent within it to ensure its consolidation.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter VII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the cure for what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own making and done by our own will, and its practice is indeed beneficial for children, then we should assign to that better operation and method the mildest losses for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not write it in their laws, and only because we have acquired by experience the cause for which I have attributed to the greatest number of skilled practitioners and barbers using circumcision and purification with a new knife and with pliers; and they use lint from flax and incisions with a fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And you have already tried all these methods and do not find better relief than with scissors, lances, or thread that, when used to cut the foreskin, force it back, as the foreskin's edge is caught between two layers, and the inner layer is pulled away, requiring another incision and causing certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the circumcision that is performed by cutting, which surgeons use, is not safe for incising the end of the male member, as it easily enters the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But when using the unglable (forceps), it may break off and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is naturally short, and in most cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen this myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	On the preparation that is done with scissors and linen tape, I have discovered through experience its goodness, because the scissors are of proper incision size, for this reason the sharpness that is above is the same as the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand with the two sharps, make the cut according to a comparison in time; and it makes compression of the tape in a figure containing the knot of all pain, from which no error arises.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first manner of the operation is that you keep the child mostly calm if it is one of those who understand a little, do not make any but tie the tape to its hernia only, and let it enter into the other on the following day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in all possible ways, according to what he understands.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him stay between your hands properly prepared, and do not let him see any scent; hide the scissors in your hand or place the foot so that the child does not see those or any other of the tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the base of the anus, and clean that which is added to it due to impurity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then secure the site marked with a thread using a small piece of the second ligament, place your finger on it and indicate the position of the ligament left with good tension, and insert between two ligments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the anus slightly and extract the tip of the instrument; clean the wound thoroughly, which is better, and sprinkle powder on it, then place a cloth on it, in which the mucus from the patient's body is spread with fresh rose oil; leave that over the wound for another day; and treat it with cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the forceps used for cleaning, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The extremities should not be of unequal length; the others should be so that the axis of the foot does not deviate from the axis of the leg, and both have the same curvature as two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the correction in purification is because the strong reading escapes the intrinsic code entirely, or part of it, and you must make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, consider extending that of your time to your finger in front of the location's aperture and make an incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove it with a pince and make an incision with that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If three days have passed and it is believed that the swelling comes from an inflamed aperture, then leave it until the inflammation subsides, extract it with ease, and make an incision according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And pay attention to the head of the sore, as it will not allow you access.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that part which the plague has solidified with powders, as we have described in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it cuts into the flesh deeply enough, and you adhere to the rules regarding it, this will not be noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And apply treatment to that part as we have said for it to be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or congestion, or by a narrow opening or flesh, and similar to those we have mentioned in the methods of treatment in the previous section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and its retention due to pressure already in the bladder's neck, then know that the disease is still bent on its sides.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then position the patient's feet on their back and extend their abdomen, pushing it upward from their back; the disease will tighten its grip on the affected area as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, the bladder's neck is constricted to facilitate the expulsion of urine from the affected parts behind, so that the urine is voided.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the condition we described above does not improve, then you should address the cause of the disease with a syringe, which is called 'siringua'. Its form resembles: both argent and subtle as a lion's claw, equipped with a needle made of fine wire in the shape of a long ray, similar to a palm and a half, with a thin cane at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination through that is to take the urethra folded and tied at the end of a thread or string for proper tightening; and insert the ends of the urethra into the opening left by the catheter, and cut it with scissors if any cause for the string is superfluous, but rather insert it forcefully into the canal and then open the bladder with the edge and with urine albumin.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply a poultice over the pain on the skin, and drain the vesicle of the patient and the abscess with oils mixed, olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then insert the catheter with ease until it reaches the root of the abscess; and fold the abscess towards the opening of the fistula; and push the catheter from inside; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the pain is driven to its origin, and not done according to this order, but rather the meat in which it has twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then carefully extend the lint in the wound little by little, as urine dries out the lint.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that one for the cure of urine, use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder cleansing with bladder stones and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When it happens in the bladder, ulceration or abscess, or a severe fistula forms there, and you want to drain water and medicine from it, then use an instrument called a clampstone, and this is how it is done:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But if its beginning is silent, it is tightly closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three parts: two from one side, thus as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, there is a vacuum, which is what drives it, and according to its quantity, it accumulates or disperses; whenever any cause throws it out of balance due to moisture, it is driven in, and when it is expelled, it is driven out, just as a ship's anchor is affected by the tides at sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the anchor into the moisture and drive it away from the openings, for the moisture is driven into the cavity of the anchor.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the anchor into the wound as we have mentioned in the treatment; and drive the moisture away from what you drive, for that moisture reaches the bladder soon enough, and the illness centers around it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is crystalized, and that shape is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	Whether it is made of silver or lead, which looks like a small feather, and leave the stick inside the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then tie it between two with strong double ligature, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the urine.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then apply your hand over the bladder with the humidity, in the manner that the disease requires that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then pierce that in all its roundness; and insert the thread very strongly into those channels, turning them around; and add to the circle as much moisture, urine, or water as you desire.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you insert this into the instrument and perform it as you have done with the bladder, expressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	**Chapter LXX (60)**
De extraccio de peyra.	**On the Extraction of Stones**
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed the division of stone types and their treatments with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, or sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that becomes lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And they tell you of that most manifest exposition and concise summary.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it says that the disease originating in the bladder most often affects children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, appearing sandy, and the illness causes itching, swelling, and pain, and this is how it becomes incurable.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from that condition becomes easier after they have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Among the young, it is more common because of what exists between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, we must begin by cleansing the malady with Christ, who extracts the entire opening present in their intestines; for that opening sometimes hinders the flow of urine due to its inspection.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then, taking hold of the hernia near the patient's feet, it should be carefully manipulated and massaged so that the urine descends into the bladder or, sometimes, it may leave its position.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then use the appropriate instrument between your fingers, prepared beforehand, and let go of the contents of the bladder, so that it completely empties into the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then, carefully extract everything from that opening, both the solid and liquid matter.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then immediately cut it open with a knife.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch the slight touch of the tendon, cover it with oil the small indicated part of your left hand, whether the illness is a child or the little seed if it is a young person complete, and insert that into its place.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And then, while the stone is inside, place your small finger there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly turn that point, little by little, into the opening of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press that place with your small finger, and expel the stone outside from the part you cut it off.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above them, and with the other hand hold the cord that is left over the legs in the part where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then carefully insert a spatulum through the opening which is the shape of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	It divides into what is between the buttocks and genitals, not in the middle place, first on the side of the left thigh; and the incision should be above that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made, so that the external cut is wide and internal narrow according to the amount that the stone projects from the buttock, not more, because strongly it comprehends the saying that when the stone is in the buttock, the incision should be there, and it is forgotten its disability.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is a stone with angles and edges, so the excretion of it is difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it is like a grain, round, and it is made of the lighter excretion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your hands over that part, or tighten it with a suitable gesture, the extremity of which is as sharp as a stone over which you tighten the bandage on the foot, and do not tear from it; or insert between them an instrument with a curved, fine tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot do that, then enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flow, cut and cauterize it with vitriol three times.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the foot is more than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and cut into it; then push a little water in; and like this, if they seem to be more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the pain is very great, ignorance is that you pierce this great section, because it causes the disease one of two ways: either it stops (the flow) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, which is why the location is not entirely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	If it is necessary to expel what is inside that is foreign, or to repair the fracture with pliers, extract those in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in warm oil and water, to ensure the poultice gives way gently.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then return the patient to their bed, and do not loosen the bandages for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that is loosened, moisten the area with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of fine-ground salt and a base of oil until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If, in the case of this plague, there is a risk of gangrene, clean and dress the wound, and it resembles a stone frozen in the bladder (and urination is thus hindered), then insert what I am about to say into the plague and extract that pus, for if it causes the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with wine, water, and salt, and oppose all kinds of things that are suitable for its cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during all stages of treatment, ensure that you bind and adjust both things and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, and it gets stuck there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with something you have recommended before it causes dissection, because the forces used in this treatment are often blamed for causing dissection; take a sharp-pointed iron probe, which is the shape of this one:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular, pointed end, sharp, stuck in the wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take a thread, and tie it to the urethra, leaving the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the iron into the urethra, penetrating with ease until the probe reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, and continue drilling until you make a hole from one side to allow urine to flow out; for soon enough the bladder will be emptied.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then apply your hand to what is broken off from the stone of the kidney, outside the urethra, as it is squeezed and expelled with urine, and the disease is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this treatment is not suitable for any reason due to that condition, then tie a thread around the stone and another thread on top of it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then tightly compress the stone in that urethra between two closures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that one.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then release the adhesion and clean the infected gangrenous flesh, which is formed in the ulcer.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to leave a thread around the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other thread on top of it, for when the thread is loosened, the stone is expelled from the urethra, and the infection returns to its place and the disease worsens.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this, it is necessary when you tie the bandage over them, that you raise the edge to the parts above, or that you return to its proper place, and secure the pain thus as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If you see a stone in any of those places, the cure is then difficult, and it is forbidden by many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that women with strong bodies become weary.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you should not find a woman more wise than herself, who would disclose to the doctor when she is pregnant, or whether she is married to a man.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third statement translates as: "The surgeon is he who does not hesitate to perform this art, especially the operation with his hands.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth states: "And in women, the place of incision over the stone is far from the location of the stone, so a deep incision is needed, and there is fear there.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	If it is necessary to do so, you should seek help from a skilled female surgeon, and they are not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking in those skills, seek out a surgeon with sharp and subtle tools, or a female midwife well-versed in women's health, or a woman who has herself undergone this procedure.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	So, command this present one, and tell him to do everything you instruct, from examining the stone to its removal. This is because he must first determine if the woman is a virgin, and ensure that he whispers his words into her ear and asks for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, cut it off, leave its root, and then command him to incise on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If it is not ripe, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urinary tract and feel around on the stone, for she places her left hand on the bladder and extracts it at a good price.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when you find it, slowly extract it from the orifice of the bladder to the outside, at the same time using your strength so that it reaches the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision at the appropriate place of the urinary tract, from the root of the thigh to some other part, stopping the flow of urine through it and cutting off the stone. His finger should not be withdrawn from the urethra.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And make the incision small at first; then insert the blade into the wound, and if pressure is felt, adjust the incision according to the amount, knowing that the pain will be released from that point.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you should know that the parts of the kidney are like dots: some are small and sharp, others large and bitter, some long and round, and they have spikes.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know the number of parts (or types) of kidney pain, in accordance with what you have described regarding what you want to address.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vitriol (a caustic substance) to the site in three layers and let it sit for an hour until the pain is severed, then return to your operation to ensure that the kidney pain has been released.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare for yourself, from the instruments mentioned in the extraction of kidney stones in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you wish to stop the flow of blood and know that its expulsion is from the arterioles that are cut, then place powder on the area, apply those anti-fever pills and stricture gently, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for thus the illness will die out.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the plague.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, once the intensity of the bloodletting subsides, after several days, the area may heal. Then you return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about hernia removal.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia of the abdomen is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white chest cavity, which leaves the opening of the vessels containing the bowels, and it is called the chest.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is found in the natural fat that surrounds the liver, which is another organ; and it is the end of the generative power between the white gallbladder that we have spoken of, and this is not true.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the organs, which causes this material to be released, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck against the organs.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity does not have distinct colors, for the color of it may be declining to citron or bloody, or red, or black and putrid, or white and watery, and it is this that is most important.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is recognized that this addition of water has occurred are as follows: for if it is in the white gallbladder that we have spoken of, then the appendage becomes round and slightly elongated in length with a shape like a pear, and the organ appears, because the humidity surrounds it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the humidity is in the own panicle, then the abscess becomes red from the wound and thus man thinks it is another wound.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the legs of the genitals and the white ciphas (testes), then a burning sensation occurs.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to determine the color of the humidity, you should observe the color of the abscess as it appears from the wound's edge; and according to what is seen in the track of the wound, judge what is within.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be fleabitten if possible, and clean the wound thoroughly.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then, lie the patient on their back for some time due to any cause and place clean cloth under them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then place yourself on the patient's left side, and instruct the assistant to follow his right side, who should stretch his leg from one to two spans from the knee to the buttocks and to the opening of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a long, sharp knife and cut the inguinal ligament in the middle of its length near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to the direction of the hair growth, at a distance from the line that you must follow with the knife, so as to reach the white bone inside.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then extract it, observe, and pay attention so that you do not incise; your incision should be made with precision, carefully examining the amount of extraction at every step.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then punch the white bone with a wide puncture and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the blade along the edges; do not touch the wound with your fingers, and cut the blade in that way that is within your ability.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut through it completely or in pieces, especially its thin edges, for if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, there is a risk that the water does not drain out.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you process it from outside the wound during your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the blade, return inside and adjust the two lips of the wound of the genitals with sutures, and then treat it just as you do with other injuries, as long as it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then grasp the vessels that are above the suspension, extract the water, and treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is added in two parts equally, you will know that both are hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did the other in contrast; and if it seems to be an operation to you, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should clean the wound, and enter into the sections of the infected skin immersed in oil or rose oil; place another piece of cloth immersed in wine and oil, expanding it over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; and place them on folded sheets and poultices, and bind these with the bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two sheets of cloth and make them humid with warm water; press the extremities where it is held by the cord or damp wool, add them to the structure in the crotch of the pants, one extremity taking the place of the anus between the two, and the second touching the fold of the thigh, and all the tightness should be adjusted in the crotch of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; so you take a delicate cut-wound cautery and incise at the root of the intestines, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white cips containing the water becomes uncovered, and then you take the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek script.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then perforate that cips, and light it until all the moisture is drained out.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cips with cuts, and scrape it with delicate cautery lit, incising it according to your ability until everything is eradicated, and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you know that this operation is much safer and further from the flow of pus compared to cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If it causes you discomfort to use cautery during incision or heating, or if there is bleeding, then be sure to treat the difficulty that afflicts you with a cure appropriate for it as described above.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is in great pain and there is no hope for a second operation due to its terrible nature, then perforation should be administered as we have recommended; and it is at this point, as we have mentioned regarding the meanings, that you will know that this hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you know that you must cut the malady on a raised spot, then perforate the abscess at the lowest part of it with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And it should be wide enough to let all the water flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area to seal it, tie that off, and leave it open to allow the water to drain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then attend to that internal area until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If there is any contraindication to the discharge of water at that time when you perforate it: this should only be done if the white pannicle in the orifice of the plague causes discomfort and prevents the emission of water, then know that you must insert into the plague a needle or instrument with which the water is extracted from the dropsy, whose form is preceded; or apply a small amount to the size of the plague.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns and is retained for about five or seven months; and when it is added, then it should be perforated in the same manner as before, so that the disease will also pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII. (No translation needed as per the context provided.)
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On Hernia (Fatty) and its Treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision above this hernia, there is great danger of losing the best dispositions; for it seems to me that its discharge and being saved is through that better way.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And you should remember the operation on that one and the use of the poultices.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, it is said that the apostemas appear in the bodies of those whose genera are composed in such a way, and this is done for various reasons: either due to an acute excess of humors that overflow into the genera, or through percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the apostema is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain in it, and it is a serious apostema.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	Very rare is the dried-up apostema, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And some times this is caused by the contraction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those parts which have already been perceived as painful, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	It may be that what is due to the inflammation of arteries is known as the discharge of the abscess when you press on those parts; and it does not matter if that touches you.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	What is caused by the inflammation of veins does not discharge from it for any reason except compression on those parts.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is also possible that in this case a section is made and on the other meats; and you insert the knife into the openings of the genitals, and then take hold of the parts of their roots, and extract the white chyle from them, and cut the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and insulate the suspensory ligament that you cut from all the divisions of the root of the testicle.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the bone has already been consolidated in those flesh parts, then you must extract the bone and cut into that.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the fracture or between what is between the bones, then you must dissolve all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must cut everything that belongs to it and extract the bone as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with a mixture of wool and rosin oil; then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that are internal.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess that has been enveloped by some similar growth, causing softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult the movement and walking of the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious regarding what preceded it, for that is where remembrance comes into play.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, I say that operation should be done according to what I have mentioned first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you should sever the ailment over a raised pillow; then stretch the suspensory of the testicles towards each side; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hand, as it is proven to be effective on the burning pain; and use other means that you have, and extend them with vigor.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp knife, using a transverse cut, along the direction of the vessels while they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then carefully extract from all parts, as we have said regarding the extraction of arrows embedded in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then take a needle with a double thread, and pass it through the first place where the pain occurs, and then pass it again at the end of their course.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make incisions in the middle part with a right cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is added due to foul humidity and corruption.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the disease with remedies for other diseases in which you wish to prevent further generation, so that vessels do not remain one of two kinds, as it is not harmful for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	If a vital force affects all the veins, then you must know if the testicles are extracted or pressed by them, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the cutting of the veins, and become atrophied, or pressed in such a way that it is no longer beneficial to those.
Capitol .lxv.	It appears that your request is incomplete or lacking context. The text you've provided seems to be a reference to "Capitol .lxv." but without additional information, I am unable to determine what specific translation or interpretation is needed. If this is part of a larger text, please provide more context so I can offer the most accurate assistance.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	# On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending from the openings of the abdomen, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture into other parts of the body.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be of the abdominal wall or an excrescence of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, a cut, a cry, a sudden elevation of some heavy cause, or similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this, when it is an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and not suddenly, and it is a protrusion of the abdomen towards the back due to the abdominal wall pushing against the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it being a tear in the abdominal wall is that it causes a sudden and violent pain at the onset; it is a protrusion appearing below the affected ribcage, due to the intestine pushing out from inside the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this condition is called intestinal hernial protrusion.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And in some cases, it is found as a swelling, and in some cases, it runs in the hernia gap, and here it is retained, which greatly impedes the patient's condition, and in some cases, it causes severe pain and especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be careful, for it is important to avoid the wrong ingredients in that process.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of performing the operation is that you command the hernia to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand inside it, if it obeys its movement, and then turn yourself over so that you lie on its chest between your hands, and raise his legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then narrow the cord which is the cord of the testicles at their attachment, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely through the long; and then fix in two folds of the section cut as you need to open the section with these.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to forget from that,
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise those bodies which are left by the cord of the testicles, as long as the white hard body of each part is discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into what is the testicle, where it is between white body, which is left by the cord of him, and between the second body, and loosen from that adhesion which is behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold with your hand the cord of the testicles at its attachment, and thus extend the white body on it with your left hand, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle above, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek out the threads that show there is no cause for the intestine wrapped in the hard white stone.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find no cause for it within the body, then you should turn your attention to the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And take a needle with a strong thread of silk, and insert it through the last part of the stone, which is below the cord of the testicles, which is cut; then cut the ends of the thread that emerge from the stone in such a way that they form a cross, and tie them strongly to the stone from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly together so that none of the vessels that nourish those parts can bring any cause for infection from here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And another time, apply the poultice according to the first application, three days apart; then separate these two poultices from the patient's body, leaving the bandage on the testicles in the amount of their size, cut all the excess material according to its roundness, and secure it from coming off.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the opening left beside the cord of the testicles, in order to drain the fluid and cleanliness as we have recommended in what we have said above.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply the wool soaked in oil to the ulcer; leave it on the wound; and apply the poultice as recommended (and sometimes a white cautery is used, as we have said should be done after incision to prevent discharge of pus, as this has been seen to cause problems); and leave the poultice until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the case is severe and prolonged, then hot water should be applied, and it should be left on until the poultice falls off as we have said above.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then attend to the wound with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	**Capitol LXVI**
De hernia ventosa.	About hernias that protrude.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that suggests it was difficult to treat.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first method they say is done as we have recommended for hernias that are visible; which is to cut open the canal close to the hernia with ease; and then dry the middle part around it carefully so that the vessels do not fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the infection as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the dislocation that occurs in the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, when the angles break as we have said, they open the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not mention any genetic cause of hernias to the patient; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the condition persists, a suitable fissure should be made in the skin before the hernia descends into the skin; this happens due to the expansion of the skin as mentioned before, which causes it to become thin and protruding.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is with cautery, as was mentioned before.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by binding as follows: the patient lies on their back between two cushions, and the broken area is dried with a section of cloth according to its size, three digits in length.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then tighten the white strap that is below the knee until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the needle and place it over the prominent part of the joint, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then locate the two prominent points on the end of the joint's ray and adjust the suture between these two points.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then gently extract the end of the joint, without pressing on the intestine or causing pain, as you must be well aware when treating intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Then attend to the treatment of abscesses, and when you drain the pus, cleanse it and restore the affected area until it is consolidated; for the joint is contracted and the prominent rupture point is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better at this location, as it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	**Capitol .lxviii.** (Capitol 68) 
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testes.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In some men, the cord of the testes becomes softened due to the softening of the tissues surrounding it, and this is noted in its careful observation.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is tasked with the treatment of this condition to have the patient lie on their back and expose all the softened cord, which should be elevated above its natural position; and then carefully stitch together the two lips that are separated by the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and a secure suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then, cut between the sutures; and carefully tend to other ailments within, ensuring their healing and the falling out of the filth.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxix.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembering it in this book, I will speak of it; and the remembrance of it is necessary only in two ways: one is so that when questioned about it by a doctor, he may know the cure for it; and the other way is that we ourselves may at times have need to castrate other animals for our breeding stock, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar creatures.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by tying or by cutting an opening with a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In the case where it is performed by tying, the method of operation is that we cut off the animal while still alive, so long as its genitals remain pliable and relaxed and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then carefully take those wounds in your hand so that they heal and the touch does not remain visible.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Castration is performed by incising and cutting, ensuring you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then attach the ligatures, and incise each one with a cut between two hooks.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those pustules that you have lanced.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any of those in the head, but the subtle phlegm that is on the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This method of castration is better, which is done by cauterization, because it leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire to mate.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then attend to the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two manners: one where there is an abnormality or appearance of a space in the scrotum where testicles should be, and another where there is tissue resembling female genitalia present.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, it causes urine to flow from the scrotum where the testicles should be.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a bit different: in that the female organ above the vulva resembles two male testicles, albeit slightly smaller outside and with two ovaries as well.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you must incise those tight meats within which the emission of that matter takes place, and then cure them with the treatment for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men from whom urine is expelled from the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of cold and flesh prominent due to causes of women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The hard cold is too tight due to natural causes, and it is necessary to pay attention and make a mark with regard to it; sometimes it becomes magnified in some women just as it is spread out like in men and interferes during coitus.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then take some lint or wool with your hand or tweezers and scrape.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with scraping, especially on the wound's edge, to prevent blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then carefully tend to that part of the cure for the plague until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	May be new flesh is flesh that has not been scarred by the mother's horror until it fills in, and strong pain persists outside as a result, according to appearance of the (and for this reason some first call it "tailed malady"); therefore, you must scrape it just as you scrape lint, and tend to it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter .lxxii. (This seems to be a heading or reference, not part of the medical text itself.)
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the woman's knee joint is not perforated or has a small tear.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to disease that has preceded it, and it is caused by improperly adjusted flesh or subtle and dense buildup.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is felt in the knee joint or in the patient's sides, or under their armpit, or in the lower part of their body, and it prevents movement and engagement and childbearing, and severely prohibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of this is made by examining the patient's knee, if the swelling is apparent, then it is treated immediately; but if it is not apparent, you should inquire about the pain in the patient's words or according to their feeling.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the ingestion is by subtle poison, particularly affecting both lips, then cut and tear it apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that it holds over the two soft lips, and then pulls them, indicating the most intense pain on both sides.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman lies on her back, her legs extended, and then extends the two lips with force until that subtle poison is broken and the ingestion is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and cloth, dip them in oil, and place that over the area; apply heat to the site so that the incision does not heal.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the poison is thick and dense, then cut it with a sharp knife or with a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the operation is for a tumor, then suspend it from a hook, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted to the patient's condition.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the plague does not become deeply embedded.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Keep it for several days and administer water from the dry source.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And it is healed with the other treatment of consolidation until it is cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes accidents occur in the mother's womb from other meats, and then you must cut according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is so for gangrene of the limbs, to the gangrene of the limb which is in the greatest part, no contrariness should be caused by any means.
Capitol .lxxiii.	**Capitol .lxxiii.**
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red botch that occur in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of dilated veins, especially when they have been long-standing and dried up.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And we have already discussed the classification of these hemorrhoids and their signs, and to say thus which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the prostration of the old age and do not appear on the surface, then in these there is no cure to be done with fire.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are within the orifices of the anus upon which sensation occurs, these are those that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And be sure to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend her legs, either with forks or a rough cloth, and cut those at the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those areas the flow of holy water from one of the sacred powders, in the same way as basil and others similar to them.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then massage their feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of holy water persists, then make a decoction with an abundance of spices and extracts from milky grains and stones and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of wheat and comforting herbs, mix them with honey and wine, and make a plaster from this over the back of the patient.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the abscess bursts, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or the juice of arugula or the juice of plantain, mix with wine and apply to the area; then treat the area with a poultice until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Do not touch the sore that is of sharp appearance; be careful to do what you understand from my previous explanation.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eardrum accidentally in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses occur in the body, as well as cracking and abscesses that cause ulcers, inflammation, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhaging, tumors, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And you have already described these ailments and their specific types, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you mentioned in this treatise on abscesses that when they occur in the body, especially those that are dangerous, and if you want to know the manner in which the operation is performed to remove them.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp, with inflammation and fever, and whether there is any swelling or discomfort, if so, do not pierce it immediately, but cure it using something that aids in the maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then place the woman on her side on a bed that has two beds; recline over her back and position her feet towards the opening below the abdomen, so that her thighs are spread apart, and place your hands behind her knees, and bind her with some bandage as appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the direction of the wound and administer the instrument that opens the orifice of the mother, the form of which will come into those cases that are about to be done properly.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And be aware when administering this instrument that you remain in the right position over the opening of the mother of the woman, and whatever enters from the instrument into the mother should not be greater than the mother's opening and damage the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the mother's opening, then be aware that you should place pillows over the texture of the mother's opening so that the entrance of any instrument into the mother's opening is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And take care that you hold the angle that runs in the instrument of the knife above and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the angle until the opening of the main orifice is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears and it is hot and moist, then take care to immediately dry that part with a wide spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And after the sanie (faeces) is evacuated, then take care to place in the wound a pack soaked in warm oil or olive oil containing some astringent, and apply pressure in the section near the anus of the patient.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And remove the pad from the anus and place on it clean wool soaked in water containing alum.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And the treatment is completed within two days with a poultice that suits it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And in some cases, the mother and the plague are washed with water and honey, and then added to water in which a lint or a long piece of fabric has been boiled, and finally return to the mixture.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is deeply embedded in the infected mother, you must be cautious about treating it with fire, instead focusing on the treatments we have mentioned in the previous section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv. (This indicates the beginning of a new chapter in the medical treatise.)
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives the manner in which embrioic (fetal) substances should be treated when they present abnormally.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the commencement of the natural birth process by signs, and this is when you see the woman exerting herself in labor and desires to smell the air; she is drawn away from these things because of what is upon her during childbirth, and she hastens the emission of the embryo. At this point, you will know that this birth is according to natural form, and it is the emission of the child over its head, or suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will know that the mother's belly is compressed so that the embryo loosens slightly as it moves over its head, it feels the second pain, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Anyone who deviates from this practice in this part is unnatural and unworthy, for when the embryo is situated over its feet and its body is positioned in front of its head and its legs, or its hand is on its foot or at its side, or its head and hand are above it, or its belly is pressed against its back, and it strongly twists around its spine, resembling unworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For this reason, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these matters, and that she guard against mistakes and disappointments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And she will show all the signs of these, and what understanding is in them so that their meaning be known and established over them.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fever is located on the head due to its natural heat, and it is strong in women and affects them in a difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already weakened, then do that stop it, which women have, and evaporate the congestion of it with fennel seed and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the meter between their split and narrow spaces, or rather, that second one into her finger, so that it touches what is inside of her filled with humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the child descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If it does not descend, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fennel seed dust.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command him, remove the poultice, which should be changed and do that make him sneeze with the condition; and close his mouth and nose for an hour, so that the child is not forgotten soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if two of the limbs are asleep at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease, little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, then gently lower the cushion onto the ground; the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the limbs are not quickly returned and the fetus dies, then incise them and remove the rupture from the fetus or tie the body to the mother's hand with a bandage and extract it with equal force, as it will be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the position of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, then you must push them up, and gently turn the fetus, then stretch it little by little and take one of its legs and extend it gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are situated between the thighs, then command them to relax and make them vomit in this condition, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then return the small movement little by little until it reaches that second natural position, for that will be the time when it is expelled through vomiting.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is forbidden to do what we have recommended, then take a mixture of alder and dissolved gum, and grind it well in a mortar with good percussion, and apply the liquid to the hernia of the woman, near the base of her stomach.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make those cuts in boiled water, until the symptoms disappear.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the cuts have stopped bleeding, then do the fumigation of myrrh and apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And after the fumigation for an hour, you then stop it on a hot pad, make him sneeze and expel the phlegm from his mouth, take it away from him, and press the lower part of his belly with a light compression, as the condition will soon be relieved.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examination of the condition on their hands and fingers.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the condition appears in this manner, you then gently insert your fingers one by one; have the woman bend forward over her belly, let her feet hang down, and place herself on her side, compressing her abdomen.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And you then press on his belly gently, and extract from him what is left in his feet, from the soles until he is ready for the final expulsion.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the condition is not relieved, take his feet and move them vigorously, and press on the parts over the hip bones gently until the fetus can be expelled from him.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then I insert my fingers and narrow the opening little by little, and order the woman to exhale until the fetus is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The fetus is delivered longitudinally through one of the fingers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Use skill to reduce the woman's hand, but if that cannot be done, raise the woman and do it that way.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be done that way, then make the woman lie down, and strike the parts of her with a violent blow, and then apply oils and ointments that you have ready at hand.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth occurs, then perform a cesarean section, and then study the reduction of the hand, and insert the fetus back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, and order her to contract until the fetus is delivered.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The expansion of the condition over the body causes its muscles and fascia to be twice as large as normal.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should have her hand on the fetus and then slowly turn it, making sure this is easy.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is as long and wide as desired, then stop over the hernia where we have recommended oil and mucus.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the patient to breathe deeply and slowly, and when you have done this, make them lie on their side and command them to bend it, then ask them to switch sides; and cause them to sneeze in this condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Prepare for the exit of the fetus on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you encounter a severe case of fever according to this manner, consider and then insert the second needle with your finger until it is free from moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the object is suspended over the face and neck, then insert the needle through the object so that it is not retained and causes delay.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then force the object apart inside until it stops moving, and instruct the woman to buy some lighter materials, and then they will extract it easily, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Double delivery of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	You know that twin births are common, and sometimes three or four, which is strange and hard to comprehend; however, their causes may be natural, and not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among these, if they increase in number, a second one appears, and they are separated by measurement, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in each person's navel; and sometimes they are forgotten as if it were a natural fact, and at times they are detected by an unclean measure, as we have explained.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver due to their position, and it comes to what we have said about non-natural positions, then you should treat them as we have explained.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and simplifies delivery, even at a late hour, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body for labor, leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and some are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some times are formed in the order one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and many more, and it is necessary to have already verified that a woman who has had several miscarriages does not get pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes great harm due to the measurement of the wise sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this I include in the science of midwifery so that they understand how powerful it is for that young woman similar to this, and therefore they should pay close attention to it.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have mentioned in the section on treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual operation, then consider whether the woman is of healthy constitution and free from any conditions that could lead to her loss.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Now place the woman on her side, with her head inclined downwards and her legs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The midwife should hold both parts or be lying on the side to prevent the contents from spilling out during delivery.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucilage of althae and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then the midwife places her hand, anointed with these oils and mucilage, inside the mother, and with ease, she finds the location where the cuts in the fetus are located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate place for this: Consider whether the fetus is ready to be delivered headfirst, and then place your attention on the cuts in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or leave it with its beard, or in the fork of its spine, or in places near its ribs, or below its hipbones.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the onset of pain is in the feet of the patient, then it occurs in the instep or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And you should hold it with your right thumb, and bend the patient's hand at that place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your right hand easily and position the thumb as needed to reach the affected area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then hold and position another thumb, or the third if necessary, in the opposite location to draw it equally, without stretching it excessively according to its natural state.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it is beneficial at every step, so that the condition of it is alleviated as is done in cases where the removal of a tooth is necessary.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And pay attention to what is between them, where the stretching should be softened; and if any part of it gets stuck, then the midwife should apply her fingers with oil and skillfully insert and turn those parts that are stuck.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the position of the fetus is overlooked, then the incisions should be changed to where it is easier; and do so until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the hand is positioned against the other and cannot be reduced due to the tightness of the hernia, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and once everything is delivered, cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And likewise, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the head of the fetus is large, or there is compression during delivery, or it is in a position where water cannot flow out, then you should insert between the sharp edges and cut the head, and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," whose shape will be similar to other instruments described in the relevant chapters.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And apparently, the making of this is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that it cuts into that inflamed swelling, or takes up that swollen part as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is solidified and compressed, then you must cut with a fork, then split it open so that the moisture in the foot can be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	If it is not complicated and does not require special attention, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the part from the belly is abscessed or contains water, then you must perforate that place to drain the moisture that is within it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the process is above their feet, then the movement of it should be gentle and the direction towards the opening of the wound should also be light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the bowels are blocked and the foot is affected, then you must cut open the abdomen and the foot, remove the cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and pierce the bowels until something comes out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If other members are restrained and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked, then insert your hand into the opening of the womb, seek for a child's head, and pull it out to the mouth of the mother, and insert one, or two fingers, and turn it until it comes out.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the opening of the mother (womb) is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the ovary, then do not force it; instead, first administer a flow of moist, greasy causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply poultices, and keep the patient in water that softens and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on their side, as far as possible, use a blade: and administer what we have said about the living body.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise in the bones, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And be sure not to leave any cause inside the second time.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the treatment of the wounds that occur from the main cause.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs from the wound, stop it with strict waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and then another time on that same fire, she became pregnant again, and the other child was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It has happened that after a long time an abscess opens up in his body; and it swells until it opens like fire, and begins to give off heat.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And you have been called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the plague is not healed.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should consider the patient from various causes and apply strong attraction plasters, and extract an oss (bone), and after a few days, another bone will come out; and you will be too amazed when there is no oss in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will realize that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	So you will continue to treat the disease, extracting many bones from them, as the woman in her various dispositions has been doing for a long time, barely saving her life with these methods.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be surprised that this is a strange thing, but because there is knowledge and aid to it, the doctor uses his art with his hand for its healing administration.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	On the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the hernia.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the turn which opens the main part:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a strapper in which the limbs are locked, with two turns on two ends of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this turn should be made to be more subtle than the stranglehold, and it can be done with a rope of hemp or a stick of wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each stick should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and the margin on both sides of each stick should be one finger's length; and the length of each should be a palm and a half. In the middle space between the two sticks, there should be two adjustments made from the same side of the stick, whose length is the greatest part of a palm with a slight difference, and the width of each should be such that two fingers can fit easily, or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional elements are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened for you to turn over the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It is made of wooden sticks or bones according to the appearance of tongs.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extreme end of it, there are also two additional elements, each with a length of about a palm and a width of approximately two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the mother up, you lay the woman down on her side, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument resembling scissors according to the amount you wish, within the limits of the mother's mouth so that the metal does as you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The way of vertigo that the ancients spoke of:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The method of pushing that which is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The method of healing as it contains the great cure:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is made like a pair of pincers with teeth at the end, also when using, and sometimes it is done long as if with other pincers according to this form, also when using, which have teeth as if with teeth of shears with which it cuts and contains.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Method of healing little:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a needle without a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a needle with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	A form of forceps in which there are teeth that close to hold the head of the child.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A form of spatula with two extremities, one of which is used to incise the head.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	A form of two spatulas wide.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are practiced, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and properly prepared by the artisans, they become easier to use and more useful for people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the secondine (a medical term for a specific type of tissue or structure, possibly referring to a second layer or aspect).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of childbirth begins, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in that position, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe freely, so be it.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if that happens, take a hot compress and make a hole in the covering, then place it over the open mouth of the mother, also using warm herbs such as calamine, rue, and black cohosh, as well as licorice root and sweet flag.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the hot compress, and then that one is placed over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it there until the steam reaches the concave part of the mother's body.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing as we have said, and the second one is expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this treatment does not work and is not effective, then command the nurse to dip her left hand in warm oil or a mixture of elderberry, and then carefully insert that into the patient's anus and search for the second one, and when she has found it, slowly extract it little by little, according to the method we have indicated, so that the mother does not suffer from violent attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then change the position of the sides right and left as necessary.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of attraction, so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with medicines made from herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then take care not to do anything in the process of abstraction, but know that what comes out of him into the mother's mouth lies in the woman's matter, and immediately anoint it with a discovery and tetracycle; for this will soon putrefy, dissolve, and be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it appears, there is a high evil sound in the head and stomach, which causes the patient pain; and then know that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the ancients already used fumigation with fennel and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and the secondine (postpartum bleeding):
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is necessary to make an incision or a tear.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the fine tip of the instrument should be placed in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoking should be controlled over the arms of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that until the smoke is consumed, and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many infants have navels that are not pierced, which become slightly swollen and raised.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, use a sharp instrument to pierce it, and be careful not to touch the nerve.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully treat that wound until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If there is a risk of infection, apply pressure on the wound for several days, and stop when the child's condition improves.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it also happens that the infection of the anus occurs for the consolidation of a ulcer or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with the same remedies we have mentioned for healing and cleansing.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that tend to form.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that form in the perineum, filled with purulent discharge, are usually narrow and thick, occurring either near the anus externally or in the space between the legs.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or a mass.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that condition is chronic and due to the flow of excessive moist white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known for the substance that comes out of them due to the exit and pressure; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exit, and often a strong odor emanates from these wounds.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas are found in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint space and into the root of the testicle.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in the case where a fistula is found penetrating into the anus but not fully, you should insert a thin, pointed instrument into the anus and attempt to gently erode or cut through the fistula when it is not inflamed.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a subtle attempt of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the tentation or hair in its proper place.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all or if you do not find any cause of expulsion such as worms or flatulence, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrant, and now you must limit yourself to treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the tissue of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and its prohibition until that location is strengthened with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the tentation has entered here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and it causes pain in the passage; and it will be sore forever; and it does not respond to treatment, nor is it solidified with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the healing of them requires work and patience on the part of skilled physicians over whom they are held captive.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with fer (perhaps iron) is hoped for according to what you have been advised and proven before.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And indeed, the illness moves between the patient's legs over their sides, raising their legs inside, the parts lean towards their belly, and then it attempts to penetrate with lead, or iron if in a narrow fistula, into the place where you know the attempt originates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels like the illness is around the heart, then you must insert your little finger directly into the chest.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your little finger the attempt already started and discovered to penetrate, or another thing that feels between the little finger and that, it is certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for there is no cure in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Nevertheless, they say that it heals certain men quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And regarding the treatment by which one hopes for rapid improvement in the patient, it is that you make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the inside; and then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh around the fistula, which is similar to a reed pen tip, has adhered together.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then take care of those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the flesh that is adhered together has healed, and then apply medicines that promote healing and consolidation to the flesh; if it heals well, it is cured; otherwise, it will not be cured in any time through other treatments.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the tent (or probe) does not enter deeply and stops in the area where there is only a thin layer of flesh or bone, and sometimes the fistula is on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and as the drying progresses, you will see the tent (or probe) being pulled out, and thus it is freed and removed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated meats that are assembled like a quill of a pen and not torn for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If there is a flow of pus that comes between you and your operation when you inspect those meats, then the best thing to do is use a sharp instrument cauterized with fire or acute medicine, because cauterization with fire closes the two wounds properly: it adjusts those meats attached and removes the pus by drying the humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then care for those wrapped in bandages or tightly bound within that area, and at the same time, treat the plague with hot, hard flesh-generating and consolidating care.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so these medicines which involve stopping and cutting off; when the treatment is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the fistula has already penetrated into the perineum and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and explore it carefully.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you sense the attempt and between you and it is clearly a foreign body or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment for this condition involves one of three methods: either cauterizing it as we have mentioned; or drying it out, reaching into the cavity when possible to administer the cure; and not using any incision because you do not want to damage the surrounding tissue or alter the patient's desire; and take care with that as we have said so that the healing is strong. Or elongate that membrane and clean the pus that has formed inside it near the anus, as we have said, either through probing or another instrument of great sharpness, and then excise the infected flesh in the opening made during the section, using cauterization if necessary. Finally, strive to restore the whole wound through incision, and if the orifice does not heal properly, and the fistula remains open at the anus, let it be less severe for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cord and on the margin of the anus, then take the attempt to pierce the extreme end, which is thus prepared with a needle according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert yourself into that vein wrapped in your fields or around those; then, insert the attempt into the vein within the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is inserted into the margin of the anus very close, then you extract the vein from that path as you insert the tip into the anus; you extract the end of the vein and align both ends, then open each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you again insert the vein into the flesh, open it between those pieces of flesh that are between the two ends of the vein and that fit together.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the opening of the fistula is not deep enough, make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either with force or gently, because it is not for you to cause injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is sharp at one end and the other end is not sharp, so as not to cause unnecessary injury when you cut.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus runs from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are said to be of two kinds; either they appear between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are swollen with the grease of inflammation.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they are small and large, and the sanch (vein) runs from them at that time, it is one, it is mobile, it comes out of the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are purely anal, according to the few moistures of citrus water or a little vein with continuous flow, are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are within the anus is that you command the patient to be placed in a certain position so that when the anus contracts and hemorrhoids appear before you, you can express them.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with pins or what you have at your disposal, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the pins are not held in those because of their moisture and softening, then take a coarse cloth or a napkin or a woolen thread, pull out those with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powders over them after the incision, so that they adhere to that place instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then attend to those and other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then lacerate the malady with incisions in the areas of pressure, wash those parts in water that aids in expelling the hernia more easily when the malady is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is often slight, and you should apply those with your finger or those with ointment, make incisions in them, and then attend to their healing as we have said above.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	For those who perform incisions, here is how you should administer sutures according to this method: take a length of thread wrapped around the finger and use an needle to extract the hemorrhoids from the splits above, then make the needle penetrate into the root on the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread around the split below the needle, perpendicular; stretch the hemorrhoid with strong tension, tighten the thread, and withdraw the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this continuously, leaving them untouched, so that the excess of blood flow leaves that part.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place a warm, oil-soaked cloth or wax over the affected area and rest it, commanding the patient to do the same.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then remove that cloth and, when it becomes clean, treat the wound with ointment or other remedies until it heals.
De curacio de fistulas.	**Curation of Fistulas**
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas may occur due to drying out of an opening or due to constriction caused by natural factors.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they have been long-standing and no longer respond to those medicines, you should open them with a sharp instrument or with your finger, making sure that the punctures remain moist and are not allowed to form scar tissue, which prevents their healing; and then treat them until they are healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enter, and ensure they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hernias is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	You know that hernias are crucial, and not only do they appear according to the color of the skin resembling a nail head, but they occur throughout the body, especially in the groin and sides, and by those pains you should address them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And so it is incised what is in the ring of the hernia, and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root; and then care should be taken of that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small, rough, rounded ulceration on the surface of the body, often seen in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is that you extend and incise that, or open it with a sharp instrument within the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they are now eradicated with both tools as you have said.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A mosquito is a small, pierced or ulcerated eminence on the surface of the body, often accompanied by itching, and when it bites, it feels similar to a sting from a mosquito, and it is done around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a thin needle of goose or duck feathers, strong and sharp, and place it gently over the swelling within the affected area until it contains the circle of the swelling; then turn your hand over the needle as you inscribe what is in the circuit of the swelling, and place it on the pressure point of the flesh, and you will remove the swelling from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The departure from the needle should be subtle, silent (not piercing), wrapped around itself so that upon touching the said swelling, it is not affected by its rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the swelling, as described in the cauterization of iron in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the form of instruments that are administered to give heat.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes heat is given with silver or copper or iron that has been melted or shaped; and sometimes it is given with small or large instruments according to those used in the treatment of small children, which should be small; and for those whose buttocks are frail or painful, the heat from such instruments should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of large and small heat applications:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the tube above which the bag is placed should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distinguished where the bag is attached as well.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), bent slightly, and thin; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side a single channel, whose width should correspond to the thickness of the rays and, for small ones, somewhat thinner.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag be filled with animal bladder or sheepskin medicines, and its length be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated through many parts like this when it is twisted, and if the space between the parts is as wide as said.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those parts a strong fiber of raw silk, or surround them; adjust the bag to those parts; and when the bag is positioned on it, tighten it firmly at the base of the patient's genitalia between two distinct points of firm pressure, and properly cauterize each part: but the quality of cauterizing those parts is that you fill the bag with medicine that is warmed according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then have the patient lie on their back, raise their legs up and place under them a cushion or a lance; and apply the end of the cautery to oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take the bag and squeeze it twice hard, and with force, until everything in the genital area is evacuated; then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you believe that applying heat to the pain of stomach ulcers and vomiting helps, then use cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus that hurt, then use a gentle and subtle heat, as the childlike cautery whose tips are cut off.
De curacio de las plaguas.	**Curation of Plagues**
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already stated in the division of the cure for plague what is suitable for the body, and you have thus given the cure for those afflicted with great care and according to medicine's capabilities.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made and according to the place where the plague strikes.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues occur are also due to heat, or an incision of space or of metal, or striking with a lance, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on sudden illness.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The plagues that are in the places of the body can also be like the plague which strikes on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And it is often recommended for the cure of certain plagues that it stops that reasoning and regulates the others.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the recollection of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the pressure of stone or something similar, and the patient has already taken the necessary medication but the pain is severe and you fear that the condition might progress to apoplexy, then immediately perform a craniotomy and flebotomy, and do not delay; extract the blood from the vein according to the amount of virtue in it, unless there is any other contraindicating cause for flebotomy, especially if the headache that has resulted from the illness is slight.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And flebotomy should be performed opposite the affected area; and pay attention to the patient's rest, diet, and avoid heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If any contraindicating cause exists due to the patient's size, then reduce the diet and do not provide meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And regarding the illness, if it is a severe apoplexy, apply a hot compress soaked in olive oil or wine that has been strained.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are certain of the infection's severity, apply your treatment to the affected area, if it is fresh and the air has not changed the powder that I will describe in detail later.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has changed that powder, then apply some ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to a laceration and the edges of it are not aligned for proper healing, then adjust them with stitches as I will describe regarding their suture.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound has exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not a deep gash but a small suspensory one, then incise it and apply medicine to the wound, restoring the flesh appropriately in place of the damaged area, and instruct the patient to avoid foods that are coarse: caps, hard bread, and similar items, until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find gangrene in the leg that does not adhere to the bone, you should cut off all the rotted parts and remove them, and then take care of it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If these plagues are caused by an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not incised by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if cauterization needs to be done after the pus has been drained.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so that you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens against the air's change.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the powder is this: take equal parts of olive oil from crushed sesame seeds, dragon's blood, and non-extinguishable coals; mix it all well, fill the plague with it, and tightly bind it with a good bandage so that the poultice adheres to it, and it coagulates with the pus.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten it over the poultice and leave it, without loosening it while it is in that state so that the medicine does not escape until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And at other times, it is treated solely with cautery, when there is no fever or dragon's blood present.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this surgical procedure is also done for large plagues when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and they are fresh with their own blood, the air of which has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then one does not understand the position of this poultice, but rather treats them with what we have said: either by placing hot compresses on the inflamed spots or by applying cold compresses to the joints of the sick with water and honey until they get better; and similarly, treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	If a fracture of the bone occurs in a small place, then you extract it with a gesture.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And tell the cure for skull fractures where it is dangerous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the ailments of the collarbone.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the ailment occurs in the collarbone, its treatment is not different; nor is it distinct from the ailment of the skull when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves or arteries of the collarbone are cut, then if it is a nerve, treatment should not be forced but rather the pain should be alleviated through methods that cause less irritation; similarly, as with venom and similar substances, they should be avoided since they can cause further damage to the nerves and contraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not attribute any specific cause to the pain, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of all members' sensations.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with lighter medicines, it is also washed with two types of water, sometimes mixed with perfumed or unperfumed oil, and then dried with hot water and other substances according to this method, and moistened with humidity.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is severe, then a stitch is administered, or the edges of the wound are closed, and then it is treated with poultices until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or caused by an acute impact in a low-lying part of the body, then it should be pierced at the most sensitive point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an artery is already incised in the plague and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spine of the ribcage or all of it has been incised and the veins in the neck have been saved, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures on the rib bone and do not touch that area; equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and tighten it decently, leaving it for some days; and then care for it with poultices where there is stiffness and excitement until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of pus within it, extract as many as you can; leave what is not suitable for you, until the plague has dissipated, and it is separated and removed from him.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the affliction is recent, sprinkle that powder which has been recommended on it.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If the affliction involves a fistula, then treat it with the water of which the memory will come in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the afflictions of the chest or similar, when it begins between the shoulders and is painful to space, or to a rib, or to a lance, or to a bone.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or a rib, and the depth of the wound is great, then consider more carefully if the affliction has air (puss) when the malady turns; then know that the affliction is deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the affliction is recent with its own pus, then you should apply to it in the first hour powder, and do not squeeze it so that the pus is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the body, and causes more harm; instead, apply to it a more attractive ointment, and clean it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, you should stop at the infected wound's edge with a clean cloth to draw out what it has absorbed from moisture; and make the patient rest on the affected area so that what is within runs out properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If after three days the wound is healing without incident to the patient—no spasms or tremors of the heart, no constriction of the arteries—and other signs indicate a good prognosis, then you know the illness is in remission; and from that point, apply treatment for pain and any other lingering ailments until complete recovery.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is accelerated and it remains open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it accordingly.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a sharp object or blade, and it's superficial on the foot or back, treat it with the method previously described for joint pain, whether it's a large wound requiring stitching or a small one treated with powder.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If a valuable bone has already been broken and you have already extracted the pieces, then twist and cut the plague to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the pieces are not separated, leave them inside so that the plague does not spread, as extracting them would be difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of the same kind in other parts of the body, the treatment should be the same as that which we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	On the stomach plagues.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the stomach can be great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In the case of great pain, one should examine the intestine or abdominal nerves, as there is often an intrusion of them, and their suture (sewing) must be done with both force and subtlety.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And when a small disruption is caused, it is difficult to repair in another manner, and I know that the reduction of them is even more difficult if you do not quickly prevent their intrusion into their place, as they open and thicken, making it difficult for the instrument to enter.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is to shift it, because in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in both aforementioned species.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for sutures of other diseases of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two sutures, proper to themselves, communicate with other diseases, but nevertheless they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to each of you the exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, it says that when the hernia is small and there is no apparent cause from within the body, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the fragility of the rupture as we have said, or when the hernia experiences inflation because of the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then you should wrap that in a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth moistened in hot water, or take water with vinegar, and turmeric, and spices, and wrap it around the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And in some cases, they use wine for this, which has a cauterizing effect and is better than just water alone in resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you have determined that the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the hernia in water with high levels of salt and mallows, for it thus alleviates the pain caused to it by a slight injury.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is permissible to insert this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small, sharp instrument that incises hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate not to cut, and there is no need to dry excessively or deprive of nutrition.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, consider its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the instrument is curved sharply, and the other part is not acute, but rather slightly blunt, not too thin like a spatula, but more obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus, when the disease is aggravated and the intestine protrudes, it should be returned to its natural position in its proper place, if possible, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, you should keep their head lower and their legs higher than the pain points.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And seemingly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must pause your intention and your consideration towards it for a while so that the part where the pain is located becomes higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus, you must also manage this in both great and minor pains.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in minor pains, you should do what you have prepared, and then make the minister be between your most sensitive parts, where the disruption is located, with your hand adjusting the lips of it, and uncovering from one to another until any cause of the suture becomes apparent elsewhere.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one according to the amount of the width of the wound; then place it near the end of the tear in the finger, and tighten the needle, making sure not to push through both ends of the cord, but only pushing through from within the knot, until you have added the two ends of the cord and the two ends of the phalanx, thus creating four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases, join two parts together, and add the two lips and the wound through proper addition; take the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, just as you did with the first one; do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completely closed the contraction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be in varying thicknesses, ranging from coarse to fine, as the thin needles cut into the flesh lightly; the thick ones are difficult to insert into the cord, so it is necessary that they be medium in both fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is important that the needle be inserted into both ends of the affected leg at once, so that the flesh is not cut too deeply and the hernia heals before its closure.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches, so that the hernia is not blocked from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then cut the ends of the needles, so they do not puncture the patient again during their sleep; and place over the stitches loose poultices from all sides, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the hernia is healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches use needles in any way most suitable for small hernias, as they are sufficient to close one or two stitches or those around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second stitch is different: you must close the four ends—the leg and two ends of the abdomen—in one go, with a needle carefully wrapped in thread both thin and thick.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle part where it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls up the pus from the wound, so that the stitching is like a stitch of cloth which is tightly bound.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, leave the thickness of the tip of the finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture teaches men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this type of suture, I have treated a wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which was caused by a blade, and it was a rupture of the wound that was about the size of a palm, and there was an opening around two palms from the middle of the intestinal cavity; and then I had reduced that tissue that the wound had opened in the middle of the member after twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the disease is consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and you treat it and heal it; and after that, it recurs periodically for many years, and changes its manifestations.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other physicians had judged that it was not curable; and by a miracle of fire, for you found no cure for that pain where the fire did not burn or any medicine help, he stopped the plague with frequent applications of hot compresses and constant washing with honey water until the fire cured it.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell of two kinds of stitching according to the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And indeed, you begin with stitching the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, when the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to its right place and length throughout the body, and leaves the end of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; then make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside in the other end of the member.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have done that, repeat the process in the other direction at the opposite end of the wound from outside to inside; then lift the edge of the flesh on this side and insert the needle into the other end of the wound from inside to outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And insert the needle in the penetration that you make, which allows penetration of the flesh at the end of the wound where everything has been penetrated.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin from this side and carefully extract the needle from the wound, taking care not to damage it, and return it to the same sheath, pressing against the edge of the flesh on the other side, which is opposite to this opening; then remove the needle from the sheath that is part of the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Do this a few times and continue in the same way until you have removed everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of stitching is that you sew with a skin stitch, which sews the skin together, so you stitch the flesh once from the end of the tendon, and then again when you have completed the task.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Now, the second type of stitch, which is truly the hallmark of the guild, and this one is spoken of and used for repairing, is that you sew with a second-tier stitch, which some doctors also use, adding to it according to what is appropriate for the nature of the wound; then you apply the edge of one part to the other edge, forming a complete seal as you see fit.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Ensure that you keep the needle at the edge of the fabric on your side of the tear, and make it penetrate the tear from inside out, passing through both edges of the fabric; then, turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside in, passing through the two edges of the fabric again.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then carefully turn those folds, and make some of the cut openings penetrate from within to without at both ends of the mirror, other than on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than common lightweight stitching, and it is a stitch of which we have previously spoken.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And they might say that the stomach stitch is made with two needles, so you must insert a thread into some of them, and begin to introduce the needle from this one, making it penetrate into the other side according to the stitching of those which hold the skin together.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the stomach, the stitching there is more difficult than in other parts of the stomach.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The treatment of one disease should be judged according to other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of which is when you recognize the recent disease by its itch in front of the wound that the air alters it, return the intestine to its place and sew it up and treat it properly, then place your hand over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the disease, then place your hand over that ash which you have prepared in front of them until they cause severe pain and the pus is discharged, and they become hardened and heal; and treat it thus as with other diseases until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply this treatment as soon as possible, since it begins to cause pain in the joints, fingers, and toes, and change these measures every two days, just as I have taught you, until it is healed, for you should not need other medicines due to your careful planning regarding simple diseases.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the contagion may spread to the vital members, then immerse the affected part in a bath of oil of good quality, or warm oil, and place it on the areas between the angles and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their bowels, as often happens, you should apply a black, astringent vinegar, especially if the ulcer has penetrated into the cavity of the bowels.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one affecting the thicker bowels has a lighter cure than the one affecting the thinner bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And its cure is difficult because the bowels called "jejunal" do not receive a cure for the plague that strikes in them from anywhere; and this is due to the great number of veins that are in it, and to the magnitude of those, and to the subtlety of the body of that, and to the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you process from the disease is the fabric, and you achieve a fresh one, reduce it according to your instructions, which reduces hernias equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has been passed into the space and is already turned red or black, then tighten the thread over the area affected by it, so that pus flows, for in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut what is another part of the ligament, and place both ends of the thread on either side of the wound, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it should be removed, and the fabric's collapse and discharge of the plague's arm should cease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it in some people, so that you see him who was once plagued in his belly by the stab of a lance, and had the plague on the right side of his stomach, an old plague with fistulas, and from him came management and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then pursue the treatment of the patient, even if it was not confirmed in their healing; rather, continue to apply heat to that area until the pain subsides and the location is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you see that the location is consolidated, pay attention to the illness that engulfs them due to an accident in their belly; do not encourage any further such accidents and break their usual habits of eating and drinking, and then immerse them in water and exercise according to their condition.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced people say that when a hernia in the belly is small, it should be tied according to this manner: take large needles; then adjust both edges of the hernia and place a needle from those that keep the mouth open on both edges of the hernia; so when they hold onto those and tighten their mouth, cut off the cap, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another needle close to the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have used enough needles for the entire hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return it [the intestine] to its place and press it firmly until the hernia is healed; and sever those attached parts inside the cavity until the hernia is cured, so as not to cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the hernia appears as a fine thread coming from the hernia of an animal, thinner than a hair; so take the end of these hernia threads, quite bare, and with a needle wrap it around, and then insert that thread through the opening of the hernia, and return it to its place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If the hernia is large and wide, especially in one of the delicate cavities, then it requires not only reduction but also a delicate operation, for it is not completely cured.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	You know that every ulcer and abscess that forms as a result of aging and inactivity becomes an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and persists for a long time without being incised, it is generally called a fistula and we refer to it as such.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistulas, in truth, are open wounds, hard, white, and painless, to which the body becomes concave just as it does with any other pain; and for this reason they are called rhiza, that is, the root of the pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	These are wounds that become moist, which fester; and if the moisture is drained away in a few hours, it is good.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is excessive, and sometimes it is scarce, and sometimes it is thin, and sometimes it is thick.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And you have already prepared it as described in the division, when you mention the plagues, know that any ulcer which does not heal or is not on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: among them, one is due to lack of blood flow in the body; or because of evil spirits; or because between the ulcer and the skin there is hard, prohibitive tissue preventing natural healing; or it is caused by excessive pressure; or because that ulcer itself becomes infected and the material transmitted to it is of poor quality; or because the remedy for it is inappropriate in its treatment; or when corruption reigns in that region, and it becomes a pestilence; or due to the nature of that region, as is the case in Zaragoza where difficult digestion of maladies is experienced and healing from postema is slow by nature; or because there is bone involved, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	You have already described all those causes and the signs of them, and in the division, you have mentioned the remedies for them.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so it is also important to make known to you the cure for fistula, which is made through surgery with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the brain, or the belly, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints composed as the hand and foot, and similar ones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these types of fistulas, those following this manner are from difficult-to-heal illnesses and do not receive treatment, and their occupation is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is any of these fistulas whose depth does not reach these places mentioned, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to an understanding of it, then take care or a saw, and if the fistula is according to rectitude, and you examine it carefully.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then examine it carefully with a delicate probe, for lead with the lightness of its body is removed and deviates the curvature of the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has an extremely horrifying appearance, it is not within your power to attempt treatment on it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then christen the orifices for their horror, for the humidity by which you cleanse those orifices must also affect the others and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then, carefully inquire according to the manner in which you can know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or close, or it is a fistula with only horrifying appearances that lies entirely within your control, where with all your strength, through your questioning, you explore the illness, and through your compression with your hand over the area, and by similar signs and accidental causes at the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have considered all those causes with due care, then turn to the treatment according to your confidence: for you must consider whether it is a fistula that appears close or in a clean place, far from joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places that are dear to you and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula as is mentioned in its description, stop what is in that flow and from corrupted flesh, and what has formed in the openings of the flesh, or from parts and similar, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rule, then you should incise it in the place as deeply as possible with your knife, and then cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh; and then apply some wrapped up hot compresses, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with your finger.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this until the hot medicine has corrupted everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula from its corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with bandages which generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it does not heal from this, then you cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to become certified in this, then examine and dry it as we have recommended; if you do not forbid any cause from veins or nerves or from a main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then clean that part where the corruption is present; and care for it with water until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and the gangrenes remain as they were, then you know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; and then you examine it again with greater care, make a diagnosis of it, and thoroughly clean it with the last strength you have, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, good; otherwise, you will know that this corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which cannot be reached, and therefore your endeavor in that place is not to cure but to extract it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small, it may be removed with your hands; otherwise, use delicate forceps designed for such tasks.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, carefully extract all of them, and under no circumstances allow any to remain due to the strength of your grip.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If it causes you any difficulty due to moisture, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then cut through those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and carefully dislodge the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hands over the affected area where the pain is most severe, and leave it there until the pain eases; ensure that it does not become lodged between the bones, flesh, and ligaments, and beware of any pain that may indicate that the section you have cut into during the operation has healed.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Staying, if you fear, apply to the affected area a mixture of olive oil or Egyptian vinegar or any other green ointment, for when these bindings are removed, the bones will be separated from their adhesions and that attraction will be alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone, such as those of the thigh or groin or similar, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface, then at once apply that remedy as quickly as possible before the darkness and corruption spread, and thus restore the illness.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted from it is a severe fracture, and the corruption has already reached the medulla of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close that wound completely by cutting into the area where the corruption has occurred, and thus cure it as soon as it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you to attend to a man in his thigh, so that he supports you simply and assists with your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man aged around 30 experiences pain in his thigh; the pain arises from swelling within the body until the matter reaches the thigh, which is caused by an abscess or a great abscess, and not an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so, the condition worsens over time due to the error of doctors, as the abscess swells and causes hot, painful matter to accumulate. Treatment is delayed until the limb becomes fistulated, resulting in severe pain and destruction of tissue and body humors.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	After this, many doctors for two years focus not on the wisdom of the body but on its arteries, as they are called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	They examined the limb and the matter draining from its orifices, which flowed throughout the body. The condition of the patient was completely stable, and his skin color was citron-like.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then insert the needle into one of those openings and penetrate the needle through the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then carefully examine all the openings and find those that lead to all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then you will cut and incise over one of those openings until you discover an opening in the bone, and find that it is hardened, corrupted, and already filled with pus; and a part of the leg within which you had penetrated was already corrupt.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you will secure what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I realized that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had extracted and secured, for I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I will pause the restoration of the disease with consolidating medicines for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I will iterate and expose again regarding the second bone following the initial discovery, and seek to continue the correction of the bone's deformation.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I will secure what appears to be the cause of that deformation, and then I will make small perforations to treat it, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I will discover it again and carefully incise the bone in small fragments, making perforations to restore it, but it is not restored until I cut around a palm of it, extract the marrow, and then restore it with medicines; it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no further iteration in the operation is necessary unless for the arrangement of the frailness of it and due to its poor tolerance and fear of death, as it experiences fainting at all times due to excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is healed entirely by treatment, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its disposition in the body is done well and returns its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions and does not cause contrariety in walking or discomfort from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If a bone protrudes from the body, you should act as follows: take a linen strip and stretch it around the end of the protruding bone, and ask someone to extend that on the patient's body; then attach the coarser linen cloth over the flesh left behind, and extend the edge of the cloth onto the area where you want to make the incision so that you uncover the flesh in the desired location without damaging it.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stake or table beneath the bone appropriately, for when you do this, the saw should not cut into the healthy flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And be sure to make the incision over the corrupted area slowly, for if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear in the patient's sensation, you may need to repeat the process with the saw.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it forms a continuous gap with another, and the corruption is in the middle or at a gap within it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and apply heat to it, and close the gap of the first opening where the corruption entered until the locking of the other gap continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the locking, according to the location of the corruption, should be small, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and close the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in a straight line but twisted.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption how it appears to you, and open that up, and remove it according to some possible disposition that is suitable for you, and in a twisted way, rectify it where it does not cause any harm to the veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels are best suited to cut these bones, depending on the position of the bone, their preparation, thickness, fineness, size, hardness, and rarity; so that you choose the appropriate instrument for any operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation indicates to you the specific instrument you need; when you have great study, length, and knowledge of the techniques of this art, and experience with various ailments, then you will already have for yourself what is appropriate for each ailment among these instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And in the end of this chapter, you will be taught the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed to your training, the very same tools that you will apply to your practice and experience with others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another lock:
Forma de autra serra:	Another form of lock:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of a larger alternative lock.
Forma de ray:	Form of a ray.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray should be according to the form of a keyhead with stars, and its points are according to the shape of points on a spear.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable for these to be inserted into the joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is widely opened.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of larger scissors than others.
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller scalpel:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a long scalpel:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of a saw or other appropriately shaped tool: it should be curved and have the sharpness of steel, and the part that holds the blade should be made of wood.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the scalpel with a concave curve:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another very thin scalpel:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another scalpel with an extremely curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small scalpel resembling a knife:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of scalpels that are used to cut bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Another type of scalpel, smaller in size:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Another type of scalpel; this one resembling a ray, with its end curved like a saw, and it is used in various places for the reason of bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	A scalpel shaped like a ray, suitable for the removal of bone splinters.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular with a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, resembling a cover that encompasses all the causes we have mentioned regarding razors, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	On the incision of extremities and the opening of bone joints.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may be affected either by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, and if the corruption is not healed through those medicines, and the cure does not bring relief, you should consider incising that member where the corruption originated, so as to remove the disease and prevent it from causing death or further harm to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of him to whom this happens is that the affected member becomes black where it was incised, as fire had burned it, or you may notice the darkness extending from the area of the incision into the entire limb; hence you must consider incising it.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creature such as a sea scorpion or a viper or a rattlesnake and others of that kind.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or impact is on the end of the finger, you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you access the hand, cut those at the root of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the socket of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if that does not work, cut the arm at the elbow within the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes to another joint and changes around the elbow, then it is the end of the patient's suffering; and to treat another cause for this in healing is a matter of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, if the corruption is in the foot, cut the digit of the foot at its joint; then you insert it into one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the foot's edge, you will incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it is possible to enter within the joint, then you will incise the leg within the joint of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then in it there is not left room for treatment, and you should leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising or cutting off a member is that you tighten the ligament at the point where you want to make the incision, and then tighten another ligament over the area; extend the instrument one ligament away from the point of incision, and extend the surgeon's other hand another ligament onto it; separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments without breaking them, so that all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or cut.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And cover that all openings be sealed with cloth so as not to touch the area, and bring the patient's injury back to a state of harmony and proper cauterization.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If a blood flow occurs while working, cauterize the affected area carefully, or apply some powders that constrict the flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then properly bind the affected member with appropriate bandages and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you that you attend to a man on his foot, this person has met with an accident which you and I have recommended, which occurred to him due to a dark stain on his foot from the adjustments that were similar to fire burn injuries.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption occurred first in his toes before it spread throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And so that man prepared himself for the pain and the urgency of treatment as he saw the progress of healing in the member affected by the severity of the pain and the heat from the wound, and he incised the foot at the joint, and it healed with fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time exposed to that corrosive disease in the hand's finger indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it conquers me, and I have pierced to reflect that superfluity to the water that stops over the hand of medicine, then I apply the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected and I begin to go to the other finger as soon as I begin on the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he urged me to cut the hand of him, and I do not wish to do this hoping on the reflection of that superfluity, and rather I must persist in the incision of the hand of him dead, for the virtue of the disease was at its peak.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he left me, he returned to his land and cured me that man who had prepared and cut off his hand entirely, and he is healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not finished this narration but to be of assistance regarding those who suffer from this disease, and that it may signify what is meant and according to which it is done.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of sins and the quality of enema administration with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged, forming a collection of pus, then it breaks and perforates itself, and the pus drains out, leaving the area empty as if it had been cut away, and the skin over it remains intact, without any corruption reaching behind it, nor does it affect the bones or nerves or connective tissue. It is called a sinus, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to such an extent that corruption completely envelops a member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to cut through that skin entirely as it is rolled up, especially when it is subtilized and made into a wound with cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the constipation adheres and that that corruption does not result from a subsequent consequence, and in the intestine it has passed forward, then treat it with a clean enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the condition of the sinus; if it is severe and the arm that it affects has a bad odor, then use an Egyptian enema medicine made with oil, wine, and zingiber in equal parts, place them in a vessel, heat it over fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; enema the sinus with that, tighten its openings, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then remove that impure substance; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain is alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And in some cases, enemas are prepared with ash water, when this remedy is not available; take the ashes of vinegar, and put them into water; then mix them together and prepare an enema with it until you feel that the pain has subsided.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then an enema should be prepared with honey and a third of triacetin mixed together, and another with wine and honey mixed, for honey has purifying and cleansing properties, and wine helps to adhere to the intestines, especially when the wine is deficient in astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you perform this process a few times and feel that the intestines have been cleansed, then an enema should be made with water that promotes the growth of flesh in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	It is because you take a mixture of dyaphinic oil and dissolve it with wine that has astringent properties; or you prepare an enema with certain medicines and apply others that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the openings of the sinus are narrow, through which the catheter of the enema cannot pass, then you gradually widen them with a small iron, and apply hot water wrapped in Egyptian or basilicum ointment until they are enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening appears to be wide, then you should close it with stitches and add only enough quantity of the enema that is necessary.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening through which the arm flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it in the lower part where it is located so that the arm flows inside, because when the arm is constricted within the thickness of the sinus, flesh can be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the surrounding bone, then you should perforate and prepare the member in such a way that the arm can flow lightly according to your convenience, so that there is no retention of causes in the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed over the appropriate sinus to extend those on a cloth from them.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a great quantity as to cover all the sinus; then, with scissors, cut in the right side of the orifice of the sinus, making it slightly wider than the orifice itself; and extend on another cloth of the same size, soaked in warm water, and place it over the first one, at a safe distance from the orifice of the sinus, so that it prevents the discharge of the patient's arm and does not obstruct the large cloth for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	One should be placed over the orifice of the sinus, which you should change at all times to ensure it stays open, preventing any obstruction from what is adjusted on the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter being discharged from the sinus opening has adhered, or a strong adhesion formed, then on the third day, you free it, or loosen it, and when you free the infection, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	If the sinus has formed a narrow space and there is a subtle infection, do not be anxious about the adhesion, for healing will occur of its own accord, as some people have experienced slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and others the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if a foul-smelling discharge has been coming from the sinus for several days, you should know that there is no adhesion; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolonged, then adjust the treatment with dry medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they should be dried just as well as poultices when excess moisture must be eliminated.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last sentence to translate is: The most effective remedy for this condition is to take a decoction of nettle and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it externally on the affected part, and hold it there until it takes effect.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it resembles this action, when there is no heat, take nettle decoction, honey while it's still warm, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, boil them, crush everything and turn it into a powder over the honey while it's on the fire, then apply it to cloth and press that onto the sore area; and apply the honey you've noticed has become thick, and sprinkle that over cloth and press it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Sometimes, they administer to the patient long slices of aromatic lily root (which is a type of lily) and ermine flour and centaury, and use these simples either fresh or powdered, crush them and sprinkle over the honey previously mentioned; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the condition persists and does not improve with this treatment, you will know that the corruption is in the sinew of the limb, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or their connections; then you treat it with a fistent cure, as it is said.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of wounds, inflamed nails, and the addition of a cut to the finger, and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A wound is an apostema that leaves the nail of the finger or toe weakened, and it can also affect other fingers, and as it progresses and its treatment is delayed, it becomes either an apostematic cauterization or corruption, discharging pus that corrodes the root of the nail, weakening it entirely, and spreading its corruption to the bones within, causing a putrid odor. The end of the finger appears damaged, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have examined as we have said in the previous division and do not agree with your treatment, then you must remove all surplus matter adhering to the nail, and cauterize the wound nearby, for heat helps in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the joint healthy, and the additional pressure of the joint has already stretched the flesh within, then begin to prick and injure that joint, then cover it with a fine ray from the angle of the joint you are pricking, push it forward and cut into the flesh easily, and place something over that area until the flesh is completely healed; and take care to apply poultices until it is cured.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already taken hold within the bone, then you must drill into the bone and extract it, for no time is there health where there is corrupt bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption has spread to the mentioned area, then drill into it in one of the joints according to its recall, and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If there is a joint with severe percussion or laceration and it causes intense pain, then you must begin by cauterizing the affected area, and carefully cut through the malformation using an acute, transverse section above it, but ensure the section does not reach into the flesh remaining on the joint, for you may cause the malformation to spread and lead to additional unnecessary tissue growth at the site; and treat that area as necessary.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Many say this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of many men, is that they are entirely fleshy, or mostly flesh with few bones, or entirely bone and little flesh.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	Some of them originate in the formation of the joint, or it is the nature of them in some places of the body.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	One who is born with conditions in certain parts of the body does not become ill, but one whose condition is formed in the joints suffers greatly.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And as for those who are born fleshy, the incision is light, and you must insert a blade at a slight angle to their origin.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	For one who is born with conditions in the joints, treatment is difficult; so be wary of removing them.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Place the knife in the place where the person was born with this disease, make an incision at the beginning of their flesh with a round cut through the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws to carefully clean it so that healing occurs.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	This consolidation which occurs between the joints may be due to various factors such as age, or the nature of the individual who has not experienced it before, or due to infection or fire, or similar causes; therefore, it is necessary to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their bandages a thin layer of warm oil to prevent them from becoming solidified too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until the consolidation occurs as necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain joints of the hand, then remove that consolidation according to what is suitable and appropriate for the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the incision of veins, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are thick, rolled-up veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in those who lead active lifestyles or work physically, and in travelers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, you should administer a purge to the body to expel black cholecyst sometimes with strong expulsion, and draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment for them is by iron according to two methods: one is through incision and extraction of that black blood, and the other method is by elevating the vein and extracting all of it.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made as follows: first, inject hot water into the vein until the thick blood is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then tightly hold the patient's thigh with a bandage above the affected area, and cut the vein at one or two or three points along its length. Then raise the black blood using the upper part of the bandage below the leg, and from there into a jug, until the desired quantity is extracted, as much as the patient can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then approach her, and command her to abstain from cold foods that generate it.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them should be according to this manner: You who tighten the garment of the patient, if it has much hair, and then place him in water and soak the garment of him with lukewarm water until it is soaked and the veins are dilated; or if it is through strong exercise, if a bath is not available, until that member is scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the rope at the right of the vein by sectioning it in the middle or at the last part of it, or at the lowest part of it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the rope with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears black, and it is necessary for you to assess that patient who suffers from that disease decreasing its intensity.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore when you have freed yourself from the chains, you will see that white thing which is a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then carefully insert that lever within which is elevated and released from the chains, and suspend all the heavy weights.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then make another cut nearby, passing through the three parts, and carefully extract the chain from the vein until it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section, after the talus, and extract that one and elevate it until it passes through the second section, and extract that from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section which is most superior or highest of all sections, while it is completely released; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not succeed in extracting and elevating it, insert a needle with a strong thread double-knotted and pull it out, or leave the edge of it inside and turn your hand over the entire area where it was inserted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it breaks, it is difficult to lift that part and it will cause further harm to the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once that is completely removed, place your attention on the infected area, immersing it in wine and applying both warm and cold oils, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted without twist, and not in the right position as we have said, then you should cut through that on all sides of its torsion and at the places where it is wrapped up, and suspend it with stitches until you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful that you do not pierce the vein and cause pain to it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it up; use your prudence in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The form of the injury that is dried out:
Forma de unci orp:	The form of an ulcer:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not acute as with ulcers, nor does it have extreme sharpness so as to not harm the vein; on the contrary, it has great flexibility, because if it were too subtle, it would pierce the vein due to its subtlety; we have said this regarding its superfluous thickness on the surface.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Extraction of the vein of the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs, in hot regions, as well as in the areas of Arabia and in the rear regions of India, where there is little moisture and no grass or trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And severe pain is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the growth of the hernia is putrid, as snakes and worms and parasites come from within the body, winding and growing between the intestine and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the impending occurrence of hernia is this vein that happens in the leg, a violent inflammation; then the area becomes irritated; and soon after, the vein begins to leave from the location of that irritation, as if it were pulled by roots.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the hernia begins to appear, you will know that you must wrap around it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Inside, there is a dragon, and you should observe it and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And many times when it occurs from any cause outside, wrap it in lead and observe that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the swelling persists, you cut a gap in it and wrap the bandage; do not cut into the red part until it has come out, for if you cut that part, it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing abscesses and pus in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For the swelling that requires additional treatment and needs to be extracted little by little, until it has completely come out from the back of it, ensuring that no part remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it is observed in some individuals that its length reaches the palm and fingers, and I have personally witnessed it reaching a length of 10 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during treatment, insert the ray into its track and perforate that long track in the flesh, until everything inside is evacuated, then apply poultices to the area for several days as a remedy; and carefully care for it for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is sometimes seen to have great swellings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and comes with much painful inflammation, and is issued from each swelling.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and refer to what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine inflammation.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called bovine inflammation in some countries because it causes great pain in the limbs and throughout the body, and it pushes and breaks the sinew until it comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of this disease is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms and serpents and roundworms and ascariasis in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared by the evil of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the joints, its strong grip in them crushes and destroys the joint, and from there it should be observed closely.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, it should not be done unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what is left below it with strong compression and constriction, and then dry it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause harm, then place a hot cautery over the spot where it resides, and the main reason it is feared is the corruption of it which also corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If it affects the head near the joint, then tighten the upper eyelid with strong compression, and dry it, and extract that; and beware that the disease uses purification of the body with medications to evacuate corrupt putrid bad humors, and be careful of foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the incision above the disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	You were called to a woman with malady in a village, and you discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which you broke by pricking it, and as you looked, that inflammation seemed to go away on its own, almost like living silver as it flowed from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then he removed the pain from that place and put pressure on the muscle, and held it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then correct in the other body until reaching the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I realized that I had to turn myself around in every direction as if my sight was all-encompassing; and it was too wondrous to behold the permutations of it and the speed with which members change place.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already witnessed this in my feet according to that manner; however, I have seen many which cause profound pain to be shuffled from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have never seen this in the feet thus as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is anything but that the woman was old, with brittle limbs and exposed veins, and in this state, the sensation of that altered wind appears.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this retrograde treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with constricted veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And if you want to cure it and the patient feels that pain, then do not appear to be doing something as we have said, but tighten over that area, leave it slightly open, and dry it, pressing on that place until that airiness is reduced, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not find them in your feet, then cure that by relieving the body and that which expels airiness, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of fire and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows vary in type according to species and the places in the body where they are shot, for their diversity lies in that some have sharp points, others small, concave, or blunt tips, and solid shafts; some have three edges, others have barbs, and others have wings.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And according to the members and parts in which it strikes, it follows two manners: for the principal members, such as the head, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, bladders, and their like, when it attacks any of these members and appears as a sign of death, which I have often observed, you must avoid the extraction of that arrow from those parts where death seems to be that in which the greatest dispositions are, and when these signs of ill health do not appear, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and cure the disease.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And among the signs of the servant, when an arrow strikes in it and pierces the bone, and it is from the base of the skull, which occurs due to violent heat, and scotoma, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of speech, and vomiting of bile, and so great is the loss of words and voice destroyed, and there arises from the place of the disease a white humidity resembling powder, and spots like those of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	However, the signs of an arrow lodged in the heart include feeling a sudden, sharp pain on the left side near the breast, with no visible cause; a strong, irregular pulse; rapid flow of black pus; chills; cold sweats; and fainting; thus knowing that death is at hand.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung include sputum of pus from the plague, veins close to the collarbone appear engorged, a change in the patient's appearance, heavy breathing, and great anxiety for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the peritoneum (velament) in the lower abdomen, the pain is felt primarily in the lower ribs, accompanied by severe, intense pain and deep breathing, and all the muscles are weakened.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if an arrow pierces the stomach, it will immediately alleviate the pain of the harmful food poisoning.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the plague (or wound or hernia), and there is no hope of recovery unless the arrow is extracted.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and allows urine to leak out, it causes severe pain in the patient, and you should know that this is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, chest, shoulders, hips, spine, and limbs, can also be saved according to proper arrangements when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you what I have observed about these arrows, so that you can understand their use in treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that when an arrow strikes the lacrimal duct of a man in the root of his nose, and it is extracted from him on another occasion, leaving the grays of his eyelid intact, he recovers, and there is no further damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had struck him in the eyelid, leaving the upper eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could only be removed with a small tip to which it clung, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without causing any harm.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and there was no further harm to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into the gutter, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one to which only ears are attached; and then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the gutter of the patient; and then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and I realized that he was dying from it; so, after passing thirty days and finding no change in his condition due to any of his dispositions, I incised the arrow and manipulated it, and thus healed him, causing no further harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow had become embedded in his back, and the wound was deeply embedded, and after setting fire nearby, I extracted the arrow at the root of the injury.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had become embedded in her belly, and the wound was deeply embedded within her, and it did not change in her dispositions, and the woman did not suffer distress from any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And he sees another man whose face is pierced by an arrow, the wound consolidated and the arrow broken, not causing much pain but much resembling these.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was pierced in the middle part of his nose and had already inclined to the right side a little, and hidden was all the arrow.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you were called for the treatment of him, soon after the piercing of the arrow within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then he closely examined the wound of the arrow; then he inquired about that attempt subtly, and did not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain leaving the right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was because of the end of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And he applied the place with an ointment that is attractive and digestive, trusting that the location would heal for me to discover the place of the arrow, so that it dries over that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be concerned about the significant place where the arrow has reached; continue applying the plaster to it for many days and no further accidents occur; as time passes, the plague solidifies and you remove the malady of extraction through intervals of many days until on one day you feel the arrow in its own nostril and reconnect to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then you should stop on the acute corrosive plague for many days until a fire opens up, and with gentle attempts, you should ease it, and cauterize the end of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then you should adjust the opening of the plague according to that acute medicine until I visibly see the end of the arrow, and I dedicate myself to this for intervals of time over four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, since the plague has grown, and I can insert scissors into it, I persist in that, and do not be distracted by other things, when one day I begin to extract it with these devices according to what will come in the form of those at the end of this chapter, until I extract it; and I restore that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but they have restored it and the affliction is consolidated, and the malady is healed entirely, without any pain in it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that it gives this rule and meaning regarding what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those others are not understood from the narrative nor do those comprehend the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the skilled artisans compare a little about what is said and pay attention to what is presented regarding what is absent; they seek new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you say that arrows are not forced out of the members in which they are embedded but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they enter, or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding through fleshy parts, and is thrown out and discharged.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, you will find that you leave it for some days until the flesh around it becomes weakened and the attraction of it and its discharge are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And seemingly if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to your diet, leave it for some days, then repeat the process of discharge and movement on another day, and it will be discharged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not adhere to your diet for some days, you will find that you pierce through the path of the arrow in that bone, starting from a subtle movement until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if an arrow is embedded in the skull bone and has pierced one of the brain's cavities, and it causes certain symptoms that you know and call, then abstain from removing the arrow and leave it there until its presence becomes equal over some days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone but only in the flesh and does not pass into the brain, and the patient recovers after some days without any complications from those wounds, then devise a way to attract the arrow and draw it out.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your efforts at removal, then administer drugs around the arrow's path as we have recommended, and take care of the site until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already lodged in the body and affects a nerve, then examine that area, and if you feel any sensation, apply certain stimulants to draw it out.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you must puncture the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are auricles attached to it, which must be removed entirely, then cut the flesh in which they are embedded using all possible tools; and devise a way, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion, until they become obtuse.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, use torsion of your hand with forceps at all times to make it bend; and employ every subtlety to ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it can be extracted with great difficulty from both the patient and the wound.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot reach it with your own effort, then wait for a few days until the swelling in the course of the arrow subsides, and then repeat the procedure when it is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	If you experience discomfort due to bleeding, then administer what we have mentioned for treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by yourself.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you must aim the point of the arrow into it, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And the arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of the other party, or which already process any part from outside, or make the end of the arrow flexible due to the sensation of the force applied above the designated cord, then you should focus on it; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and then shoot it, for it is made light for departure.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, cut with your knife according to the direction of the arrow that penetrates into the bone, and amplify the cut, then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if that does not work, leave it for a few days and then repeat the process as often as necessary.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the arrowhead is embedded in that area, then push it towards the inside.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the arrowhead has fallen and you want to provide impulse, then insert your finger, if it is soft, push it vigorously into the hollow of the bone in the area of the arrowhead and then push it towards the inside.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the inside, as the arrowhead will be forced away by that movement.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is deeply embedded, press down all your concave flesh where it truly is, if you can do so, and treat that area as seems best.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel it upon touching, and it is possible to remove it without causing harm to veins or nerves, then do so and treat the wound as necessary, and use whatever remedies are at hand until healing occurs.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Design of forceps for removing arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a sawtooth design, so that they do not release the arrow.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in various sizes, large and small, according to the quantity of the arrow's length and thickness, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the area affected.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of applying pressure to this concave extremity in order to remove the arrowhead from it, and to push out that stubborn one.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The method of applying pressure to the stuck arrowhead:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	so that the arrowhead's intrusion into the concave area is removed and it is pushed out.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venipuncture (phlebotomy) of veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins suitable for phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in total: two pulsatile veins near the ears, called the temporal arteries; two located on both temples; and two in the two lacrimal bones, known as the aspicient veins; a vein in the middle part of the forehead, and one at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two on the lower lip; these are called the alae; and finally, two veins beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, one is cefalic and must be treated with wild latz; the people call it "the vein of the head", it is deep, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cefalic; they call it the people "vein of all the body", the basilica is the vein that is located in the domestic arm, and it is called "citillar", while the common ones call it "the stomach vein"; the funis of the arm, which is paused on the fossa, is the one where flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the ear for clear manifestation; and the parotida, which is the vein located between the said auricular and the smaller one below, only in its two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And on the foot and the leg, there are three veins; one of them is left at the curvature of the end of the wild latz; the second is sophena, and its location is left by the domestic arm of the latz; and the sciatic vein, its place is left by the wild arm of the latz; and on the leg there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is an ancient cure for migraines, emigrations, and ulcers on the head, old afflictions.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the method of bleeding them is as follows: it should be done by shaving the patient's head, and rubbing the patient's head on the occipital area where both veins are located, close to the ears, with firm friction; then tighten the bandage around the head so that the two areas appear squeezed and the ears are located in two prominent spots on the head; and if you wish, as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as they say, here is how you should try.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Now take the scalpel, which is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as needed; and make the cut as deep as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, tighten the bandages and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been preceded at the beginning of this book with the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	However, of the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and serious evil, causing frequent blindness and acute overflows in the legs.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing flebotomy on those is as follows: restrict the patient's breathing until two veins appear palpable for a clear perception, and demonstrate their pulse while leaving the small finger aside; and then you will be successful.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then lift the cord over the vein at its stated point, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument therein, and raise up the vein; and cut likewise in the other two veins; and make the blood flow as much as your need requires.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then carefully isolate the patient's hernia, and place the stated pressure on the vein for an hour, and then press upon that spot and apply poultices and tighten it with firm constriction, and leave it thus until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And having thus recalled them, and made the incisions, and drawn them in at the beginning of the opening.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to ancient malformations of the face, and migraines, and bleeding, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the technique of the flebotomy is according to what you have learned; so that the illness tightens its collar with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the 'digger', whose form it has.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Stop the point at the prominent part of the digger on that vein and strike it with a gentle or other maneuver according to its nature, and let the blood flow as much as you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's illness and tighten it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes the vein is opened by a lateral flebotomy, but it is not appropriate that the flebotomy be of acute extremity as with the other flebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and open that vein according to its direction, for the bone is very close and strong, and would break in the flebotomy if it were too delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the opening of the two veins that are the tears of the eyes due to itching and tearing in the eyes, and to the illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the vein in a particular area, and then you make a phlebotomy cut there, standing over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a little bit of phlebotomy, especially in places where there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is slight, then only a small part of its end should be cut.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then allow the blood to flow as much as necessary, press over that part, tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and violent sweating, and it helps with facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it tightens the patient's vein and then you take their nose with your left hand, and make a thin long phlebotomy cut in the middle part of the nose according to its straightness, because the vein does not hurt here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Ensure that you complete the incision with your small instrument little by little and let the blood flow as needed; then close it up after a night, since it is restored more easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The closure of the incision from both sides should lead to the restriction of swelling, the commencement of healing, and the alleviation of various diseases and acute conditions, as well as corrosive and malicious ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the incision on those parts is that the disease tightens itself in each one near its root with adhesions; and the surgeon should be at the head of the patient, and the patient should lie on their side.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	Then make a small incision in the vein with a wide incision; and take out blood as needed, according to time or as much as necessary for that purpose; and then do the same with the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then apply a ligature to the ligament and tighten both veins with gentle pressure so that the pain is not aggravated, and place a poultice within the wound until the disease is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And regarding the healing of phlebotomy on the veins, it compares to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and the decay of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers located in the nose and around the anus.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy for these cases is to cease the illness in front of you, tighten the collar of the wound with a bandage, then carefully turn back the lips of the wound, and observe two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is due to the darkness of both, and this happens more often in the area surrounding those parts where small black veins are found; and then incise each with a precise cut.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is doubt left, and you do not know which one it is, then enter into the incision of the greatest one among them, and take note of the most apparent pus from among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make it resemble the two veins that are on their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	You may often use incision for the two veins that are on the lip left open.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	For the two veins that are left open in the tongue, the proper procedure is phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal portions, which are found in the throat, to the malignancy of the uvula, and to mouth maladies.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomy for those is that it follows the disease among your fingers before the sun, lifts the tongue, and observes under the tongue, from one side the vein and from another side the other vein, and the color of each is inclining towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make a flap in each one; be careful not to cut off your hand while making the flaps, as those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins, which are also flap-cut in the groin, are those through which blood usually flows in all humans. The flap-cutting of them is done according to two methods: either by using a milled or olive cautery with subtlety decreasing; or cutting with a flap-knife, and this one is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this arteriotomy is what you use for section, and it has special knives of various lengths and thinness according to the width of the veins and according to their tightness.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of milled flap-cutting:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	both the length of it and the thickness, and it is used to open the concave veins full of thick, hard clots.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the procedure for olive-shaped phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of smaller extent and involves the subtler ends, and it is appropriate for phlebotomy of subtle veins that contain delicate blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, the phlebotomy of the basil vein, which is one of three veins, should be performed with caution as it removes blood from areas that support the head and neck, and also from the feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is important for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to be very careful and cautious, as he must protect that area, and if he erringly pierces the vein during phlebotomy, he will cut the artery and cause a flow of blood, so he should not perform phlebotomy on that part with a sharp needle until he has carefully examined it.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the pain is not apparent through manifest signs, you must recognize that you should remove it and change to another, or seek some root; or cut into the flesh in its final part on the arm, for that is manifest; and thus remove it with a flebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform a flebotomy, recognize the tightness of the arm at the site where you will touch it, and place your hand over it tightly; then bend the arm and cut the vein with a concave section as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in any part of the location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you feel, with tension, an inflation at the site where you have placed your hand, that inflation is due to the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you feel the flow of blood in the flebotomy as with a bell, and the flow is subtle, you will know that it is from the artery's flow; then cut and tie off the vessel for a long time; and if the clotting occurs, since the visible clots are broken up, tighten the arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And observe the patient from the discharge of their moisture, and be extremely careful of them, and do not cause harm to them for some days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the gangrenes do not separate, and it is not appropriate to apply medicine to it, then you cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the end of it is contracted, and the gangrene is separated; or take a piece of raw flesh, and make an incision there, and take one portion and tighten it over the place of the vein with bindings and poultices within the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the gangrene is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat it with the water mentioned previously to remember the place of the powder that separates the flow of gangrene.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of the gangrene from him is difficult due to the position of the location of the plague and the possibility of binding of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalica, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And be cautious in phlebotomy to those who have fear of it, for there is a nerve; and then, when you reach the point of phlebotomy and find the nerve, stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and often not completely successful. This nerve causes sensitivity; and if it is hidden from some men and is subtle and not shown, you must pause in performing phlebotomy that you make a cut with the phlebotomist's instrument, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief for ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with a olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is advisable for you to always remember that in performing the phlebotomy, you should not puncture the tip of the lizard's tail solely with the phlebotome, but seek a lighter spot, and do not notice it, unless it is troubled by the initial percussion that precedes the phlebotomy on some occasions.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some cases, when the apoplem (or hematoma) does not form during the first percussion, do not notice it again regarding that apoplem.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the phlebotomy and its accidents are what you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence translated into English is:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a flebotomy at the third or first pulse, three hours after passing the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Flebotomy can be performed at any time of day or night, whenever it proves convenient and necessary.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And remember that children should not be subjected to flebotomy before the age of 13, women who are pregnant should not be flebotomized except in the fourth month of pregnancy, and the elderly, those who have already passed 60 years, should not undergo flebotomy.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to undergo flebotomy in any way, let him purify his bowels with a lion's clister beforehand, if there is much fissure retained, so that the veins do not expel excess blood during the flebotomy of the bowels, which are pure, and do not burden the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let the patients not be subjected to painful surgery and excessive eating, nor should they escape from illness or intoxication until this matter is thoroughly investigated regarding their condition, nor should illness come from hydropic conditions, and more than fluotomy should be feared during colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplication of urine, labor, exertion in meals or vigils, or any cause that debilitates the virtue, either physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is appropriate to consider the subtle movement of humors in this regard if the swelling is due to heavy foods, drinks, and medications, if it is possible for them to affect it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And it is appropriate to immerse oneself in water if any cause does not prohibit, or some exercise for the purpose of subtilizing the swelling.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the fluotomy on the leg of the patient at around noon, as it is said to be the third hour.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And therefore it is to be known that the foot of that person must be guarded from all animal misfortunes, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and also from all physical accidents, such as excessive work and strain, sudden movements, or anything similar to these.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his side, let the causes be presented of which cor (perhaps referring to a specific ailment or condition) is often experienced by men, characterized by aromatics, fragrances, balms, and similar elements according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And then follow the flebotomator (a medical instrument for drawing blood) over a cushion that is placed on the thigh of the person who should have been flebotomated.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract the person's arm, and with the flebotomator in your hand, make two or three strikes on it; then tighten the ligature with a belt and wrap it twice around it.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the obstruction is firm, for an obstruction that is not equal, or the obstruction becomes excessive, then prevent the flow of semen; or if it is for loosening and relaxing, then prevent the complete withdrawal of the semen.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then, for the obstruction, note that he who has suffered from a faintness should rub his hands together between their fingers until the veins become swollen and are felt to be pulsating.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then, for the flebotomist, apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy tool; place the index finger of their left hand over the vein, leaving the location where the flebotomy should be performed so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pressure is reduced. When performing the flebotomy on veins that are full of air, and as you pause the flebotomy on those locations, the vein contracts due to the flebotomy, and it becomes clear to the flebotomist; and if the vein is not cut by the flebotomy, it will be narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, it is important that the phlebotomist be skilled and experienced in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after the phlebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little, or apply compression over it if the location is not apopthematic.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the location is apopthematic or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two and do not strain the ligament; for suddenly applying heat will cause severe apoplexy, nor should it be bathed.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and there is barely any blood flow, and you fear that you will not get the desired amount, then repeat the phlebotomy on that part according to its position and adjust the opening a little, and apply compression in front of the location as it becomes apopthematic, for the location is apopthematic in many people due to only a slight opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	It may sometimes be already inflamed, so do not apply any treatment to it, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply some ointment on any part of the wound, because it heals the body from infection.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better at this location than any other oil or ointment.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And it seems that the application of oil in all forms of vein extraction, which venesectionists perform to prevent body infection, is a wise and knowledgeable practice when they stop at one of those on this location, because the infection is eliminated and turned back when it becomes severe.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a great inflammation is produced in the location of the vein extraction, as it often happens, especially when there is no significant bleeding but only swelling, or at the sight of a few veins, then you apply, and compress the place with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it like that for an hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And then cover it immediately with the compression of that vein or another vein to complete its treatment.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply some external cause of alum and myrrh mixed, or some other cause of mint juice or warmth or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often accidents occur, necessitating the removal of abscesses and protrusions through phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel softness, you should apply compression to that area; for the swelling is due to a bad vein and must be treated accordingly; and then be careful in applying any of the causes we have mentioned, as the blood will flow strongly from the arterial vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply plaster to the area where there is stiffness, so that the place becomes firm, and then take care of the other treatment until it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And take care to extract the blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the dominant color above the wound as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the wound is black, leave it to fester until it becomes pus; similarly, if it seems thick, leave it to soften until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, leave it to heal completely.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And be careful with those who are full and strong and require bloodletting at once; in such cases, enlarge the incision of the vein and make the venipuncture wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are anemic, do the opposite; extract blood in several stages and make the wound narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for venipuncture is the transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and the incision of nerves, and it is more laudable and more safe than phlebotomy according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which syncope is usually subject after phlebotomy, you should cure that in front of phlebotomy with a small amount of wine infused with milled grapes or simple oxymel; and extract it from the blood in three or four passes.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a cold of compression, then take before phlebotomy wine infused with myrrh or honey-based syrup aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in fragrant and highly scented aromatic syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by the sudden release of much blood, you should take in drinking water with a little wine and fragrant syrup; and use its aromaticity with fennel, and cool your foot at that place.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use other causes as mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here he should extend his arm and dissolve the gangrened part a second time, as in the case from which flebotomy is indicated for rapid evacuation, and its virtue is warm, which evacuates the small gangrene little by little, according to the quantity of virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If one should extend their arm and remove the gangrened part a second time, and their body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first flebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	One who wishes to remove the gangrene from the body contrary to the direction in which it is declining, should make it extend on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	As for a body in which there is much gangrene, already hardened and acutely painful and causing fever, it should be removed from the gangrene in one operation and a great amount of blood drawn off, and the perception of pain amplified until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the chest of the patient to prevent death by fainting, as these attempts should be made only when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And be careful when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and slightly bend it outwardly, for this causes too much harm.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habitize the layssa (dressing) within that is flebotomized secondly; or renew this with the acuity of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifices of the veins; or place over it a light compress of turpentine or sage, and continue that compression until the blood has fully drained.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is inflamed, dress it and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, you may bleed that person at another site or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the cord or basilic when they are not found or are obscured, as it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the vein puncture is that the patient inserts their hand in the water until the point becomes engorged and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then it is tightened over that ligament with a strict compression; and then a vein puncture is made according to the transverse small, not longitudinally or transversely.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the incision should be wide, and your vein puncture should be made with the point of your instrument on the joint of the hand slightly.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is obstructed, then you insert your hand in the water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of Saint Charles is immersed in cold water for a longer time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is far safer than that of all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein in the right hand is indicated for liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you should tighten your hand strongly or with the other hand, as you have immersed it in cold water, so that the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then phlebotomize transversely; and if you cut into it, it will not hurt at all.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to cut off the hand during phlebotomy, because then the nerves in that part of the body are exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then apply the hand to the affected area and let the blood flow through it; for if you do not apply pressure to the wound in warm water, the blood will clot within the venous opening and prevent further flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	Once the blood has been extracted according to necessity, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening; and make sure that you do this in a narrow space.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the healing of this arteriotomy with the hand from the left side is appropriate for illnesses of the abdomen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do the same for the arteriotomy of the other side, just as you have done with the previous one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The healing of the venotomy should be for illnesses that are in the extremities of the body, as well as for illnesses of the uterus and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of veins and ulcers of limbs and old garments, and similar to the illnesses mentioned above.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the nature of the foot surgery is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction until the veins appear; then he wraps it around the ankle joint with a strap; the position of the vein is clearly visible, from which it branches out in various parts of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, make the incision wide enough to remove the hernia through the opening in the leg, as this is better and more salutary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a foot surgery on the surface of the foot, be careful to avoid the nerves that are left there, and place your incision precisely where you perform the surgery, otherwise it might not go as planned.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And the surgery should be successful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If it is prohibited to elevate the leg, then immerse the foot in water and let the blood flow out until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist misses on the first attempt, he should repeat the phlebotomy in that place a little more, since the area is sensitive; and do not fear any harm from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And it seems to do the same thing on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for sciatic vein, the same place as we have said is where the tail should be placed below the hip joint in the wild position.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the healing of the phlebotomy wound is at the hip joint when it is for a hard case.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for him is that it brings the disease into a bath, relaxes and strengthens his body from the side of his leg towards his foot on all four sides with a thin long band, since only then will it appear through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, you perform an incision on that part according to each skill at your disposal and the direction, and it is better; or incise it through incision or secare it through secation, for the location of it is open.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most people not easily noticed; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the sensation of all, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot instead of the mentioned auricular and ankle joints.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the tightness and place your hand over the site of the flebotomy gently, as it is said to be healed lessening.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas are made of horns, or iron, or glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And the treatment is carried out in two ways: one involves incision and extraction of pus, and the other is through incision alone.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this incision treatment, which is through scarification, is carried out in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the twelve locations on the body where such incisions are made include: the one where vents are placed in turn, which is at the nape of the neck; the middle point on either side of the collarbone; vents below the jaw, beyond the mouth; vents on both cheeks; vents on the tongue, two at a time; vents on the shoulder blades; vents on the arms, two inches apart; vents on the legs, two at a time; and vents on the feet, two in each.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And the extraction of blood should not be from large veins but from small ones scattered in the flesh, and thus it does not cause harm through phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be done with fire or hot coals in any illness caused by congestion within the body until it is entirely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If it is necessary to induce bloodletting for an illness or a continuous condition, we should do so at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of the day and at any time that seems appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in men, the blood becomes thick and stubborn, necessitating frequent bloodletting, which they find most distressing and uncomfortable; from these people, congestion and inflammation are found on their face and head, and they suffer from puffiness and darkness around their eyes; some lose the place where they had bled, and their laughter is increased; they experience a pleasant taste of blood in their mouths or their tongues become stuck; and their sleep becomes more frequent. They also experience vivid dreams during sleep, full of heat, pain, plagues, and other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when pain occurs for any reason among those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the night, they command a ventilation to be done rather than waiting two or three hours past day.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And one immediate relief from the ventilation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and everything that sinks into the ears; more importantly, it is evident that this is an appropriate evacuation for the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is in the area of phlebotomy of the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use on what is of foul composition or where there is catarrh, as it brings great discomfort to that area.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, one should not use it on the feet, and on the tops of which are joints of pain.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May he who is lying on his side be relieved; and for that reason you must order the bellows handler to place his hand slightly on the parts where the suction is applied, lest there be a loss of relief.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	The application of suction from the bellows in place of phlebotomy of the vein (vena fusca) and basilic artery: thereby it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the lungs, tearing of the lung's muscle, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the bellows be slightly moved, for if it remains in place, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the suction of alhagdahan confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, bright light sensitivity, and tooth root pain; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic artery.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And be sure to instruct the blower not to press his hand during the scalping so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	After scalping, apply alcohol to the wound in the mouth, and treat the corruption of the gums, and similar conditions in the mouth, which are in place of phlebotomy using other means that are applied to both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the scalping that is done on both sides of the jaw provides relief from pain, which is achieved through the application of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the scalping of both parts within the sockets provides a rejuvenating effect of phlebotomy of three blood vessels, namely the basilic, the femoral, and the cephalica; these vessels draw the blood from all those hand-operated veins in the flesh, as well as from the smaller veins of the other, larger vessels, to achieve attraction to the three vessels.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bellows man not to blow too strongly in the scarification, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leaves only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bellows used to blow over the anus and confer relief to hemorrhoids in the rear end and to pus ulcers left behind.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to command the bellows man to be a strong bellows, and of iron, for the place requires a powerful section; and its strong blows should be subtle and scarified in the scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The smaller bellows from the legs decrease in gentle blows, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and relieve old pains of gout and kidney stones, and the bladder; they induce menstruation and ease breathing and coughing; and are used in place of flebotomy of two phials, and also in strangulation and of two nails.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, these weaknesses debilitate the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the openings (or vents) of the loins, the rejuvenation is proper to the rejuvenation of the vents of both legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the vents is that it stops the vent in the beginning of the vacuum and sucks by temperate suction, and does not prolong the position of the vents, but rather gently pauses them, and remains tightly placed, and allows the humors to come to the location through equal occurrence.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the location already reddened and swollen, and the pain of the wound appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then make cuts and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that man whose flesh is tender and thin, be sure to scrape him once and not too hard, so that the place does not become an ulcer.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the bellows to increase the scraping and press slightly, and facilitate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the swelling in the vein becomes great, be sure to scrape twice, for the first scraping opens the way for the veins to drain and their content.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large vein.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make a third scraping so that you may achieve its end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Lastly, when we want to extract the vein little by little or a small one, a single scraping is enough.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we should make an incision with a deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the cut is deep, hard, rough, and its edges are very tight, then the places where the suckers (or ventosas) are applied should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, one may use oil of aloe, or oil of violets, or oil of pressed almonds, or oil of nettle; and if it is in winter, then use oil of nails, or oil of lily, or camomile oil, or saint john's wort, similar substances.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess (or "superfluitat") is thick, sticky, then use oil of amaranth, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions, or with hot water saturated with solatrum, or with water from a couch (medical pad), or with grape must, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And he whose leech has very moist sanitization, washes his leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for he whose excesses are abundant, wash his leeches in antivin (wine made from grapes fermented with their seeds and skins), or in water mixed with savin, marjoram, or anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And be it known that leeching should not be administered immediately after a bath; rather, it should be done approximately one or two hours after, and the leech should be allowed to rest close to the treatment area.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venesection?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When beginning the treatment, if the phlebotomist or the one who has had the bloodletting is irritable and has severe pain, inflammation, then you should take causes that cause chilling, thus with acetylcholine, and belladonna, and other similar herbs.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should also abstain from their meals thus with chicken, and other lean meats, and foods seasoned with spices.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking alcohol from almonds or cannabis seeds, and sumac, and a mix of fragrant herbs between vine and nutmeg; and it is recommended that they consume little alcohol and food, abstain from chicken, cabbage, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on days of ventilation and flebotomy, the liquid intake should be greater than the food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	It is necessary to give some men a small dose of tyriake, or musk, which is peppered, or alcelite before ventilation or flebotomy, or afterwards, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is lessened; and it is not necessary for them to take this scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Rather than the openings (ventosities) that are a form of lancing being on the liver, and on the belly, and on the umbilical, in the regions of the joints, and on the sides, these members do not suffer from lancing.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for these (openings) to drain the pain from the members, but rather to attract the pus of the member, thus pausing a ventosa on the breast in cases of flux of pus from the nose; and they use this so that the ventosa's binding force on the member be dissolved, just as it pauses on the belly and the umbilical; for it rarefies the member and scalds it and removes pain as it resolves the ventosa.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is placed over the swelling when an injury or bruise occurs, for by virtue of strong attraction it improves the injury and eradicates the bruise from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to do when it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed spaces.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only; and in some cases, they are administered over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered filled with heated water for the ailments of the gallbladder.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the ventilation be filled and the pus be great, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of a wound administration at the fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice should be the thickness of a palm; and in the length of it, in the place that is in the circumference, half of it, the bandage should be small according to the amount that fits into it an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is prepared with eringos, oranges, thick lemons, onions and tomatoes so that they do not damage the member from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of it is a transverse slice of eringos or iron, where the candle is placed over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this poultice is much greater than the one we have previously mentioned; and its size is smaller according to the ailments and the state of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cups used for children and the weak are different from the cups used for young and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the method of applying this cup is to hold the fire over the affected member with a piece of wood from the fireplace, and place it on the middle of the transverse bandage in the exact spot of the cup, so that the fire is ignited around the edge, preventing any harm to the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Once applied to the patient's member, as we have described, and when the cups are in place and do not need to be adjusted, then fire is brought to the pointed end of the bandage, which ignites the vapor within, causing the cup to dissolve shortly after.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And continue holding the fire according to your preference, applying more cups as needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Place a cup that is administered in the pleurisy pain, with water, in which there is no cross or breach, and it should only be filled with water and placed over the affected member.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the way to do it: And the larger this cup is, the better, because it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in most members, but only in those where it is not possible to place cups, due to their small size, as well as the nose and other similar areas; or on a member devoid of flesh, as in the case of the nose and its surroundings.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups, which are in the infected water of boils.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then, in the evening and night, let them lie in warm water until they are relaxed and no cause for pain remains in the belly of the patient; then empty the body at the beginning with flebotomy and enemas; then massage the patient's limbs until they turn red; and then let them rest upon it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and the case is handled.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to remove the obstruction with an enema, it is more beneficial in youth.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, wash the area with hot water and then apply cold water; massage and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the fever of the infection persists and it is necessary to stop the bleeding, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water and place it on top until the discharge stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the ulcer is multiplied, sprinkle it with vitriol triple-distilled or gall and substances similar to astringent causes, until the ulcer is absorbed; or place the roots of boiled fava beans over the spot, leaving them until the beans adhere to the site, and the ulcer is absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if, it is necessary, bloodletting should be done, then it is possible to change those sites.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If bloodletting is prohibited from suspension, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh ulcer or a needle left in the place until it forms an ulcer; and afterwards, they should be stopped, because those that feel any pain soon allow the formation of an ulcer.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some triple-distilled aloe, or salt, or ash on them and they will soon come off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the treatment of the third stage: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this manner of science in our land is hidden; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have not devoted myself to it until now, except through the length of studying the books of the Ancients and understanding their teachings, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I will now discuss my experiments and studies over the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And now I present to you a summary of all that my knowledge encompasses and upon which my experience is based; for I have condensed it here for your benefit and freed it from the constraints of detail; I have abridged it at the end of explanation, and demonstrated it at the conclusion of description; and I have outlined in it various forms of the instruments that are administered there, as an addition to explanation, just as I did in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	**First Chapter**
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	**Summary and Collection of Fractures of the Bones: Since it is necessary to make a preliminary mention of those fractures from which we must proceed, before we begin the remembrance of the broken limbs and the diversity of each one.**
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	**Therefore, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to those whose understanding the artisan is forced to begin at their commencement, and who are at ease regarding the truth of these; it is for you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.**
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you must act at the onset with flebotomy or remove that part, or in some instances, if no specific cause is prohibited, with debility of virtue, or it is the one to which the accident happens, or weak from decrepitude, or there is time for violent heat or violent friction.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then it is sufficient to content oneself with food consisting of herbs, veal, and crab; one must abstain from fatty meats and foods that clog the veins, except when ensuring safety from apoplexy, and if there is no risk of effusion of matter into the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their previous condition, which is usually the course of treatment for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be healed, you must ensure that the patient is given nourishing foods with substantial and heavy nutrition, such as foods made from flour cooked in water, and rice, and bread, and beef, and goat meat, and fresh fish, and similar coarse foods, and at this stage, the fracture will coagulise more gently and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones crack when they are in the first state of decay and in the old, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature because of the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	They are consolidated and continue according to their nature as long as the members are dry, and they continue and consolidate those that are of them at the end of slowness, just as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nature, however, adjusts and amends the broken bone from any cause similar to gout, in which a swelling adheres and strengthens that part which is always glued and united together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, whenever any cause does not prohibit it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to abstain from the patient's food, food in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness predominate, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The great variety of fractures corresponds to the variety of members.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you have gained remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its separate chapter from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	The great variety of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is one type of curved fracture that occurs in them, and others happen according to the length of the bone: thus are the sagittal, stellate, and other fractures, both proceeding and not proceeding from the pain, as is done when preparing to write, and there is the fracture by contusion and dislocation in the head, and the small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for all kinds, it is a specific torment in its restoration according to the distinctive remembrance of it in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And this is known as bone fracture: the deformity of it, and that prominence and sensation of it when pressed by your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no deformity in the place, and you do not feel a strong pain when touching the bone due to movement and the patient does not exhibit great suffering, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformity or small fracture, where you do not feel pain when pressing with your hand and upon compression, you apply the remedies of which you have recollection suitable for the place; then make it very tight due to subtle stiffness.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you know that the location, when it is curved and does not split into two or anything else that does not happen in it naturally, if all parts of its comparison are broken, then understand that you must begin from your hour of correction of the habitation that has happened to it post-accident with caution.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If it has happened as a post-accident caution, then leave it for a few days until the apostema ceases; and then bind it in any way that you can of lightness and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And you know that the restoration of it and the stitching of it is lighter than the bone in which the accident has happened naturally.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the return of memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If it is in a bone that is severely fractured, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position holding the member should be equal to its natural shape, while the extensions of the bent member are stretched, then you pierce to cause them to return to their original state, using whatever means you can in those places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And beware, according to your strength, that you do not cause harm to the patient during your operation or inflict any damage; and pierce with according to your ability, applying one pressure to another in their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And be sure to touch the area with your hand appropriately at that time, and if you encounter any other cause, correct it and engage it with the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause ulceration with their frequent operations, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen this happen through the operations of their frequent movements.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, apply compression and carefully perform the operation and closure of that member, providing rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and ensure that during his vigils and sleep he does not strain himself, observe his pain, movement, agitation, and functionality, and wait until the position of the limb is one in which the pain or injury is alleviated; then move it to another position where it does not feel pain; and ensure that its placement is straight and correct so that no deformity occurs when it is healed.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the closure of the member is what you will observe; because you should know that broken members differ in their fragility, size, and shape.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And regarding those that are small like the arm, elbow, and forearm, when their closure involves a very thin piece of cloth, then ensure that the wrapping is delicate.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Those who have thick joints or limbs, should know that every one of them must be enveloped and firm, as the joint's tightness connects the large member strongly and equally to all parts, so nothing enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, as you begin, carefully start your evacuation of the swelling, applying appropriate pressure, over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps depending on the member; and firmly grasp your hand slightly against the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then, carefully shift your position to the superior part of the fracture site, and tighten gently rather than pressing hard on the area you have secured with your tightness.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then, gradually extend your wrap around the fracture site, and slowly soften the tightness until you feel the location open up slightly.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then, take another bandage and wrap it around the injured area over the previous wrap, and carefully remove the initial wraps below the fracture; and continue your work on the tightness of the new wrap and softening as per the method described for the first wrap.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the folds of a cloth or linen, which conform to the contortions of the fracture, if there is any; otherwise, do not place anything on it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place your attention on the other side, wrap these sterile bands neatly around it, if the area is not inflamed or infected, and stop when you reach the point of inflammation; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the bands.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The bands should be of different types of canvas, made skillfully; or of wooden sticks; or of palm fronds; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, note that the band applied over the fracture should be thicker and more elastic than the others; its length according to the measurement of the member in magnitude and smallness; tighten the bands on the other side as per your initial tightening; and then bring them closer together with a needle decently according to the stricture mentioned before, and it is that your stricture should be according to the location of the fracture more, and the tighter it is from the fracture, the less it should be.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And take care that the threads are strong in thickness and fineness, and are numerous; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in some operations where the thread of the cord is tightly twisted, it is a great error when the constriction is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Likewise, very thin threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve the desired constriction, and it will not be possible for one thread to fit between two others without a gap of at least a finger's width.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the illness is localized in the extremities of the bones, then constrict at those points without applying excessive pressure, so as not to cause damage to the patient with threads made of leather or silk wool.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the disease breaks bones and causes disruptions in the joints, and it is necessary to refer back to what was mentioned in the second chapter regarding its peculiarities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately tied with steel; this is because when the limb is large, it cannot be bandaged by steel except after several days or seven or ten, depending on your certainty of avoiding gangrene.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of plasterers that the ancients used to restore fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	A method of plastering as an emergency restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where heat and friction should not be applied: take powdered lime from the mill, which is the essence of flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if that is not possible, then take a thin and soft cloth, and prepare it as an alternative, using this method.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: prepare a mixture of assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, of each 10 parts; mirra and aloe, each 5 parts; alochil, 20 parts; mix these thoroughly with warm water or egg albumen, if the patient's wound is clean; then apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster, which confers benefit in fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white aloe, 10 parts each from dragon's blood; mirra and aloe, each 5 parts; acacia, 6 parts; and Armenian powder, 20 parts.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these should be thoroughly mixed in a mortar with either warm water or egg albumen and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	A method of plastering joints and separating bones from their locations, causing pain in these areas as well as to cracks and fractures; take fine wool, immerse it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	This plaster is not merely for restoration, but also for preventing abscesses and expelling pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppy flowers; mix them all together to make a paste.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	A method of quick plaster administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you wish to resolve the abscess of a wound: take roots of alder, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, whole grain flour, all mixed together; make them into a paste and apply it on the member, if it is not infected.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scalded, then apply that with cold water of parsley or cold water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a poultice for a hard abscess that requires the restoration of the member: take alder roots and seeds, and elderberry, and melilot, and basil, and violets, and chamomile flowers, from all parts; grind them to a paste and mix with savin water or distilled water or wine, according to the quality of the member and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Yet Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed over the afflicted member before its restoration, except for making it with wax and oil, and not otherwise; and he recommends that it should be applied between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	A warm compress can be applied to the broken member after its restoration and for causes of shrinkage, also using myrrh, cloves, and similar substances, just as we have recommended for those causes.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take half a pound of cedar wood shavings or wolf's fur, and other herbs, and salt, mix them together, crush and filter them, and make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount should be adjusted according to the size of the wound and its separation, considering if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, it is better to leave it in place. You should not separate the bones for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain, pressure or swelling at the site, you should immediately remove or loosen the plaster, and prevent further application of it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, and immerse it in hot water until it is moist, then apply this to the site until the pain and discomfort cease, and rest the member for an hour. Then place over it a cloth soaked in wine and oil or rose oil, and cover with another cloth for a night, ensuring there is no risk of infection and that the swelling of the member and the pain are relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that delicate constriction and apply a small plaster, not tightening it with your initial restriction, but using subtle means to heal it.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have subsided, and you feel the need for a plaster and constriction, then repeat the process as you initially began.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause occurs to the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or seven; and in some cases, everything is left for twenty days, as it appears to you, due to the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that place.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and regulate the amount of food for the patient according to the recurrence of their condition.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you examine the site of the fracture and find it already dried and weakened, but not covered, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it; so you should pour warm water on it every time you touch it; for three days in total; slightly relieve the tightness, and with this operation direct the nutrition to the limb, and healing will occur more easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But here is what the foolish restorers of a limb fracture do another time when they do not cover it properly, and restore it according to its distortion, which is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon, he would enlarge the scars on the patient's free limbs and cure them towards this.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The fragments of fractures are varied, and their shapes differ, and the causes are diverse; some fracture occurs from the impact of a blow, which stops all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone dislocated, as it is in a fist, and that's why this type is called dislocation; or space cuts a piece of the bone, cuts the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the rear of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures is great or small, and from fracture that is compression or traction; and their cause is the impact of power or weight on bone, and they seem similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is either penetrating, reaching the surrounding fat and leaving the bone exposed, or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture is when it is damaged in the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This is a description of a fracture caused either by an impact or a sudden force, where a piece of bone breaks off and remains embedded inside the body, leading to a concave indentation at the site of impact, similar to what occurs in the case of erysipelas when there is a breach in the skin.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This type of fracture is most commonly seen in the bones of children, especially at the ends of long bones.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	In all these types of fractures, the bones often remain slightly separated with fragments still attached.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And one should return to the original state of affairs at the site of the fracture.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I have learned all these types of fractures by examining them, and questioning their appearance and the state of corrupt flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary injury is known for being discovered over the bone, and it is washed, and bandaged over its affected area, as the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of the illness, and if you observe for the accidents that signify by their manifestations on evil, such as vomiting of anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and cessation of speech, and fainting, and acute fever, and emission of pus and bleeding from those areas, and similar conditions to them in the major dispositions, then it is not a cure.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you observe non-corrupt accidents, then you hope for health, but you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the illness comes upon you at the beginning as it does and this happens during the winter days, then you must study the bone's exterior from the 13th day according to your disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you must know that the bone should be studied from the 7th day, after which what is left of the bone decays due to panicullis, and accidents we have previously mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the panniculum covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and inflammation, then you must incise the fractured and inflamed part as I have previously mentioned.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you dislodge the patient's head from the illness, and discover the bone according to its usual place and manner as much as possible according to the shape of the illness, and elevate it over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you accidentally discover a bone fracture, pus or abscess, stop it with what covers it, and this is done by filling the area with sheets soaked in wine and rubbed oil, and allowing the inflammation to subside until the abscess is resolved and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumference of the bone and the removal of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	This is the second of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One method is to cut the bone with a sharp incisor tool, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the first one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer a wider incisor than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And you should have a variety of incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them shorter, with their ends more acute, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their aid to facilitate percussion over the incision so as not to injure the head or harm that part.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, be careful that you do not perforate around its circumference before making the incisions with the instruments, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called this way but because they do not reach the end of the bone in the testis to which it is attached, so that at the margin there is a rounded or curved extremity, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, as each one corresponds to the specific nature of each bone, provided that at all parts of the skull the end of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of specificity of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the method for three kinds of treatments: When drilling into the channel of a broken bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and rotate it within until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the treatment instrument to another location and pause where it cuts through all or most of the thickness of the ray or surrounding area.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then you cut with scissors what is between each part of the bone, making it as thin as possible that you can place over it in a lifting motion, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool you have prepared for this purpose, using pliers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch any part of the healthy tissue.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So, once you have drilled through the bone and it is separated from the healthy tissue if it is connected to it, take out the extracted part, be careful to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone away from the other tools that resemble scissors, but ensure it is more delicate and thinner than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if one breaks a small bone or dislocates it, take hold of it with ease using the tools at your disposal, and then treat the wound with lice and ointment as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which divides Gaul and lauds for great glory; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and manifest, while, as soon as you have uncovered that part and paused over it, the extreme end of this cutting tool, slow yet gentle, which this figure represents, should be applied.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts ahead in length, thus; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut that is applied to the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then carefully strike the incision of a limb with a small mallet until all the bone is easily separated as it is revolved, and be certain of the absence of panniculitis in that area where you fear any manner of complication, and if the medicant were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their ailments; certainly, he would be asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	If, however, a rupture occurs with the pancreas in some places of the bones, cut that part of it at the end of the incision tool, which is shaped like a lens, and separate it from the bone easily, for it is separated from the organ without pain or suffering.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pancreas, and what is abscised or remains attached to the bone is the facia, which has asperities and subtle veins, then you must scrape those asperities and eradicate those veins with delicate razors that you have prepared in various numbers, so that it is possible for you to apply to all parts the most appropriate use of them and the most correct according to how your operation on that fractured bone proceeds.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And be sure to administer in your treatment the reason why you cut the bone at the beginning of the pus from those cuts, and then use it for the subtle pus of the body, and do not stop doing this continuously until you achieve administering the heavenly and subtle pus of all these.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small breaks or subtle fractures, be sure to administer care according to what you have for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is cause that it is not mastered over all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And let us focus on what we have written regarding great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the pannicul is compacted when you remove the bone, be sure to take a cloth from it according to the quantity of the swelling, submerge it in warm oil, and place that over the area of the swelling; then take another cloth folded or doubled and submerge it in vinegar and oil, and place that on top of the first cloth gently, so as not to hurt the patient; and administer on that a light poultice, and do not strain that unless the swelling requires it.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the abscess's safety; then remove that and administer medicines as needed, such as rosewater, flour of herbs, powdered bones and aristology, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make this medicine into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicines of good quality from which he/she abstains and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be mindful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not have any obstructions of ointment or other things; nor should you add severity to it; for when it is appropriate over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts and destroys it, and brings about a malicious malignancy towards the illness.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the head's cerebral matter, as it purifies the bones and more significantly when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether it affects the patient the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is pernicious for all its knowledge.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if blackness does not occur from the medicine placed upon it, but rather because of that medicine, then take some honey and crushed olive oil in equal parts, and with those lines wrap a cloth, and then place it over the affected area; and subsequently apply the treatment with the appropriate spices for healing until it is cured.
Capitol .iii.	**Chapter III**
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two places simultaneously, but rather one of those small bones, for it has two bones inside, and the piece that is separated is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but rather suffers from attrition, deformity, and sinusitis.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two pieces is broken, then you must introduce that small fragment into its nose, and with your finger hold the fracture from inside, and with the same finger push it outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this to facilitate for yourself, and be careful not to cut through your operation on the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach that point, then you should equalize the pressure at the end of the line where there is a significant curve.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the following to it.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attempt to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, return the patient to complete rest for at least seven days after the operation.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if it's in two parts, making sure that the linen is as thick as possible to fill the entire nasal passageway.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus, some of the ancient remedies are that the swelling should be immersed in a border of herbs, changed several times a day, which I have not seen; after discovering that the joint is covered with albumen of chicken eggs mixed with flour of corn; and then apply it until the bone is hardened and the cartilage strengthened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes, in certain cases, it is inserted into the nose instead of swelling, because it is wrapped in cloth from the lion's fur; and this is when the fracture of the nose is very painful and the injury does not prevent inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this is not necessary at all; and if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use swelling.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another situation occurs, such as a nosebleed, apply a plug made of wax or a piece of cloth dipped in hot vinegar and rose oil, or aqua vitae.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not prevent the development of gangrene, then coat that part outside with flour of sesame and powder of burnt bones mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it to stop the flow of blood, and do not bind it for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken or cracked, then you must carefully divide them and extract any pieces that remain in the wound; then, with a cut, remove any remaining fragments, and treat the wound with appropriate medicine to promote healing and consolidation, and apply suitable dressings.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must carefully treat it with warmth and administer nasal drops of mercury until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not extensive, but only slightly out of place and not divided into two parts, its judgment is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right little finger; and with your other hand, gently pull the fragment inside to facilitate its movement outside, and equally align them.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, to enable their equal positioning.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth leading to their displacement, then apply those of which you expect them to return to their original position using thread of gold, silver, or cedar; and place a bandage over the broken mandible, wrap it with a doubled cloth, and secure it with a large, properly-cut piece of linen or a single strip of the same length as the mandible; and then fasten it according to your ability and what is suitable for the application, without damaging it.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be quiet, and abstain from food and excessive drinking.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you estimate that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day, cut and loosen the adhesive from the affected area; correct what has been altered, and apply a poultice with flour, egg white, or chamomile, as you will have left the cerate on it, and hold the compress over the paste.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the annex and the application of the poultice are in place and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it, do not loosen it until it has healed and strengthened the fracture; for this fracture tends to tighten in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if there is another acute inflammation, then follow what has been said above for the treatment of it until it heals, and heal that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of the bone or a dislocation, then use your skill to reduce those dislocations to what suits the case in the removal of those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifices of the fracture are narrow, you should widen them with a flébotomi according to the amount of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have reduced those dislocations, and they do not remain dislocated again, then with the orifice of the fracture widened, you should apply the splint; otherwise, place it on one of the appropriate splints over that area, until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Chapter .V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula (a bone in the throat) when it's dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the bones of the joint are broken, the fork-shaped part is fractured, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Depending on whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts other than those that occur accidentally, its restoration is more difficult; or it happens in such a way that there are no attachments, and it is more subject to complication; or the fracture is like a plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is its most complicated, you must have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork and assist, while the other extends the collar to support the joint.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then apply the bandage to the fracture, making sure it takes on the shape of the part according to its form, and not leaving any bulges or cavities.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, wait until the padding of the patient's bed is soaked in linen or wool, and its size according to the amount of your necessity; then extend and raise the fork and shorten the padding with your hand as you swallow the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the end of the fork to the desired length due to its bent state, then you should place the patient in a supine position, and place a cushion over their muscle halfway in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press on the muscle at the joints while holding the fork's end in the supine position, until the os of the fork is raised as it was initially, and then you will correct the fracture and swallow it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	If you feel any splinters of the fork and they are painful, then you should carefully cut them off and extract those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, you will ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the fork, the instrument that serves to extract, aside; and this is the form of the instrument, either made of wood or of iron.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a cup, whose concavity is such as you have needed for it, according to the size of the bone or the thinness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of it according to what is possible for you during the operation; since there are two ends, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the disease which you have cut when you have extracted the piece from the bone is wide, and it seems secure from fistula, then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is minor or you fear a bad infection, you will use moist cloths and powders according to the quantity of the wound's break.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then insert a cloth soaked in hot vinegar and oil, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the pain and swelling of the bone are severe, apply a paste made from flour mixed with egg albumen, place it over the affected area, and hold it in place with a leather bandage. If it is necessary, use a long thin instrument, as the Saracens do, about the size of a palm or slightly larger, and make incisions on the foot, then apply double powders to the foot and the paste. Take a thin table knife whose length and width are similar, wrap it in cloth, and place it over the fracture site; then turn it as you see fit, ensuring the patient's discomfort is alleviated, and reduce any bulging. This is what should not be overlooked.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And provided that the star (or the fracture) above the broken bone is not worsened; and so that whenever you see the illness each day, if you notice the ligament becoming softer or the star already being reduced, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then hold the patient's sleep (or rest) over their neck, and place a small cushion beneath them to gently raise their head during sleep; so that by that means the supporters (or muscles) of their body are elevated from the side of that joint, and thus is raised the fracture of the furcula at the elevation of the muscle; or it is lifted the arm of the patient at the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless it occurs in the vicinity or aperture (of the wound), within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you see that it is coming off on the patient, and adjust its tightness; restore (the treatment) and leave it until it is healed and the fracture of the furcula is coalesced.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is tightened and bandaged according to its state in 28 days, and in some cases for certain men it is cured in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	**Chapter VI**
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	**On the Restoration of a Broken Shoulder**
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of it, but not the main body, rather only the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the place is broken—and it is broken in the middle part of it—it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural state in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place a powdery mix of alum and honey over the wound; and stop it with a double cloth poultice; and place a thin piece of wood on either side of the table according to the size of the spatula, or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the stick is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a stop, and then adjust the stick according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then tighten it strongly over the dilated tongue with a restraining stick, until it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the lubrication every day; each time it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the stick if it moves from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula should be restored in 10 days or 25 days. (The text seems to have an error with "xx" and ".xxv", suggesting a range of days.)
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore, once this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the lubrication, and be sure that it is from among the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the site of the painful bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it fast, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the tailbone or aposteme caut if this should happen.
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	A broken foot sometimes cracks in the middle and tends to heal poorly; its ends may be healed, but the middle part remains cracked and divided.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the accidents of the foot when the middle part is broken, it inclines to the sides within and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, and all kinds of twisting, and it may produce severe vomiting; and it is evident in the cavity of the bone that is broken, and it is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press upon their muscles, adjust their ribs to the two lower ribs, and proceed carefully in the operation, according to every manner possible, so that the bone structure returns to its original form.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and stopgap, using a thin sheet of lint or cloth, wrapping it around; carefully attach this to the broken bone without causing further harm; occasionally check the bandage's tension, tightening it as needed, and when it softens, loosen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it becomes necessary to trigger the displacement of any corrosion, pain, or abscess that has occurred in the area, then cut and loosen the bandage, remove the plaster, and correct what has happened as a way of treating the patient; and if required, reduce the bandage again after applying appropriate treatment; and adjust its tension until healing occurs.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of broken ribs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur casually but in severe impacts to the back; and as for their endpoints, away from the point of impact, it is only due to something that is cartilaginous that pain occurs in them.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of him is not hidden from sensation, you must inquire within to understand his condition.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that the fracture is addressed according to its type, each in turn, as it is possible; within reason, it should be swallowed, and then a plaster applied and the broken bone pulled together, if necessary for that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, it causes intense pain and piercing to the patient, similar to the pain caused by someone who has pleured, and due to the pressure that the bone exerts; it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is a difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ancient ones are ingeniously designed in that most cunning device.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from their actions, they say: take away food from the patient that has caused inflammation and windiness, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is pushed out.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We should avoid this lest it cause a slight wound to generate an abscess, if it happens; and if it already has, then immediately aid it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They also say that certain things should be applied to them which are cooling and, close by, sucking strongly; and it seems reasonable, yet it is feared that the wind may carry away the excess due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They also say: take a piece that the location should be covered with wool already immersed in hot oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, which should adhere closely as you wrap it according to its shape; and it is treated for the patient's illness with pleurisy of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the disease causes a violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures deeply, fear over the disease, then cut into the place, expose the broken rib, and with your hand press down on that instrument which preserves the health, remember its previous effect, and cut through the bone to facilitate it, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then it is necessary to adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with bandages until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside the wound, then cut and insert poultices in warm oil and place them over the area, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him be supported on the side on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter .ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of the fractured spine at the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it begins to swell, resembling the fractured spine in the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider this: if their muscles are already relaxed, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or tighten those parts, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they do not feel pain, then you know that it will not heal, and in such cases, the condition is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if it feels tight and painful when pressing or piercing the affected area, then know that the bone's end is safe and that the malady will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the patient's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now, if you notice that it has already become soft, this happens to those affected in the joints, and when they lie on their back, they feel stiffness and lack of control, and sometimes they turn onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not try to treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no such cause occurs, the cause is better and should be left light.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is that you pierce at the relaxation of the affected joint with a heated cauterize point or with oil-soaked wool, and sometimes place these over the affected spine several times until the affected area becomes numb.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place a comfortable and firm bandage over it, tighten it well upon that affected limb; and order the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the afflicted part until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a need for amputation of the leg bone or any other cause that has already separated from it, then you must cleanse and dress the wound over the thigh and hold onto that bone; and properly adjust the two edges of the wound, either with sutures if it is large; and then treat the flesh around the wound, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the last part of the bone is broken off and it is the end of the limb, then you must insert that portion of your left hand into the wound, and with your other hand hold the broken bone as closely as possible; and then place a bandage and splint over it, if these are needed, and tighten them.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel bones broken in them, then you must bind those, and hold them still, and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the wide [or: extensive].
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anches (hips) are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is not uncommon but communicates with the extremities of those parts, and is sharp in length and declines to pieces within; and it causes pain to the patient at the place and a shock when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over the place which is over the fracture, as the position of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, you then cover that according to what you have been taught by custom, in such a way that it resembles its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in the long bone or has already moved to the joints, then make the patient lie on their stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have finished that, apply a poultice and then place over it a board of wood or iron, and tighten with pressure, without worrying about the puncture of a fracture or the removal of the staple.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the concave space with something that fills it completely until it takes on the right degree of tightness, and instruct the patient to sleep either on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	If an abscess forms dangerously, then stop the spread of it and its restoration until the hot abscess is calmed, and apply to it what has been described previously; and then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it thus with a cover.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there occurs an accident in the leg bones or they are broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	**Chapter XI**
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	**On the Restoration of the Broken Helper (Femur)**
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The helper (femur) is that which lies between the hip joint and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a piece of bone roughly in the middle and shape it as follows:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And they should be seen in both extremities of the bone, then it is suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on their side; and then pour out their broken arm over the pole until it reaches the joint in the middle where the curvature of the bone is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over any heavy cause or the physician extends this to the parts below; and the doctor should hold the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns as it was.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient is placed on their back and their head is held up with straps, and then two assistants are commanded: one to hold the fracture with his hands; and the other to hold the pus below them; and each of them extends themselves to different parts.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten your hold on the fracture with straps and on another part with another strap, and each of the two assistants extends themselves to different parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so, if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, you must stop half of the ligament over the bone and leave the other side of the fracture against the joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And if the fracture seems to be in the joint, then you must stop the ligament at that spot and against that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply this with ease and care, and as it is wrapped according to how it must be done, strengthen it firmly if there is no risk of gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If there is a risk of gangrene, do not tighten it within the seventh day; place on it a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, to rest the gangrenous part, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method of strengthening is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm upon the support, and place your hand open over its muscles.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And hold the cloth and tighten it over the support on the arm to keep the arm in place, unless any cause prevents the broken bone from healing.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture a splint that is both broad and strong compared to the others; and you space each splint according to the distance between them, and the length of the splints should be according to the break, adding three times the entire length.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then tighten the splints with the tension as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that the tension over the fracture site should be more tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the less the fracture is displaced, the less the tension should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, by adjusting the position of the bones and relaxing the tightness as we have said when you restore the member to its normal place, you will succeed.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is a risk of abscess, you will relax the tightness and the bones will return to their normal position within seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the dressing in all cases for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation at the site; avoid food that reaches the member due to excessive tightness; and thus, correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that nothing further will occur due to it, do not untie the bandage but instead wait for three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand over the hot poultice filled with wool completely, and consider at all times during the night or day that the form of the broken member is not loosened or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened; therefore correct it with all your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And stop the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then observe that the patient increases their intake of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The custom of the poultice and the leg support is that they should be strong for 10 days; and observe that they become loosened, and that baths are administered and medications applied with ointments that correct this condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is old and dried, then you should not loosen that ligament and stitches within one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, and is known as the little bone (pous), while the other is larger and is situated below the little bone (focils).
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone (focil) is broken only slightly, or both bones are cracked at the same time, it is a serious matter.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone (focil) is broken above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is more rapid.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the smaller bone (focil) is broken below the fracture, it is a bad situation, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And then the disease becomes worse when two bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the main support, it is convenient for the doctor to restore it as soon as possible, before the break spreads further and complicates healing.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	If the fragment that breaks off is large, then it will cause more severe spread of the damage.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both fragments break off together, then it is necessary to stop the bleeding more urgently.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you should place your hand in such a way that it restores the bone and stops the extension of the fracture over a cushion, with the wrist positioned higher than all other joints, the little finger lower than the others, and the patient placed on a carefully prepared bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion before them or behind in their correct position, so that the illness does not move around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the patient who has pus, or maybe their hand, and another minister extends his/her hand similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should align the bone within its proper position, according to the best figure that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are many pieces, then you must carefully reduce all of them to their proper place using your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separated condition that affects the bone and it is not in your hope for its restoration, then you should finish over it and maintain it in the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is a severe injury, you have already prepared for it with a special procedure, so now take care of that one.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs during the initial stages of your recovery, you should apply a clean dressing made of rose oil and white wax, gently pressing between specific points with subtlety, and tighten the bandage over the affected area until the abscess subsides; then remove the dressing, apply a new one prepared from powdered clay mixed with owl's fat, and place additional stitches; and ensure that the stitch placed over the fracture is both secure and tight.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the names of the stitches on the arm are placed in specific positions, either in a single point or in two points together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And you should tighten your bandage over the fracture site more firmly and intensely, and when the pressure from the bandage begins to ease up on either side of the fracture or lower down, loosen the bandage slightly as pain memory allows, according to what is mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the sheets that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to tighten them should be of a medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the members and their ligaments after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires correction, as soon as the pain strikes the member, apply water with a spout until the pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not bind the member tightly until it relaxes, then return to the stricture.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone has healed and appears like those (before), then correct everything with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nutrition is blocked from reaching the member due to excess tightness, then you will know that you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the patient does not present any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And also, since the hand of the hernia is due to its moving nature, it should be suspended from the patient's body, and they should sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or if the pain is severe, it is healed in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complications and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	**Chapter XIII**
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the hand's finger and its joints.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the hand's finger and its joints often suffer fractures, and these do not occur suddenly but are caused by gradual wear and tear.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a hand suffers a fracture or dislocation, one must ensure that the patient remains calm and then place the hand over the affected area gently.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them properly, ensuring they are in good position.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And one should know to apply a plaster and stopgap, unless there is danger of gangrene; then, cover it with a cloth according to the area's extent, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is internal and affects the belly of the hand, make it look like a strip of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their fractured hand; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star of life be a strip of cloth in which the body is wrapped, so that it adheres to the palm; tighten it according to its need.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in external parts, then you should place a cushion on the star and another cushion at the opposite side on the palm, so that the hand is covered and raised; and then apply the compression, thus turning the hand to its normal position between the joints and ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in any of the joints, and it is the little finger, then wrap it as you see fit and tighten it on the palm; and if you wish, place a small cushion to the right so that the fracture is elevated and not damaged.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in any other digit, such as those in the middle joint, or in the index, or in the little finger, then it should be wrapped and tied to the finger with which it is affected; or all the joints below it can also be tied, which is better; or a small splint can be placed over that particular joint, as we said regarding the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and appropriately arrange the position of the abscess carefully and opposite - to your operation - as it covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is described about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the Restoration of the Hip Bone Fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone, being mobile, breaks and turns to the side, thus becoming exposed to the dominant force.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another left to support the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister should extend the ligament to its full length according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If it is deemed necessary to cut at the root of the bone, then its ligament should be cut on both sides near the thigh, so that extension occurs in it, and the other ligament left supporting the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the break is deemed to be on both sides, then its ligament should be cut at the ends, and its extension made towards the parts left open.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should equalize the bones by gently reducing them to their natural position, and join the bone with a good connection; he should cover it with plaster and tightness, if he does not want to cause harm to the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it occurs in an abscess, leave it for some days until the abscess is drained, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The compression should be as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the limb.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of material between the limb and the bandage near the joint, bringing the ends of the strip on top of both parts, then turn over the bandage and the limb to remove the excess of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place your hand over the limb at the site of the fracture as if pressing a splint against the bones of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill the vacuum between the limb and the skin with soft rags to ensure the compression is firm.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then tightly wrap it three or four times around the fracture site; the tighter you wrap it, the less restrictive and more flexible it will be, and the easier it will heal.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the bandage to the sides, leaving it open in the middle to reach the sole of the foot, and tighten both ends of the strips from the other side to prevent the bandage from slipping from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then secure the bandage over it so that it does not cause damage to the affected member or lead to gangrene, abscesses, or similar issues; and if any of those conditions arise, then remove the bandage, and correct what has happened immediately, as we have mentioned before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If it is painful to move a bone that is dislocated, then hold it in place as best as you can; otherwise, reduce it and immobilize it, and treat the condition that led to its displacement until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is tightened other than with bandages, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring it in this manner, it does not happen that the patient becomes lame; and if it is restored alone, other than what is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he become lame from the one which has been treated most recently.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is tightened for 40 days or a month or two, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shin bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the ankle bone often leads to stiffness, which may result in limited movement.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	If the fracture occurs, it is nothing but a crack or break in its parts, and this is what is called a plague or the plague, and everything has been said about it.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it should be such that it is equal to what was broken from its parts, within the limits that it can be added and joined according to what is possible by calculation and ease of fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster over that round swelling, if needed, and tighten it with a strap according to what is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions we have recommended in other fractures, thus with due caution and similar to those that oppose any accident to what is appropriate for its healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the broken leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick, and it is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin, and it is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason their restoration is done together with the restoration of the leg, and the operation on them is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone of the fibula is broken, the leg is shattered in a different way.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if a thick, dark bone breaks, probe it gently, as these are causes not easily recognized.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then administer extensions, adjustments, and bindings to the hernias according to that agreement.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg bone is clean and without movement, the extension should be less and more gentle, and thus you will aid your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you tie the stitches and complete all the surgical procedures, you will take wooden splints of a size that fits between the causes left behind in solitude, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; align them with those requiring slight pressure, and avoid using your hands, and let their length be according to the length of the leg, from outside inward to where it is most depressed.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, place one at the junction of the leg's thigh and the other at the opposite end, ensuring they are well within the foot's base.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then fasten the two bands at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, for this tightness prevents the leg from bending at the left and right joints, and maintains a good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a strap of leather is applied according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed on the leg to prevent any further movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And above all, ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when this pain is truly acute.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then consider the leg in each day and study it thoroughly, observing for signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such condition arises, be cautious in treating it until it is cured.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus bone does not experience a fracture completely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely experience fractures, but they do undergo atrophy due to their structure.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become elevated among themselves, then the patient should lie down on their side so prepared with support.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over what is elevated among those bones, and press and compress those, until the bones return to their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and bandage over them, and place the foot's belly on a small table with two ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then stretch the foot firmly with a downward pressure, as you have already wrapped it tightly with bandages and other causes of which you are aware.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days has passed, you will loosen the ligament, as you will find the bones entangled, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is just as well known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if it is that someone has a broken bone, then restore them, engage them just as you have learned and recommended to yourself in the restoration of said parts of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken bone straight according to its length and slightly bend it on one side; and return the foot to this table which is recommended to you, and stretch that firmly with a downward pressure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	If what is broken of the bones is two or three phalanges or more, then you should place each finger straight with a bandage around it as much as possible, and stretch the table firmly at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table to keep the entire foot in good position.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents we have discussed; and be cautious with any event that resembles this.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the condyle of the femur, and the bone of the penis, and the glans of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the condyle of the femur is cracked, it causes a severe pain in the knee, and you should slightly bend the leg at the joint, and hold it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife should fill the condyle with some material, and do so gently as possible; and the woman should be made to lean, supporting her weight on both legs, little by little, until all is removed from inside, and it is placed in front of the joint as best as possible, hoping that the broken bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows on their back, and when they wish to urinate, facilitate the process with care, then make them urinate, and return them to their initial position according to the manner in which you placed them at the beginning, and then return them to their first pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do the same for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strangle it over the patient's throat with a reed tube; then insert the entire bladder into their mouth, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the mouth, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then it is filled with warmth and left for several days according to our recommendation, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the hip bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in their restoration and healing the same thing that we have recommended for the thigh bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these adjacent fractures that rarely occur, especially for those who have some study and understanding of this my book; for that fracture indicates to you the best dispositions through which it can be restored and tightened.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When the skin is torn on a man's body, take a clean cloth and place it over the wound; then wrap it with another layer of cloth, and secure it so that it does not move for three days or so, and it will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the Restoration of Bone Fractures When Afflicted.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture, and especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or of the adjacent bones, or similar to those that require flay and amputation soon, if the conditions for amputation indicate so, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague becomes purulent, be aware that you must contain it as if you were covering it with a third cloth, if another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then it begins to restore the fracture in that member on the same day, and do not prolong this, if you do not risk gangrene.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If gangrene occurs cautiously, leave the restoration of it within eight days, as long as the gangrene has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and beyond, for you might cause more harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is broken and protruding over an exposed joint, be aware that you must perforate to reduce it, binding it with your hands as easily and gently as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is beyond your skill and the condition of the patient requires your hands, then reduce it with your hands using this instrument; an instrument made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits, and whose width corresponds to the amount of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for a doctor to have these three or four on hand in every type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be made, and in a certain roughness, so that it is not folded excessively during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	It should have a sharp point at its edge, where it touches the sides; and it should be made of thick material, stretching from above and within to the parts [of the body].
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It is called "volent lip hernia" in Greek, thus it is a rare case.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the sharp end of it is held above the edge of the bone, prominent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And it should push the patient all at once until the bone returns to its place, and be secured without any further operation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so try to intertwine the ends of the fracture among them, and if the end of the broken bone is delicate and you do not grasp it with a good instrument, then you must insert the end of that bone inside the tool so that it has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you are unable to reduce the bone to this condition that we have recommended, then cut it with the scissors or saw it in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then remove the one that is embedded in the bone with roughness and small splinters.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels severe pain, you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and thus do this so that you bring great relief to the sufferer.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete and you apply a black, astringent cloth, especially in summer, do not place it directly on the wound or any other area where there is oil, to prevent it from causing putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And subsequently, during the final stages of bone restoration, you should apply bandages in such a way that you expose the wound, carefully incise it with scissors or similar tools, and then use bandaging materials according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be extremely careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this and cause their patients great harm or fatal corrosion of the tissues. It is a matter of health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is light, soft, different from the swelling of other fractures...
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the disease is severe or a bad ulcer, and you are concerned about further complications that we have reported, and you feel pain in the area, don't press down on it, but rather wrap it tightly with a cloth made of hard fabric instead of soft cloth and hold it firmly.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When, after a day or two, the disease begins to manifest with swelling, remove the cloth that you had placed over it and apply some ointment, which is what we usually use to treat such plagues; take, for example, tetracycline and similar substances that resemble those used.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to clean the wound and observe the plague each morning and evening until it is healed and stopped; be sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the infection flows from it to the surrounding parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not healed or separated from the arm, then you should know that here are only delays in the treatment of the small ulcer, so be sure to take care wherever the plague attempts to spread.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those techniques, separate the ones that are removed and extracted, and those that are not separated, place the member and cause pain; perforate to incise those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you encounter an infection or gangrene, which is a different kind of corruption and putrefaction, then take care that each one of them receives whatever is appropriate for their cure, which is preceded by a narrative in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning what I should say and what you should do: when the swelling is broken, it protrudes over the member as well as the bones of the thigh and its auxiliaries, resembling those of the larger members, and do not attempt to draw it out, nor extract it, for you may cause death by doing so; leave that alone until it can heal on its own in a matter of 2-3 days; and treat the infection if you see it, or let it be, if not.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of swelling that occurs during the healing process of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Swelling often occurs during the healing process of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it is aggravated by the shape of the member; thus, it hinders the normal functioning of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have been found effective for it, such as aloe, senna, and others similar to them; take some or all of these, and apply those with a styptic effect, or white of egg, or vinegar, and rest on the swelling in a compress, and tightly bind those around it for good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And do not remove the compression for several days; then loosen it and repeat with another, as long as the swelling persists; or place a plate of lead over it, as lead has the property to reduce all inflammation in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is already granted that the joint is in a bent and tight position due to necessity, then divide it by the most superior part of the bone, and incise the superfluous and prominent, or quickly extract it until it is remedied; and treat it while it is still healthy.
Capitol .xxi.	It appears that the text you provided is a part of a medical treatise from the Middle Ages, and the section heading "Capitol .xxi." indicates the twenty-first chapter or section. Without additional context or content following this heading, it's not possible to provide a complete translation or interpretation. However, based on the previous lines translated, we can infer that this section likely delves deeper into treating specific medical conditions, possibly focusing on joint issues and their management.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures: When the fracture is restored, then gently and properly apply heat to the delicate and injured member according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then heat is applied to the delicate member, it should be for legitimate reasons: one of which is to promote healing of the ligament and proper union without delay; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrient flow to the member; or because of excess brooding; or because of inappropriate movement at an inopportune time; or due to poor blood circulation in the affected area of the patient's body, caused by weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to restrict food for the patient and make their heart tender while the pain multiplies in them; administer baths; insert a gauge and apply pleasure to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply pressure to the member, so that the pressure draws the moving nutrient to it, or continue washing it with lukewarm water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII**
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Regarding the healing of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly and surgery is forbidden from them, what would be the course of treatment?
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a member is already restored and the fracture and displacement of the bone are corrected, the treatment for its deformity and nodding should be focused on restoring the form of the member. However, despite this, the member is not prohibited from undergoing its natural operation; as long as you receive the permission of one who understands the member (i.e., a qualified medical professional), then it is appropriate to proceed with any necessary operations.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Many have been these folk doctors and healers who have practiced this on our land; and this operation is most reproachable, losing great fear the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	When the weakness and trembling are recent, know that they should be immersed in tepid water containing herbs that soften them, such as altaias and yarrow, and similar ones; and a compress of mollifying plaster should be applied to it, also with good distillation; or take a thick mud mixture from yarrow and apply it with a lint cloth or oil of chamomile, and make a compress on that; or take fat figs and twist them with columbine women, resembling those used in the medicines called Amerman's consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by constant gentle friction that is applied to the wettest parts, and movement of the limb should be administered in all directions at regular intervals.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If the deformity has already progressed and is severe, it turns into a stone and requires surgical treatment; then, one must ensure that the pus has drained and the continuity of the bone has been restored, and incise what is superfluous in the joint of that member with delicate bone cutters, and provide relief to that part which is greatly distressed and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	**Chapter XXIII**
De sermo en dislocacio.	**On Dislocation**
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the body's joints, preventing any movement and distorting the shape of the affected member, which causes severe pain and significant damage to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible; if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And so it is important not to stretch or move in the moment of the appointment, as sudden movements cause spasm and pain in the muscles.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	If this happens, you will understand that you must perform a flap surgery on the patient's thigh, and then place something between to rest the hernia; and the affected member should be immersed in lukewarm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And all members should be treated with the water of which the memory will return to its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the treatment for dislocation as mentioned above in fracture; from the upper part of the body, gently move it towards the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter .XXIIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the two mandibles are dislocated without any injury, the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places with little force, and they become slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so that saliva from the wound cannot escape, and he is unable to open his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around itself.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	If the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its original position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and swollen, then it should be administered a gradual reduction, without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's condition, and the doctor inserts his finger into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers are outside to keep them aligned; and commands the patient to cease moving their mandibles and relax until they return to their proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are permanently dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until a gentle reduction of both is achieved and do not delay the complete reduction of both.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when they are returned and compressed, and the opening of the hernia is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of cloth over it coated with wax and oil, and gently apply pressure to facilitate its ease.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not strain themselves to the right or left, and do not force any cause; having their food be a mild diet, until when the pains are relieved and the mandibles are relaxed, then they may eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, and elimination, until the mandible is healed and relaxed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult and they do not return to their proper positions, then fever and continuous sweating occur, and the patient's belly is greatly distended and they vomit pure choleric matter.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you will know it is a loss, and often the patient dies within a few days of this happening.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula (a bone in the elbow) and the end of the bicep muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not displaced from the socket by following the course of its attachment to the bone; however, sometimes it is dislocated towards the outside, and this is indicated by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient struggles under their weight and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then constrict the area with your palm firmly, so it returns.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then press upon that compress and poultice, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Apply the end of that which sears the thigh and continues on it, so it is not dislocated in any day; then cover that it be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as your equipment allows.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then press upon that compress, poultice, and restriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this treatment, the cure is reduced to the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that the muscle is not dislocated in any way but according to three manners, of which one is when it is displaced at the attachment to its origin on the other side.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is displaced at the attachment of the muscle, and this should be treated carefully; it is not displaced at the rear attachments through the shoulder, nor at the front attachments by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often displaced and comes out at the attachment on the other side after the tendon, especially in those places where there are few muscles, it is slightly displaced; but in those with a lot of muscle tissue, it is difficult to dislocate.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to certain men through a blow or accident that the muscle becomes inflamed and swollen, and is torn from its original position.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, as you understand that the patient is in too much pain, you proceed with their treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of the muscle is known when it is in the position left after the titillic (tendon) has been moved; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find a manifest difference; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and place the titillic again with your fingers as if it were a hook, and the patient cannot move his hand to its normal position, nor hurt it by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the dislocation is in the foot or ankle, and you find a clear sign of injury, it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, light reduction is made when it is fresh and the illness is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the parts above; then he applies gentle pressure where the hernia is, and reinforces the joint with strength in its place; the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it over them; and then leaves it so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, what we have said does not return, and only at the beginning that the dislocation occurred, a few days later, it is necessary to ensure that the illness is bathed in cold water, and administered drinks that soften and line up as if they were cut with fennel, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused where the hernia is, waiting for it to shift between relaxation and tension; then the doctor places his hand over the expectation, and lifts the head of the muscle towards vertical, and pulls the patient's hand away so that it is not hurt by the parts below, and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it is not hurt by the parts below, for soon it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce this second way: so that you make present a man who is taller than the hernia, and he stands on the side of that place, and inserts his muscle between the hernia's tickle and raises the tickle of it above the parts beneath until the hernia is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the hernia from the parts beneath his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else causes it to be suspended, so treat it carefully, for the displacement may return soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in another way: take a long stick with a round head, similar to a pilon of mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it beneath the hernia; so that when you lay drapes on the head of the stick, the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand from it to the other side, and strengthen the opposite part, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, use this treatment: take a stick, its length should be about two arm-lengths, and its thickness four fingers, and shape it like this:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then cover the head with a round cloth to prevent the stick from causing harm.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place yourself comfortably, holding the stick with your hand or arm between the affected parts, and rest the stick on the assistant and your arm and the end of your hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Place your arm on a scale according to its length, and extend your hand towards the affected parts, while the other hand is suspended from the other side, so that the joint can be treated at the right time.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of the patient is completed in any way that is possible for you, and you notice that you have left off the gentle touch of silk thread; then prepare a poultice with powder from millstones, mixed with egg albumen over all the muscles, so that they are turned away from it, and tightly bind the thread to the poultice, attach the patient's hand to the collar of the poultice, leave it, and do not remove the patient's hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And be sure to restrict the patient's food intake slightly, as long as the member is comfortable, for it is lighter on the healing of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then provide the patient with more food after seven or five days, and exercise some movement; if it stops hurting and does not become worse, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that happens to it or any other cause, then be sure that in such a case, hot cautery should be applied as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and compression are reduced on him several times, but it does not heal and he cannot raise that arm to its normal position, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never stay in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	In the case of dislocation, the foot and ankle or the joints behind should be manipulated with pressure and stretching to reduce it, until it returns to its proper place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the same treatment should be applied to any other compression, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the healing becomes more serious in the member and there is delay in its motion, then the disease uses frequent baths several times until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure for dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and appears to return with difficulty; it is dislocated entirely, most notably in front compared to behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden by any covering or touch, according to how it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, it becomes manifestly clear, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it move its muscles.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And be aware that you must cover the hip and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to a standstill before it becomes apostemic, for if it becomes apostemic, reduction is difficult, and complete healing is unlikely; especially when it's in the back parts, as it is most severe of all types of dislocations, causing great pain, and many times leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And for the restoration of the hernia, when it is possible to reduce it, extend your hand of the patient to two more directions, stretch their arms, and place the hands of the doctor on the sides and push the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its proper place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending your hand with your other hand, until it strikes the side of the hip joint with the tip of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And indeed, two assistants should extend the arm, and each assistant should hold this position firmly to avoid any weakness in the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then, turn the arm completely around, so that it is wrapped with a long piece of cloth or bandage over the patient's hand.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it in order that these causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return. And then gently push the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is paused over that lump where there is stiffness and adhesion, it is extracted with a loose and descending tightness, and the arm is suspended from the collarbone and left for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it is loosened; and so if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave that.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not too tight, then you repeat the application of the plaster and ligament, and leave it for several days until it is extracted; and then you loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of a joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer humidification in baths and gentle friction, and rest, as long as it is relieved; or apply heat over the affected joint, if it's a case of greasy movement; and afterwards, wrap it up and place that over the bone during day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove that and place this in a bath; and when it becomes clean, you rub the joint with gentle friction, and repeat over the affected area, as long as it is stiff due to movement, once, twice, three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	in baths, as long as it is relaxed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, apply a moist and roasted sheep's dung over the split, and wrap it tightly around that; do this several times, as it is moist and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	In some cases, the shoulder can be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate, unlike other joints, but it is nevertheless crucial to act swiftly in reducing it as soon as it becomes dislocated, lest the location become inflamed or develop an abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocated shoulder involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their arm, while the doctor applies pressure or uses their palm to push the joint back into its socket.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should be considered whether the palm is already resting on the patient's belly, in which case the patient places their back on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred previously to the back of the hand, then the doctor's hand should be positioned intrinsically over the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore return as soon as possible; if not, tighten that compression on the hernia and let go of that; do not delay, otherwise you will suffer and cannot achieve its reduction any more than the days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint pain may be due to the body's curvature; do not pay attention to any cause of the illness, but rather that the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp any cause; then you will know that the nerves are either crushed or stretched, and there is no generation in it except for its being tightened with a cautery suitable for its location, and thus it grants some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the illness has returned, place the compression that we have prepared over it and leave it for several days; then loosen it and leave it, and exercise your hand on it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement of it is stopped and some discomfort occurs, then apply a lukewarm water compress and friction a few times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, the joints become completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a joint is dislocated to the back of the palm or the belly of the patient, pinch the joint and push it back into place with your fingers, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then support the head of the joint, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend it and extend it until it is right again on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And at night, according to this narrative, continue to straighten it with care during the day and exercise it slightly at night; do this for several days until it becomes straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it appear as if this is the case, if it is dislocated in the mother's womb, and connect these parts to each other, and perform the first operation on it, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it appear as if this is the case when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	**Chapter XXX.**
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	**On the Treatment of Dislocated Spinal Vertebrae.**
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae of the back or neck, and the bones are completely out of their normal positions, it is not possible to cure them at that time, as death often ensues for the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient cannot control the treatment of the malady, and sometimes the muscles of his limbs or both legs or both arms, or even a spinal vertebra, are weakened; or it is completely dislocated and often removal of these to four parts is done.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that which is already licked by the behind is called hemorrhoid.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The treatment for hemorrhoids involves considering whether they occur due to childhood issues, because at that time, neither cure nor complete healing is possible.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In cases where hemorrhoids are seen due to accident or impact or similar conditions, as the ancients said in their lengthy speeches about treatment, the most beneficial results come from it; but you have already been briefly treated of that for which there is little excuse due to the excessive amount, by my close proximity to understanding, to which I expose and shape myself according to various tools, by which I will show and disperse this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it is said that in hemorrhoids that occur due to pressure on the anus, there is neither cure nor healing for this; similarly, in those that are formed at two openings.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs in the back itself by this condition is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And indeed, the disease is spread over its face, covering almost all the walls, and extends below, causing great pain so that it cannot be endured.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then place a straight stick, firmly fixed in the ground at the tip of the patient's foot around their head, and another stick with their feet on it at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister holds the stick, but it should not be fixed in a pit; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the patient's head and below their chin with tight linen; extend the end of the linen to the stick that is against their head, tie it to that stick, and similarly attach the other end to the stick by their feet; adjust all the linens and tie those to the other stick opposite their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then apply the surgeon's knife to cut open the wound at the base of the leg, and do not allow the two legs and their ligaments, which are attached, to remain uncut, but nonetheless they should not be fully severed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until recovery occurs.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If recovery does not occur in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall where we have said that the malady is most present, a location between the ends of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and gently presses until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open it again with your hand; and since you must be on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of your fist, the length of which should be an arm, and their head at the back of the other fist precisely two fists long; and the distance between each fist should be a palm, and already there will be a trace in each fist where the flow returns, and every part is firmly pressed to the ground so that no more pain occurs.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And take another fist-sized round object on which the flow turns, and turn it in both directions between the two fists.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a trace where the object turns, the length of which is a palm where it turns; and in both other fists, they are similar to that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot at the point where their head is placed, and the ligaments you have tightened on their thighs at the turn which is opposite their legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor bend the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then, when the spine is returned to its place and the position is adjusted, cover it with a dry, clean bandage, and stop. Then place your hand over the bandage, starting from the table, where its width should be about three times or so the length of the affected area, and along the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then, using the treatment we have mentioned, observe the patient's condition and provide them with subtle, nutritious food until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered orally for a long time, as we have recommended; this can also be done by applying a thin layer of lead on that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And in some cases, there occurs an urgency in the rear of the spinal bones, and it is separated due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should already consider as imminently dangerous because it will cause great pain if this medicine is not promptly applied to it, for it can lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	**Capitol XXXI.**
De curacio de anca dislocada.	**On the Cure for a Dislocated Hip.**
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be displaced so much, and this only happens to those whose other joints experience minor dislocation and curvature.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is displaced in four ways: when it is displaced inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most often displaced in the joints inside, and less frequently in the front or rear joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of dislocation in the inner joints is this: when you straighten the patient's leg towards the healthy side, the diseased side becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the anus due to the pain. This is where the post-dislocated anus becomes cauterized from the heat, so that the head of the bone has already been affected here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs, whether inside or outside, is that the conditions of the disease are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of dislocation occurring in the front joints is that the patient extends their leg completely, but still feels pain on the affected side, and if they attempt to walk, it becomes difficult. Their urine is retained, and the anus becomes cauterized; they must lie on their side for healing.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of a dislocation in the rear parts is that it does not extend the pain, nor can it bend opposite to the bent knee, and the leg's position is shorter than the other, and the joint becomes soft, and the end of the limb points to that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction for this dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been reduced by itself or properly treated with rest and according to its position, then it is not in need of further treatment; thus, there is no need for any additional provision.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For those in which the dislocation is recent and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you must do as follows: return the joint to its place and extend it both inward and outward, and turn it to the right and left, so that it strongly returns and does not need other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Perhaps, if it does not return in this manner, you will need to prepare a strong assistant and extend the bed of the patient beyond them, or apply more bindings, or a linen which is tight over the pain, and another assistant extends their hand from that side so as to place their hands behind the patient's thighs; and another tightly binds the limb at its joint, and another minister holds the end of the binding.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if it is an extension of the patient or of the limb within the angle of the fork, or behind the back at the base of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these at once, so long as the patient's pain is elevated to their chest and hangs pendulously.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is specially important for all four (extremities).
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary for every kind of case to speak of its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the base of the fold in the area between the top of the hernia and the point where the pain begins; and finally, the ligament should be extended from the painful area to the highest part of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then, another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's thighs and press the swollen area of the affected thigh, extending outwards with great force, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type of treatment is for the more delicate cure, whereby this member is returned to its place, unlike other types of treatment.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If the patient cannot stand on their feet due to this type of treatment, then both feet of the patient must be tied together with a strong ligature, lighter than usual, on both legs and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each part should be such that it is four times the width of the other, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by a factor of two.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the leg, and placed in the lower part; and the length of it should be from the ground two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the hernia, and hang the other hernia from another young person, while the other young person gently pushes the hernia back into place with firm pressure, so that the joint returns to its location quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation from its normal position, it is necessary to keep the patient immobile on their side as we have recommended in the case of a dislocated joint; and tighten the ligament specifically around the injured thigh and on their chest.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then use two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and another on their head; and place a moist cloth around the middle of the thigh where the hernia is located to prevent damage while keeping the extension of the parts below from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each assistant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art (or skill).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	So, if you obey reversals, it will be very beneficial; otherwise, apply them diligently and as we have said regarding the reduction by engagement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	You should ensure that the patient lies on their back without movement.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is extended slightly, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then he tightens with his other hand, and by applying this pressure, he reduces the dislocation.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not extend the patient on the side, but elevate him above the ground; once you have established that he is resting on a hard surface, thus as we said about the position of the body when one joint is dislocated to the outside, and according to what we said about stretching the ligaments, there should be no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it should be administered compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, since you extend two thighs from the patient and when you see those folds and the hernia extrudes its thigh and you expand your excuse, then you know that the member according to need has returned — and now you arrange two things and place a bandage and pull out a bandage so that the opening is not worsened in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then carefully remove the ligature and the bandage, and compare one thigh to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those folds in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore release the patient.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softening, then return and bandage that, pull out that according to your initial stretch, and release it in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then gently pull it, causing the patient to walk slowly on some surface for a few days, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	**Chapter XXXII**
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	**On the Treatment of Dislocated Joints**
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	A dislocated joint can occur in three ways: when it is pushed out of place, when it is pulled inward, and when it moves to the side, but it is not dislocated when it is pushed forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of a dislocated joint is that you command the patient to apply pressure on the affected area; then you know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of dislocated joints is to cease the patient's pressure immediately, so that he extends his limb as much as possible; to hold his thigh against his chest, and to rest his foot between his legs; and then to press the dislocated joint firmly in your palm, and to interlock your fingers over the joint on both sides of the dislocation, and to stretch out your arm until the joint returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of recovery is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful position.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandage.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer plenty of extensions to the laments of which treatment of the mentioned hernia has been previously described.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Sometimes the ankle is remedied by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation is that the ankle swells proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the dislocation is with gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate movement of the muscles and bones, and then wrapped until it heals.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary to cease the pain immediately, and have a strong and able minister at the back of the body at the middle part of the dislocation.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should place your right hand on the top of the foot from the dominant side, and your left hand below the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left make two movements, then extend your left hand; push the foot of the patient towards the bed on the opposite side from the leg that is working.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And on the third movement, push the foot of the patient towards the bed, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if you return in one movement or two according to this manner, and turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that part.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If you are forbidden from reducing it in this manner that we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch out a hard piece of wood over their chest, and press between their thighs, and wrap them tightly with a cloth so that the hernia does not escape.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the practitioner should hold the patient's legs, and another minister should extend the foot along its toes or with the aid of a ligature placed on the collar of the foot; and he should stretch out each minister in opposition to the extension of his part, and the padding between the thighs of the patient should retain him, so that the matter of the hernia is not drawn into the folds left beyond its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	Then the physician should re-align the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the healthy thigh away from the affected side, so that the dislocation returns to its natural position.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is determined that the reduction is successful, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with ligament to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so that the ligament over it is not violent and damages those parts strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then place a poultice on it for two days or three; if the inflammation subsides, remove the poultice.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And on the third day or the fourth, remove the poultice; and forbid the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	If it becomes necessary to move the patient from that position, there is a risk that the dislocation will not heal properly and become corrupted, and this can prevent recovery.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms, then apply what we have mentioned about treatment and immersion in the place where it occurred, rather than other remedies, as long as it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the joints of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Know that one who is dislocated should be splinted to a certain extent for their treatment; and what is not difficult, it is quickly healed.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some sensitive part of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated either on a pillow or table, and keep it that way as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand by the foot, place your hand over what threatens the joints, and gently press the foot towards the affected area until it returns to its normal position, and you observe that it is splinted and does not appear in the prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then you place a board under the patient's foot that takes all the weight, which has two ends, and gently tighten the structure decently and firmly for three days; and afterwards, you remove it and make them rest from walking for several days, until they are completely healed and free from pain.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other injury.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occurs and you perceive yourself in the task of healing it and restoring it, you often end up succumbing to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, one should not presumptuously assume that anyone capable of healing is knowledgeable in the art, but rather those who have long studied it, with mercy and compassion; late, not hasty, and who use cautery only when necessary, leaving the judgment to divine will, unless one hopes for salvation from perdition and relief from suffering, and in whom there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore one should strive as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And when the member returns to its normal state, administer treatment with gentle care and cure the pain with moist poultices as appropriate for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	If a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in the joints where bones are separated, then you must drill through their statements and do as we have said for simple ailments of this kind that precede in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my prediction; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, maintain your glory, and heal your true body with those things at the right time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, ends the words of Albucasim perfectly, from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
