Since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, by completing it, its purpose will be accomplished in it, and by exposing it, and by declaring it, I see that I should complete this treatise for you, which deals with surgery, as part of my art.
For surgery has been abandoned in our region and in these times entirely, except by a few who greatly risk the science of it, and its tools are lost; not remaining from it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were changed and led to those errors and distress until their meanings were closed up and their force was weakened and the art.
And I see that I shall vivify this treatise in the manner of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of work, as by adding a description, and by preparing them, which is necessary.
Yet the reason why a good craftsman is not found with his art in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long, and that its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes Gaul until he knows the joints of the members and their forms; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, ligaments, and their number, and the origin of them; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
And by this it is said that "a word is a small thing", but more in the work of the hand.
But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not equipped that he does not fall into error by which many men are killed, as I have seen often, for some are trained in this science and withdraw from it and its experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck, causing much blood to flow until the woman fell dead among them.
And I saw another doctor who thought he would extract a stone from a man who was in his state, and the stone was large, and came to him and cut out that stone with a piece of the bladder, by which the man died on the third day.
And I already called to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient he knew that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a blacksmith who was owing him for a fracture in his leg; and prepared the doctor with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with tendons and nails with strong construction, and did not let air into the wound.
He dressed it according to his desires, and sewed it up, and let it heal for some days and commanded us to remove the bandages; and so it was until the leg became abscessed and ended in disaster.
And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandages, and achieved tranquility and relief of his pain.
But corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be stopped, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess cancerous, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the evil of it was magnified in its master.
The cause is because the cancerous growth is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not have to come upon it with all force, but be in a member that suffers from everything.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that surgery should be divided into two divisions: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is work associated with danger in greater conditions.
And I have already examined this in every part of this book where there is operation that contains error and fear; so it is necessary for you to guard this and let go of that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to deceive you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with goodwill and firmness.
And use the best way for the grace of God to achieve health and laudable success, and abandon the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and leave aside your weapons that make you afraid, so that testing in your faith and in your name does not deceive you: for more remains to your glory, and thus you will remain in the world and in eternity at your sanctities.
Gaul said in some of his lessons: "Do not treat bad sickness, for that way bad doctors do not become famous."
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
The text begins the division of the book, and it starts with the first part of the first division. The first chapter arranged concerning the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the treatments of cauterizations, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on abscesses and perforations, on boils, and on sores, and on the extraction of bladders and similar things for those conditions, all arranged and ordered concerning the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoring and dislocating, and treating twisting and similar conditions; the chapter arranged concerning the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
It is necessary for me to say the quality of the aids for that cauterization and the harm caused by it, and in what circumstances cauterization should be prohibited.
Thus I say that the speech about the quality of the aid for cauterization and its harm is long and detailed, subtle by knowledge, hidden, and many wise men have spoken about it, and there is disagreement among them, and only a little of their speeches concerns me, fearing length.
And thus I say that cauterization universally applies to all matter or with matter, except for two circumstances, which are circumstances without matter.
In the circumstance without matter and dry with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cauterization is beneficial in this case, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable in disease of a certain quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inconvenient to treat dry and cold diseases with something that is hot and dry.
And the one who says otherwise says that cauterization is useful in all dry and cold diseases that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the body of a man is moist.
And I say by the speech of this person, that I have already experimented this in some cases.
Nevertheless, it is not necessary for me to come again over what has already been proven and exercised in the chapter on cauterization by previous experience, and to know the diversity of human conditions and the disposition of diseases in their manifestations, and the causes of those diseases, and the accidents of them, and the space of time for those diseases.
Nevertheless, in other circumstances, there is no need for you to fear, and especially in cold and moist diseases, because all doctors are agreed on those, and they are not disagreed upon the aid with cauterization in those cases.
And know, sons, that the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and the goodness of it is for cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not spread beyond the member that is cauterized but causes only minor harm to adjacent members.
But the action of burning medicine spreads to adjacent members, and strong heat causes disease in a member that is hard to cure and quickly wastes it.
But fire, because of its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this (i.e., spread disease to adjacent members); and this is known by experiment and by long service in the study of art concerning the truth of the causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of speech, and if it were not forbidden in my book in this place, I would reveal secret hidden about fire and the operation of it in the body and its expulsion of diseases, with a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would serve to sharpen your thoughts.
Understand, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is appropriate to do cautery and they pause the best time of early spring.
However, it is said that cauterization can be done at any time, because the harm due to an accidental time is submerged in the advantage of doing cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary pain, which do not tolerate delay, since it is feared that malice, which is greater than minor harm, will come about through delay.
However, do not trust in your feet, or sons, for they do not esteem it except for the common people and foolish doctors, since the remedy for that illness which is cured by cauterization is not available at all times, and they delay that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think for that, because cauterization is not simply in a location of medicine that alters the complexion and dries the humidity which are the causes for pain.
Nevertheless, cauterization is used excessively due to the desire for the virtue and greatness of its operation and the power of its lord.
It is possible that the illness may return at some time during the course of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in its body due to the aggregation of superfluities within it, and what is obtained for it through its acquisition in food and similar things of those causes; however, the illness in which cauterization is administered should be a subtle illness in a part with few superfluities and humidity, such as cauterization of teeth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather something small occurs.
However, the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and this is correct, not according to what I understand in it, because I believe that it is not healing that improves with medicine nor with any other reason for cautionery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and my intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses, but rather when those medicines do not work, and at the end of the illness, a person administers cauterization, and it improves on that. Here is the corrected translation:
And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place of cauterization does not harm, because this is not absolutely true, for I have already proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than iron as they said; however, when you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, since it depends on the quantity that you want for the rugosity of the gold, and since it prepares to receive frost; and if you adjust it over the fire, gold melts due to the heat of the fire, and in the fire, some layers form so that the craftsman can catch it with the tool.
Therefore, when performing cauterization with iron, we must do it gently and then apply it correctly to the operation.
I have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have organized those of the head into the feet, therefore I relieve you from asking anything else about it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization affects the humidity and coldness in relation to the accompanying accident of which there are two causes, namely scalding and much flux rhinitis, called corrisa, from the head to the partings of the eyebrows and flowing ears, and much sleep, and toothache and guliar, and generally all illness that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, scalds and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with medicinal laxatives for three or four nights, according to the power of the illness and the age and habit of the person.
And you command him to shave his head with a razor, and then put the hair that falls out between your hands on a chair and place your hands over his feet.
And you pause your palm in the position of pressing down on the rash on the nose between his eyebrows. However, since the location you mentioned has been reached, mark that spot with a test, and then ignite the olive-oil cauterization, which is its form:
And you pause that over the spot marked with the test, in such a way that it descends, and your hand should be kept contracted slightly, and you turn it around.
And you lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that any amount of bone is exposed from the skull, such as the grain of an error, then raise your hand, and if your hand does not return to that iron, with another one, if it becomes cold, until you see the bone that I told you.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the area, let it stay there for three days.
Then place a plaster made of clay or dough over the burned area and let it stay there until the burn scar is destroyed. Then treat the painful area with a four-drug remedy until it is healed.
When the wound remains open, let it be treated with honey, as it is better and more beneficial.
They say that the hump should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should remain until some part of the hump's tissue is burnt away.
Then shave that which is attached to the bone, and let it heal.
They also say that with the cautery reaching the bone, it should cause strong pain until the bone is broken, and this is the method of amputation in small bones. It is believed that from that place, steam from the head will escape.
Keep the wound open for a long time, and let it heal until it is solidified.
I have not seen these two types of cauterization in all cases, but rather in certain men as a matter of fear; and you should abandon that, for it is better for health, when it is; because the head is more vulnerable due to the continuity of the situation, as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of frail nature.
The first type of cauterization is safer and better for you; and from that surgery, you should benefit in health.
Chapter Two.
On the cauterization of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient and uses drugs such as gears, cochias, capipurges, emplaustres, guatz, cadels, gualinas, and similar substances, and if it has already been cauterized with one cautery without any improvement in that condition, consider whether the patient's head is of strong creation in nature; and if it is not frail or weak, cauterize it again with another cautery a little later. Then cauterize it on the crown of the patient's head with a cautery until the hump is separated. Make an incision in the hump and remove the amount that has been calculated and cauterize it with a cautery on the back of the head at the location called "was" - and this is the location where the vent hole is placed. And loosen your hand in this, and do not expose the bone because the patient will experience a great deal of pain different from the pain caused by all other head cauterizations.
And they will say that this cauterization is in its place because the cautery used for the corners of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used for the middle part of the head; and this is the method.
Chapter Three.
On the Cauterization of Modern Migration (title)
When sharp pain occurs in the head or the neck swells and pain enters the throat, it should be treated with medications to alleviate the problem, followed by other treatments that I have previously described; however, none of this helps, then cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterization using a burning medicine or iron.
Moreover, when using a burning medicine, you will take an alum block, scrape it and remove its edges from both ends of the head. Then, make an incision in the temple where the pain is located with a thin lance, making sure that the skin is not visible from the outside until it is hidden.
Then press it down with a thin cloth and hold it in place for three hours; then remove the alum, leave the wound to heal for two or three days, and place a piece of oilcloth over the submerged area until the wound is dry.
Then cure it with a gargle until it heals.
And if you wish, do the same with some burning medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Furthermore, iron cauterization using this method involves heating the iron over fire for cauterizing as follows:
And it is called a cross clavicle because the shape of its head resembles that of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a slight prominence.
Place your hand over the painful area and hold it there to prevent the archery from being compressed; then turn the small iron gently but quickly.
And if the quantity that is pressed by the pressure of the codena becomes as hard as stone and raises, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being pressed, so that blood does not flow out.
Then immerse the affected area in salt water and place it there for three days, and then bandage it with linen cloth, and apply cure with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, cauterize the extremity of the ingrown toenail with a cautery as usual, but be careful not to cut the artery during this modern procedure.
Chapter Four.
On ancient cauterization of ingrown toenails.
When you cure ingrown toenails with the method described in the previous treatment, and the method mentioned in the division of diseases does not help, and when the method of the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery does not work, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery knife until it is glowing hot, since this means that it is applied to the area of pain with a line as thick as the tip of the finger, or whatever that may be; and after waiting for one day and strengthening it, press it into the artery and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to watch out for the continuation of the jaw, which can be harmful for chewing, and that the tendon is not pressed and the nerves that support it, and that it does not cause spasms.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that has been cut open, since in the cutting of it there is fear, especially to those who do not know what they are doing or lack knowledge and experience; leave the operation to them at the beginning.
And I come with the reminder of the regulation for blood flow accidents from the artery according to its method, in its appropriate place in this book.
And if this disease does not respond to the cautery and the patient is able to tolerate it, cauterize it in the appropriate location on the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on compression of the artery with two knives, as this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter Five.
On cauterization of ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to pressing and is cured with medicinal treatments and other methods mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then burn it with cauterization, which is called puncta, whose form is as follows:
Then apply the cauterization and guide it in the entire ear, like a wheel is rolled, or in the area around each sample if the pain is in one specific area. Hold the cauterization of the ear lobe gently, little by little, since you must try to locate the spot where it hurts.
And if many small points of cauterization are applied throughout the ear, and you locate them, then cure the areas until they heal.
Chapter Six.
On cauterization of turturr.
Turturr that is cured with cauterization is not due to the spices that come from flux, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the affected area when it comes from drying or from spasm of the nerve.
When treating that part that is affected by ulceration or inflammation and swelling, and you find no relief from your treatment, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one should be made at the aurelha's location, and the second one a small one on its temple, and the third one should join two labias.
And pause your cautery for the opposite side of the affected area, because softening does not occur except in the unaffected part.
The form of cauterization is to cauterize it on the side of the affected area opposite the ear-lobe, placing a small one above its tip, and another on the temple whose length should be in proportion to the length of the finger applied, and pause your hand with the cautery until the amount of the tissue of the wound is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is called "cutellary", whose shape is like a table. But it is also very subtle, so it needs to be sharpened occasionally to remove excess grooves.
And apply the dressing to the wound until it heals.
Chapter VII.
On the ancient method of cauterization for apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and treatment with what has been mentioned does not provide relief, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first on all corners of its head; secondly at the middle of its head, as previously stated; thirdly at the neck. The method for cauterization is performed as previously stated.
And it has already been cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; and this is later; let it heal with what you are processing (applying).
Chapter VIII.
On the ancient method of cauterization for forgetfulness caused by feebleness (dementia).
It is necessary to give the patient large and round pills, which help with softening at the beginning.
Then shave the head of the entire patient, and pause over its neck with a poultice made as described in the treatise on poultices.
Pause it for some days because this is the method of cauterization. And do as that remedy ordered, which has already been mentioned.
And if it cures well in this way, then do not perform cauterization; but if not, make three cauteries on the opposite side of its head, which should decrease from the highest part of its head to the lowest part of its neck. Pause between each cautery with the thickness of the finger and treat the cauterized area as previously described.
But if you want to increase the dose and the patient is tolerable, perform cauterization in the middle area; but if you want more of a dose, then cauterize it over both ears.
Treat the cauterized area until it heals; and let the olive-shaped cauteries be in the form given before.
Chapter IX.
On the ancient method of cauterization for parazoli (fractures) and softening of the entire body.
It is necessary to process softening for the head with poultices and what has been mentioned; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it at the middle of its head, on all corners of its head, on the back part of its neck, and three cauteries on the spinal column.
And if the disease of softening of the body is widespread and the patient is tolerable and the condition is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spine, and afterwards cauterize it deeper until the tissue is burned off moderately, and lift your hand. Treat the cauterized area until it heals; and let the olive-shaped cauteries be in the form given before.
Chapter X.
Treatment of epilepsy by cauterization.
The epilepsy is not to be cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by wind.
Therefore it is necessary to treat the brain of him at the beginning with warm applications and the other treatment which we have said in the division when the patient is strong and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, administer emetics and masticators that will clean the stomach, for several days, with good nutrition.
Then shave the head of the patient and cauterize that place with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery on the back of the head, and over each ear you should cauterize it. And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that place with cauterizations which have been said, in having paralyzing and softening effect on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use olive oil as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, pause the subtle cauterization according to this method.
Chapter XI.
Treatment of melancholy by cauterization.
When the causes of melancholy are rotten and corrupted moistures and gross wind, then cauterize that place with the cauterizations which we have said to have a paralyzing effect.
If the cause of melancholy is superfluity descending into melancholy and the body of the patient is wet, then give him to drink that which cleans the brain of him according to what has been said before in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a warm tortoise shell made in a suitable way over the forehead, and leave it there in the middle of the head.
The patient should be sixty years old, and held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment, it is more suitable for the ancient remedy of sheep. Heat that place over a fire with moderate heat, so that it does not suffer from excessive heat when it is placed there. Then apply it to the middle of the forehead in a circle, and let him rest until it becomes moist.
Do this to the patient every week once, with the other treatment for his good health until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to him, but always have a suitable cautery ready: this is a kind of cauterization that humidifies the brain in equal amounts.
Then apply it to that place covered with bindweed or nettles.
Chapter XII.
From cauterization of water descending in the vein.
When you have been informed of the onset of water in the vein by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink a medicine that clears their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
And make him bathe in warm water for several days.
And order him to urinate, and cauterize the area with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of jaundice in two veins, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of jaundice in one vein.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are covered by the bandage, and make the cauteries in that length near the temples.
And be careful of bleeding when you are cauterizing, and if you see blood flowing from it, stop it with some medicine, which is within your power.
I will come with knowledge concerning the extraction of arteries and the opening of those arteries, as well as precautions for bleeding.
Sometimes it is cauterized in the neck between two bones with two deep-seated cauterizations.
Chapter XIII.
When dealing with old tears (cauterization of old tears).
When tears in the veins and arteries that are evident on the head's surface have become chronic, and it is verified that this is excessive fluidity, then cauterize it with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter "Beginning of jaundice in veins," at the middle of the head and two cauteries near the temples, and two cauteries near the bones of the neck. And if it requires addition, then cauterize it along the entire length of the vein on the underside of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
When dealing with the smell of the nose (cauterization of nose smell).
When the medicine given does not work according to what I have said in the division, then you prepare yourself and give the patient three nights of cochias (a liquid or paste made from certain herbs) to drink; and shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil. And cauterize it with a clove cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows, just under the hair.
And be careful not to cut the artery while you do this.
The shape of the clove cautery is as follows:
Title. XV.
On cauterization for softening of the eyelids of the blind.
When the eyelid of the blind is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar-type cautery, and this is its shape:
And if you, cauterize that on both eyebrows a small one or two cauterizations all around the edges, and they should extend from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Title. XVI.
On cauterization of the eyelid of the blind when the hairs are turned into the inner parts and poke the eye.
When the hairs of the blind are turned into the inner parts so that they poke the eye, cauterize in those areas using two methods: cauterization can be done with fire or with medicine.
If the cauterization is done with fire, tell the patient to look away such that they pull their eyelashes out like those who clean them, until they are long enough and plucked; if it hurts, you must soothe the eyes with a bandage until the eyelashes grow back.
Once they are long enough and plucked, place the head of the patient on your lap, hold their eyelid open with your hand using a thumb sign as shown in the figure of a clover leaf, and begin the sign at the base of the eyelashes.
And place a hot cloth in alum powder or chicken mucus on the eye.
And bring the heated cautery of that shape.
And bring the cauterization slowly over the shape that was outlined, in small strokes, until the surface of the skin, similar to clover leaf, is completely burned.
The sign of the healing work is that you see the eyelid of the blind contracted and the eyelashes raised due to the poking of the eye.
And therefore lift that area and hold it for three days, and apply a hot cloth to it until the scar is raised. And cure that with warm water until it heals.
But if it returns because of the eyelashes some cause and the eyelid becomes soft again, then do another time the cauterization on that same area as before.
But if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it returns to its natural position, shrinks and the eyelashes no longer poke the eye.
But if the cauterization with medicine is used, tell the patient to pull their eyelashes out until they are long enough and plucked, and make a paper patch in the shape of a clover leaf.
And take known salt and fresh wine vinegar in equal parts. In other words, Or if it is that, mix those ingredients quickly and apply it with haste so that it is not dampened; expand it onto the paper that was made in the shape of a clover leaf, and place it over one or both eyes; hold down the eye with hot alum cloth, and let the patient's head be on your lap.
And pause the patient on the medicine and press it gently, and do not force it in until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is as in this manner like fire.
And when the patient feels the bite, then release the medicine and move it with your finger; therefore when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and consider if the eyelid has been raised as when it is washed, so that the contraction is done with fire or incision, for in this case it is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the spot where the medicine was not pressed, and do not damage it until the wound is closed and your operation is complete.
And pause at the spot where you are to sew until the abscess of the inflammation has been eliminated, and apply care to it with healing ointment or another treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary for you to perform your operation with diligent vigilance that the wound does not become infected by any residue of the medicine; and if the eyelid becomes softened and some hair falls into the wound, then repeat your medication on that spot where the eyelid was softened, and perform this in the same way as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
This is the method of extracting mastic.
Know that wounds in men are various according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this is performed your contraction.
And do not conceal the path of rectitude for him who has studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Eye Socket (Lacrimal Sac).
When you are treating a fistula as mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not provide treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to lower his head into your hand, and have another servant hold the patient's head in such a way that it is neither harmed nor shaken by the head.
Approach the spot with alum of hog or hen's glands on the wound.
And approach the fire, which has this shape for the cautery:
which is concave, like the shape of a reed or feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should be penetrating to the other end. And if you want, let it protrude in this way as it tries to.
However, the concave one is better for your work.
Approach the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it. And if it is not open, then you should open it and remove the purulent material from it.
Approach the cautery that is properly lit, and place your hand on it with a small amount, so that neither you nor the patient are disturbed; then pause the cautery in the corner of the wound and burn it.
And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it reaches the bone, that is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization once or twice, if necessary; and leave it in this condition for three days, and then approach the spot with stitching and cover it with a dry ointment until it is healed.
However, if it has passed more than ten days and is not healed, then pause on the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and shaved as necessary in its chapter.
And another method of cauterizing a fistula that some people used in the past: put your hand into the fistula and open it, then pause at the small fissure-like opening that is its shape; it should be the amount of an inch of lead melted down; hold your hand with a good grasp, and do not harm the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the wound of the patient. And it is necessary to pause over the wound of the patient with alum of hog or water, because lead adheres to the site of the fistula and cures it miraculously through healing.
And if the fistula is healed through the method of cauterization and treatment that we have described, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer traction from the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity in its appropriate location.
Chapter XVIII.
On Cauterization of the Cracks in the Feet (Cracked Heels).
Many times, cracks occur on the lips, and especially in children's lips.
Therefore, when you treat those wounds as we have told you in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form:
Then make the hollow of it according to the fineness of the knife.
Place that pointed instrument carefully into those wounds up until the cautery reaches the edge of the wounds.
Then heal it with wax up to where it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess appears on the uvula or in the palate or on the gums and a boil is formed, it should be broken, drained, and cauterized, but if the treatment does not improve, then you must ignite the cautery according to the size of the fistula, and apply the heated iron into the hole of the fistula. Put your hand inside until the heated iron reaches its end, and at the other end, perform this action once or twice; then heal it with what we have told you about treatment up to where it is healed.
And if the abscess heals and is cured, that's good; but if it does not, then it is necessary to expose the location and drill the rotten bone according to what will come up in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the abscesses.
When abscesses are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicine but do not improve, then place the patient's head on your lap, approach the affected tooth with the cautery tool in the form that will be needed, so that you can place a cloth over the tooth and insert the heated cautery tool quickly into it. Hold your hand a little ways inside until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times as desired.
And have the patient rinse his mouth with salty water and keep it for an hour, as the damaged tooth is sealed and the inflamed gum is strengthened, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by inflammation or worms, and does not improve with medicine, then cauterize it in two ways: either cauterize it with a cow's hoof (cauterizer) or cauterize it with fire.
Cauterizing with a cow's hoof involves taking a hoof from a cow, heating it in iron, and wrapping it in cotton and covering the end of the hoove with the bulbous part. Then apply it quickly to the painful tooth until it becomes inflamed.
And repeat the process several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the hoove mentioned above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place the heated iron on top of it until the iron reaches the bottom of the hollow of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire is that you should attend to the candelabra or iron, and there should be some grossness inside it so that the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then arrange the form of the hot iron and place it on the tooth, keep your hand inside until the iron cools down; do this a few times because the pain may last that day or the next.
And it is necessary to press the patient's mouth tightly with a good gag and hold it for an hour, then release it. This is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with whatever tool you have available to you.
Here is the shape of the candelabra:
Capital. xxii. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
On cauterizing hernias.
When hernias are caused by sharp objects and cold humors that do not respond to medications, and you wish to treat them gently, then use fire as follows: the shape of the cautery should be as shown below, with two handles at each end to hold it securely, and heat it at one end while the other end is cool; place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or repeat as necessary until it reaches the base of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days before applying it again to the same spot until whatever the fire has burned away has healed.
Cover it with oil, lint, and bandages until it is healed.
Capital. xxiii. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
On cauterizing wounds on the vocal cords and constriction of veins.
When moisture comes over the windpipe, and especially when this is accompanied by congestion, it is necessary that the patient should be evacuated at first with laxatives, and then you must cauterize the affected area using a red-hot iron.
Be careful not to burn the tongue with the iron or burn its skin excessively.
Cauterize the joint at the neck using another hot iron on the lower spine area. The form of the candelabra should be as follows:
Cover it with what was previously used until it is healed.
Capital. xxiv. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
On cauterizing lung disease and coughing.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture and the patient does not have a fever or chills, and the disease is chronic, you should cauterize it with two hot irons on the collarbone areas where the veins bulge, and with another iron in the middle of the chest between the nipples; both irons should be heated as described previously.
If you wish, your cauterization can be performed using the "puncta" iron, which is described in the treatment for ear pain.
Make points at those places, and cover it with whatever was previously used until it is healed.
The iron should have three prongs because cauterization involves performing three cauterizations as follows:
Capital. xxv. (It seems that this is a label or title, not part of the text itself)
On cauterizing ticks that are at the top of the helper.
If the top of the helper (the bone) is displaced due to slippery moisture and does not return to its original position when it should, you should reduce the displacement as soon as possible using a small movement so that it can be repositioned, as we have witnessed, at which point you must first carefully push the displaced area back into place; then turn the patient over onto their back or side, and lift the skin on the affected area from the inside to the outside using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the inside.
Approach the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
Approach the cautery such that it penetrates one head into another, and the figure of the cauterization will come afterwards from four cauteries.
And some observations are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cauteries (meaning the positions for the cautery are determined based on the count of eight, as there are eight cauteries).
Then pause over the cautery with salt, and then prepare to adhere the patient to tranquility, and let the limb not be harmed for any length of time until it is comforted (meaning apply salt on the cautery, prepare to secure the patient in a calm position, and allow the affected body part to recover before moving it again).
If the dislocation occurs above or below and it is treated in this way, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or a multi-pointed cautery because the joint is confirmed and moisture is expelled and the patient is healed (meaning if the dislocation happens either above or below, cauterization using a pointed or multiple-pointed cautery is used to confirm the affected area, expel excess moisture, and promote healing).
Capital 26 (meaning Chapter 26). Here's a simplified translation:
On stomach cauterization.
If inflammation and humidity gather in the stomach, causing it to swell excessively and multiply its size, and if you continue with the treatment without success, then the patient should be laid on their back, extend their arms and legs, and prepare for cauterization using three cauteries: one cautery under the feet for the thickness of a finger, a second cautery below the costal cartilage, until the triangular figure of cauterization appears; and elongate the cauteries that are not positioned to avoid causing burns.
And if the depth of the cauterization is two-thirds of the thickness of the abdomen (meaning the cautery should be positioned halfway through the abdomen).
And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery at the appropriate location in the stomach according to this form. This cautery should be shaped like a circle according to this form (meaning the cautery should be positioned in a circular shape according to the provided instructions).
And the stomach should be cauterized in points where it is frightened by this cautery: you shall make punctures on the stomach according to your will with tension, and then cauterize those points using a cautery; care for that area with the prescribed treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 27 (meaning Capital 27). Here's a simplified translation:
On cauterization of the inguinal hernia.
When inflammation in the abdomen occurs due to heat, humidity or excessive wind entering beyond its normal complexity, which is expelled by superfluous excretion and is treated as described earlier without any further action, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their back, and a woman tries three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity, placing them on the abdomen below the hypochondriac region, which will prevent the bed sores in males.
The space between each cauterization should be according to the size of it, and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press the cautery too much.
If the amount of the medicine is equal to the quantity of the amount of the patient's urine, and it is not too much or too little; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then sit them down, which has already opened their legs and raised their arms.
It is possible for you to apply these cauterizations with a cautery knife, if you have the skill and caution in the art.
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and make sure that the amount of medicine is sufficient for the entire body and enters the intestines, since the urine here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of the abscess in the abdomen with a cautery.
When an abscess or boil appears in the abdomen and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the abdomen or in the serous membrane of it, then if it is in the flesh of the abdomen, the patient will feel heavy and painful without any increase.
If it is in the serous membrane of the abdomen, and the pain is greatly increased and often tires out the doctors treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned onto their back; and a woman should try to find the location of the abscess; and ignite the cautery, which resembles thread, whose shape is described on the previous page. Cauterize it with that cautery until the entire abscess is burned up, until it reaches the skin, until the pus comes out.
And take care of the other abscesses until they are healed.
And do not use this cautery method if it is prolonged in the study of medicine and has been tried with many diseases; but rather experiment with this operation several times, but you should still be careful and follow what has been said, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On cauterization of ulcers.
The ancients applied cauterization to ulcers in the same way as they applied it to surgery, and this is what you should take from the long, dry burns of surgery, a long, sharp cautery that can be found, and of the appropriate size.
Then immerse that in oil and heat it up, and then cauterize the area between the neck and the collar with one large cautery, and two small cauterizations on each side of it, one slightly declining towards the part below the beard, and two on that which is declining between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, declining a little towards the back; and another in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three on the back; and one in the area between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the foot, after the cautery that is between the shoulders.
And do not press your hand with the cautery, but rather in the work of the body in plain sight.
And they used to say among the ancients that some men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite that one in the location which is between the ribs, until it reaches that spot near the abscess and drains pus, just as has been said in the abscess of the thigh.
In this perforation with cautery, there is no fear, for death often occurs in the location where there is a fistula that does not heal.
Chapter XXX.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When treating the disease of the spleen, as has been said in the treatment by division and you do not follow that treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are valid, of which one is that you make three or four rows according to the length of the spleen as in the figure of cauteries for the thigh, the figure of which has been preceded.
And between each cauterization there should be the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as that which has been said in the cautery for the thigh.
And do not press your hand with the cauterization; and let the patient be on his back.
And another method of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two prongs, which has been said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the spleen, causing it to move to the left side of the patient.
And your lifting should be such as to lift the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
And bring the two prongs together, ignite it immediately, in the place where they penetrate the cord of the other part.
And withdraw the cautery; and therefore four cauteries are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
And return the cautery after it has rested for several days, because it is more fitting that the previous causes in the treatment come first.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of edema.
Do not cauterize in edema, but in a blister specifically.
When treating edema with the methods of treatment that have been mentioned in the division and you do not follow your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, and another on the thigh, and another on the spleen, and two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right leg, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the cord.
And leave the cautery open to allow it to rest for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is necessary to join them together, and it should be hastened by aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be as shown previously, and it is that one with which the back is cauterized, according to its shape as previously described.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of feet and on other matters.
When the feet are abscessed with edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near the ankle, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and lift your hand, and do not turn it entirely, because the stagnant water drains.
The cautery is as follows: Two cauteries should be made on the two sides of the thighs, and in each thigh a cautery should be made with the tip of the cautery. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the thigh: one on the inside and the other in a lower position along the thigh; and over each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water drains from it.
And treat with those causes as has been said.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cauterization of belly-wounds.
When a belly-wound is caused by cold and humidity until the joints become relaxed, it is the virtue of digestion and retention, which are in the stomach and in the intestines, and it is cured with the methods of treatment mentioned earlier, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization exhibiting virtues, then cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries in the narrow navel circle, with a fine cautery; and with a cautery on the bladder over a large area, or with two cauterizations.
If you see excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area on the penis and hernias, and apply strong heat to the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for which there should be no mistake.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
If hemorrhoids in nature are caused by thick humors or corrupted moistures, and have been treated as mentioned earlier without success, then three cauterizations should be made over the left buttock, just below the two small hips and a small triangle, and with a cautery on top of the navel pierced through twice.
If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and their food is not rotten, and if the face has been purulent, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery over the liver, and another cautery over the spleen with a sharp point, and leave the cauteries in place for some time until he is cured.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
On the cauterization of an abscess near the ear: It is said that when an abscess appears near the ear, it should be incised with a sharp and pointed instrument, and then drained, as this will help the pus to escape. Then, a cautery should be applied over the area to burn the remaining tissue and prevent the abscess from returning.
When you incise the abscess, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. When you apply heat to the incised abscess, keep your hand over it until the cautery reaches the vein from which blood is flowing.
Do this once or twice, for if there are many abscesses, cauterize each of them as previously mentioned, and treat them with the remedies that help their healing until they are cured.
If you use a large cautery when cauterizing, it is more effective in healing.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
On the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the groin area: It is said that when fistulas occur in the groin, they should be cauterized with a sharp and pointed instrument, as this will help to stop the flow of pus and prevent the infection from spreading.
If nature does not obey the remedies recommended for it in its place, and if the patient is afraid of them, let him be cured with cauterization.
If there is an old fistula in nature that contains corrupt blood and moisture, and it is suitable to try to heal it with cauterization, then first clean the area with a thin probe and approximate the quantity of the depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Place the heated cautery on this fistula and according to the quantity it penetrates.
Repeat this process several times until the corrupt tissues are burned quickly one or two or three times, according to your necessity.
Be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, be careful with all those areas, and do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it does not penetrate deeply.
Treat the area until it is healed.
If the area is sealed and the matter within it has been removed and remains in that state for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
If the matter is not removed, then you should know that it has penetrated or is in the bone and is corrupt, or it will bring about reminiscence of those causes in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When in abscesses pain occurs due to inflammation or excessive swelling, and the patient's body is weakened, then it is necessary to cauterize that on each abscess with a hot iron over every abscess, using a cautery with a specific tip for each case.
And in a second step, apply cauterization gently, so that three lines of cauterization will be formed, and thus they will be more effective in treatment.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to inflammation and moisture, causing the patient to not be able to retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower area beneath the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with a hot iron on the right side, and on the left side as well.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the wound; cauterize that in the lower area below the pubic bone, or with two cauteries if necessary.
Make sure the cautery tip is appropriate for each case.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterization of the womb.
When the womb is affected by inflammation and moisture, abstinence is prohibited, menstruation becomes corrupted, provocation is delayed, and pain occurs. In such a case, it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauteries in the circumference of the navel, as described in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a hot iron on the area below the pubic bone, or with two cauteries, and ensure the cautery tip is appropriate.
Chapter XL.
On reduction of dislocated ankle.
When inflammation and swelling occur at the ankle joint, causing displacement of the joint, a sign of this is that the affected limb appears longer than the other when compared to it. And the location of the dislocation is found by pressing around it.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the ankle joint of him with a circular cautery, so that you will have guidance in the circle as it rotates, and thus the joint falls into the center of the circle.
And the cautery used in this procedure should have a similar shape to the one used for stomach cauterization.
If this cautery is not available, then cauterize that with three cauteries using an olive-shaped large cautery.
Make the cautery according to the size of the injury on the entire coccyx, and care for that which heals.
Chapter XLI.
On cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to inflammation and swelling, the patient is treated with the remedy mentioned earlier and nothing more, which is an old one. Therefore it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors using foul-smelling or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicine or cauterizing with fire.
According to two learned methods, one of which is that you cauterize that on the ankle bone of him with three triangular cauteries arranged as follows: ensure good depth. The spaces between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the finger, and whether the cautery is olive-shaped or large.
In some cases, cauterize on the middle of the ankle bone where there are four cauteries.
If desired, you may use the circular cautery whose shape is described in the reduction of dislocated ankle, which circles and burns the entire injury on the coccyx.
And this is the method of cauterization in sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the leg.
If it extends into the leg, then you cauterize that on the leg at the site where the pain is located; and one cautery on the hip for about a palm's distance along the fleshless area.
And if the cautery is a knife, then let its depth be according to the severity of the wound.
And if the patient's pain extends to the location of the said feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery having three or four points, or more if necessary.
And if the patient's pain is on one side of the body, then cauterize that area with a knife cautery.
Be careful during all cauterization that you do not burn nerves or large arteries, and that by doing so, you are not causing harm to the patient or contractions.
I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hammock (cavilha) and burned through in the cauterization, and the leg swelled up into a tumor before the skin was affected, and it was burnt, perforated, and corrupted throughout the foot. Apply great care in treating the abdomen, for it is close to death.
If the pain is in two separate parts, then cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise old men in the cauterization of many cauteries say this method: make a circle with iron, whose circumference should be the size of a palm; and let its holes be according to the thickness of an almond or a pea.
Inside that circle should be another third, and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be opened in two parts; and the length of those keys should be one or two knuckles, and make the edges of iron decoratively adorned on the circles; and this is its shape:
Approach the fire to ignite it before it glows and emits sparks, and approach it to be placed on the incision of the ankle, let the patient lie down on the bed. And therefore cauterize that with three cauteries at one time.
And allow it to rest for three days; apply ointment to it with stitches and leave the wound open for several days; and cure it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
"Son of Al-Zahrawi," he says: "We have rarely used this type of cauterization due to the fear of its appearance and because we have found few who observe it."
More of the soft cauteries should be applied to those who can tolerate them, and find the location for it.
More cauteries with medicinal substances are those that you should make in two circles, each pierced by a hole where the iron rod of the door hinge is placed; the depth of the wall on both sides should be two fingers or as many as necessary.
And if the space that is between each finger's width is open both above and below, and contains within it as follows:
And place it on the incision of the ankle, let the patient lie down on the bed, and press your hand over the incision of the ankle; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be with a small fire gradually, and hold it for the quantity of one hour, and make the patient bear the biting and tension of it  since that bite is like fire  until the pain stops.
And raise your hand with the instrument and rinse the hot water from the entire ankle with mild water.
And let it rest for three days and place it on the stitches until the blackness of the tension is gone, and let it rest for several days, and run the pus out of it; this is the best remedy.
And cure it with mouthwashes until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the chest, place it in a position that contains water as was done for the ankle.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications. Recipe for alkali and crushed charcoal from both ankle parts, mix them and apply them to a new wave where the incision on the top is perforated with a small hole, as much as needed to enter it.
Place it below the next wave and pour over it alkali and living charcoal with mild water that takes them up by about a finger, and then press them well with your hand for good compression, and let the hole through which the sharp water from the incision on top is passed into the next wave.
And adjust all the water, and pour over it more living charcoal and fresh alkali, for that will now have strong acute power, which is administered in many medical operations and cauterizations of other members, as this operation acts like fire.
And among the medications some of which are cauterized wide, such as tizizic and honey with camphor and charcoal mixed together.
And it is related from an ancient man about the operation and cure for pain in the ankle and sciatica, and it is truly great to be of that, and he says that no other treatment is necessary, and it is healed by one day as recommended, for it is easy for him with bathing and syrup from that.
And it should be pressed down firmly on a mustard plaster if no greenness is found; otherwise fig leaves should be taken and crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is located, or in the thigh or chest, and left to act.
And it should be left for three hours or as long as the patient tolerates the tension.
And immerse it in water and when the body of the patient is relaxed, let it dry on the sun, as the pain stops and it is healed.
And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medications, but rather the evacuation of the body.
Moreover, it is said by Hippocrates that when a vein in the lamb is cut, it is better to cauterize it; and the cautery should be done as follows: wool should be taken and steeped in old oil, and placed between the toes and the hollows of the foot.
And take dried lamb skin and inflame it with fire until it is charred; then place it on the wool and let it be absorbed. And repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
This method of cauterization is called cow cautery.
Chapter 42.
Of cauterization for pain in two places.
Some pains occur in two places due to various causes, such as by falling or hitting or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, by the influx of cold and moist matter.
Cauterization should not be done except in this specific case which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, evacuation of the patient should be performed with soft pills and similar ones, which are applied on both sides where the pain is located three finger widths apart according to its latitude, provided that cauterization or more is attempted in each line if there is a sign of improvement.
The cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medium-sized nail in the following manner:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
In many cases this disease strikes small children; and the sign of its beginning in infants is that their structure bends back and their head rises and moves.
And the vertebra at the lower end of the spine and the back of the neck begin to rise above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, cauterize that area with a circular cautery as follows: that the cautery should be applied all around the spine completely.
And if you want, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery of two or three fingers. The points should be evenly spaced between them.
And take care of the area until it is healed as I have said.
Moreover, be careful that cauterization should not be administered in jaundice caused by a nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And since gout caused by coldness is treated with the method of treatment and the pain is not completely cured, then cauterize again.
And it is that you cauterize around the ankle joint with many cauteries in the following manner:
The olive-shaped cautery should be as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain moves into the toes or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize it over each toe with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
If you find that more cauteries are necessary, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, only place the tip of the cone.
If the pain moves into the toe and the big toe, then administer the cautery as I have said in its own chapter.
If the pain is only in the toes and it is called sciatica, then pierce around the nail holes as follows, pierce on those two lines.
And if the pain remains in those places, then pierce around the nail holes on each toe and at the base of the thumb.
If the pain moves towards other days towards the hips or the muscles, then cauterize them all around using the appropriate tools.
Do not evacuate the patient with good diet and medicine reception, because if good diet and treatment are followed and this cauterization is performed, God help.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization for fractures.
When a rupture occurs in the inguinal area and hernias appear before the scrotum at the genitalia, then it is necessary to make the patient fast on his own day and use soft foods so that the opening of his stomach closes.
And follow the patient with your hands on his sides, and order him to keep his legs inside until he is discharged or the hernia or intestine appears.
And return it to its place with your hands on the sides and try to locate the rupture on the bones of the pelvis using as a sign the extreme end which is similar in shape to the diameter of the circles at the upper parts of the body.
Approach the cautery, which has this shape:
Bring the roasted hot iron glowing and glistening. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that spot with your hand, and when you have found the bone of the pentenilh within the patient's body, move the cautery along that bone towards the middle of the thigh; if you have not reached the bone in the first observation, do so again in another observation.
Observe wisely the position of the intestine during the time of your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine, causing death or other great harm to the patient.
Know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not perform your operation.
The cautery for children must be delicate in proportion to their size and age.
Care for the cauterized area for three days with sutures until the scar of the fire has healed.
Care for it also with other ointments until it is healed.
The patient should remain lying on their back for forty days, until the area and wound are sealed.
Food should be withheld from the patient according to the length of their treatment time, and the intestine must not come out under the effort to heal.
When it is time for the patient to be raised after forty days, administer proper nourishment and care them for another forty days.
Let the patient rest and have a diet of less work, food, and drink, and avoid any violent movements, for when they follow this treatment completely, they will be healed.
Here is the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, do not stop the treatment, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let it heal as the third part of the body does; care for it as we have said before, but be careful not to press too hard.
Some people originally stated that a triangular cautery should be used for the rupture in this manner as follows:
The line is drawn across the width and above the rupture, and another line is made above it; then place your hand with a sharp pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterizing twisting (torsion).
When a person experiences pain in some limbs due to an injury or impact and the pain persists for a long time without responding to medication, it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
The cautery should be of the right size and shape according to the size, nature, and location of the affected limb or organ, as well as its twisting and pain level.
If the first cauterization heals, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the cauterization on it; for it is customary for such pains to be located near the affected limb or organ, so it is necessary to find and cauterize those areas until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On cauterizing leprosy.
Leprosy of certain types can sometimes be treated with cautionery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by decay from fevers and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common or curable according to what has been said in the division, and do not proceed if it is not present, or if there is a risk that corruption will spread throughout the patient's entire body and all their organs; then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one at the midpoint of the head, and the second below it, with the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And lastly, apply your hand to the cautery a little inside it before it grasps a small impression on the bone, and thus the sores shall be displaced, allowing the expulsion of thick vapors to be alleviated from there; and cauterize over the swelling as required.
If leprosy has spread over the patient and is manifest, then it is necessary that you cauterize with those cauteries that were mentioned earlier; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, on both cheeks, on two shoulders, on two spine joints of the neck, on six spine joints of the back, on a large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, on both ankles, one on each ankle, on both elbows, one on each elbow, on both wrists, and one on each wrist, on both knees, and one on each knee, on both hips, on both thigh muscles, and on both calves; and cauterize over all the joints of the hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on the fingernails of their hands.
And be careful with the nerves that are over the foot, not to burn those.
Some swellings are cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and another on the stomach opening, and others on the liver.
You know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as a woman does not, for the body of the patient is already numb.
It is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the instruments.
Apply the cautery with a mixture of eggs, flour, honey, and the other remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When a member is stiffened or asleep and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but not healed, then you cauterize that stiffened member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the incision a little. Apply it with a cure until it is healed.
Some swellings are cauterized with certain stupors that tend to the hands and feet, the spine joints of the back, and alleviate the pain of the nerves that afflict that member, and the stupor is relieved.
Do not presume this, but only he who knows the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire body moving them.
Chapter 49.
On the Cauterization of abscesses that are morphic.
When an abscess is old and does not conform to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize it with a preheated cautery, a little according to the size of the incision until the white and color of it are relieved and its color is changed.
Approach the treatment of that with a mixture of barley and lentils, oil infused with roses, fennel leaves, and either pigeon blood or yolk, each part separately mixed and all blended together, then limit a cloth over the area until it is healed.
In this section of the treatise, the author provides guidelines for treating gout in the feet. He suggests using a cauterizing iron to make small incisions on the surface of the foot if necessary. The text also describes a method for reducing a hernia by returning the affected organ to its proper cavity and placing a hand over the area to prevent it from protruding again. The author further instructs the attendant servants to position themselves around the patient, with one supporting each leg, another holding their hands, and yet another providing support under the patient's chest.
Treatise on Cauterizing Crabs.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around the area as it rotates.
The wise have said that it should be cauterized with the latest cautery in the middle area; however, I do not agree because I fear that it may become an ulcer, and I myself have seen this happen several times.
It is therefore more fitting to cauterize it around the area with a circular cautery as we have mentioned, or with scissors.
Chapter II.
Treatise on Cauterizing Abscesses.
If an abscess is delayed in maturation, this can be due to excessive fluid or the patient's condition, as they may be old and weak or have little blood, or due to the time of year, and you wish to speed up the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with scissors, making small punctures; and apply leeches to that area so that it matures faster.
However, if you wish to perform the perforation with a cautery, then heat up the cautery and form it into this shape: and immerse it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the cavity.
And if the cautery is applied in that location which is further away, to relieve the body of the arm; then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
Treatise on Cauterizing Corrosive Wounds.
Corrosion is corruption that walks through members, which corrodes in the same way that dry wood burns in a fire.
If you see that the corrosion is in a place where cautery with fire is appropriate, then heat the iron cautery a few small and large pieces as needed for the location where the corrosion is present.
Then, cauterize the entire area extending as far as you eradicate all of the corrosion and there remains no cause for it.
Leave it alone for three days, and rest on the cauterized spots soaked with oil mixed into it until all scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
Cure that one with a poultice made from fresh meat.
If fresh meat grows healthy in three days without corruption, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization over what is damaged in the corrupted areas.
Corrosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine because it falls in between cauterization and surgery. However, fire-cauterization is of little help for the most part.
And as I have said, the acute medicine treatment is for the division (amputation), so take it when you need it.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization of nails and similar things.
Motas veguadas: Pay close attention to the parts of the feet afflicted with what is called a claw, and it is large, open, which presses on the foot; and cauterize in these areas using two methods, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with hot water.
However, cauterization with fire is that you heat the concave iron tongs resembling a pen handle, made from iron of suitable size to treat the entire nail, and have thin edges.
Then rest the heated iron on the nail and then rotate your hand with the tongs around the nail until the iron reaches the depth of the nail. Leave it alone for three days before blisters start forming. Then apply the plaster with wild mustard leaves mixed with salt and leave it on for one night because it will be eradicated from its roots.
Treat the affected area with meat poultice until it is healed.
If it doesn't improve and there are recurrences on the surface of the body, particularly in the limbs and feet, you must administer cauterization with hot water, taking a copper or iron instrument or a pen handle, placing it on the nail; then pour a little hot water into the cup, keep your hand, and rotate it around the nail using compression from your entire hand, pressing the edge of the cup against the root of the nail, causing the hot water to flow along the root of the hole; wait for an hour for the patient to feel the pain caused by the hot water, then remove it because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And in this way, treat them all in turn until you have treated all of the affected parts throughout the body.
And treat those pus that result from eradicating the roots of nails with meat poultice.
Chapter 34.
On cauterization for tremors.
When there is tremor due to irritation of the nerve, fever caused by irritation, or some similar cause, you must cauterize it with four cauterizations or more on the spinal vertebrae, between each vertebra with one cautery; in the feet, and above the stomach, use olive oil.
And the tremor will subside and hasten the healing of the underlying disease.
Chapter 15 (or, in Roman numerals, Capitol. XV)
On the cauterization of abscesses accidentally occurring on the body.
When abscesses and pustules are accidentally produced on the body, and they are made of coarse and corrupted matter; at the beginning when it appears, it should be cauterized over the entire cavity of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood or a long-handled razor, the tip of which is extended with fire, or a lingual cautery.
And in some cases the cauterization should be applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method, and it is not trustworthy, and the superfluous matter is broken up as a result of which it heals from there.
But it is necessary that this be done with appropriate evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 65 (or, in Roman numerals, Capitol. LXV)
On the cauterization of bleeding caused by accidental cuts from arrows.
In some cases the bleeding from an arrow wound that is incised should be stopped by covering the wound, or by making a wound of counter-incision or cauterization of the limb, and in such cases it remains difficult to stop the bleeding.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, you should press your hand on the opening of the arrow wound and hold it until the bleeding stops, and until the blood has ceased to flow, do not lift your hand from there lest it starts flowing again.
And you should hold the olive oil cauteries few and large (in number) over them until they are hot.
And take from them (the olive oil cauteries) a small or large one according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein you should hastily apply it so that you have stopped the bleeding, and cauterize it until the blood has been drained and constricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you stop the bleeding and remove the cautery, then take another cautery cautiously among those that are prepared in fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood has been constricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here present, and do not harm the patient with some other evil.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in such cases, especially if the artery is large. However, in four ways, one can stop the bleeding: either by cauterization as previously stated, or by extraction when it is not extracted (in which case the extremities are burned and the blood is constricted), or by ligating with thread or a strong bandage, or by placing them on medicines whose virtue is to constrict the blood; they should be strengthened with pulley and compression.
But that which provides appropriate constriction with thread and bandages or by position of causes that burn and of similar nature should not be trusted alone.
But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present or medicine, then you should apply pressure as indicated on the wound of that vein as previously stated, and understand the great care required until the blood has stopped flowing from the superior part of the wound, and no bleeding should occur over the arrow; and on the arrow it should be sprinkled with hot water of great heat until the blood congeals and thickens; but in cases where cauterization or medicine is necessary.
On incisions, punctures, ulcers, phlebotomy and wounds and their similar conditions.
We have already said in the first chapter on all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and medicine burns, and their occurrences and causes, and the instruments necessary for this in each case, as well as the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the head to the feet.
And in this chapter I will proceed according to that method so that the one who seeks this may be helped; therefore, I will describe what should be done in such cases.
And before I begin this, I command, my son, that you learn that in this chapter it is about terrors such as those in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because it is necessary to be very careful in this operation, which involves evacuation that can lead to blood, and which threatens life, you must first apply the pressure of the vein or an incision on the abscess or opening of the wound, or making an excision or purification of the wound, or extraction of arrowhead or incision in stone (and similar conditions). And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and the most dangerous among them is death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you when there is a dilemma, for in some cases you must act like men with many diseases. And among them there is one who goes away with his disease and is easily prone to death, because of the severity of what he finds in his disease, and because of the length of his illness, and because of the fear that is associated with certain diseases (which mean death).
Of those who give you their trust and speak to you, you hope for his recovery, but his sickness is harmful.
Therefore, you must not agree with one who comes to you in such a manner; be cautious more than greedy and not presumptuous about any cause except for certain knowledge that proves what is necessary for you, and to which good outcome is attributed.
Use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication of where healing is turned, for in that lies help for you in acquisition of fame, memory, praise and glory.
Oh sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not lead or protect you, for that is in His hand.
And I have organized this chapter according to the previous chapter on cauteries, regarding the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved in what you seek and require concerning it.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Know that this sickness often appears in infants and their cradle must be shaken and when the nurse tightens the head of the infant with her hands.
And sometimes it occurs because of a hidden cause which is unknown.
I do not see this sickness in anyone except infants; and all those that I have seen it afflicted upon, I consider them lost, and as such I have found this work to be disastrous for them.
I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and his head was so swollen that it could not be reduced by any means because of the size of his head, and moreover the moisture increased until the body went cold.
And this moisture is either added between the skull and bone or added below the bones on the suture.
For the operation in this case, if the moisture is between the skull and bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in its width, and the length of the fissure should be two fingers' breadth before it runs, and this is the shape of a spatula.
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
If the moisture is below the bones, then it is indicated that you see the joints of the head opened from all sides and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand inside the joints and this is not hidden from you. It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
Extract all the moisture; strengthen the incisions with strips and feathers; bind it with wool and oil for five days, then loosen the bandage and cure the wound with salves and ointments, and keep the head in balance; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision, which you consider appropriate according to the size of the abscess and collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repletion of water appears, and do so as is most convenient for you.
Also observe that you do not incise the artery and the flow of blood escapes, causing the death of the patient by the flow of blood with evacuation of moisture.
Third Chapter.
When a cataract or ulcer occurs in the eyes or foot and this is ancient, and it does not respond to medical treatment, then the last remedy in this case is incision of those two arteries.
And therefore when you wish to incise those arteries in the head of the patient, and you press the area with a rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and keep the neck of the patient straight with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulsates; and the places of each on the opposite sides of where the auricles are located, and these are hidden in some men.
Also press the artery with a probe and incise each one with a sharp spatula that enters into the bone, and let this be the width of the head.
If you wish, place the spatula below the artery and break it at the incisions above.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers' breadth, for when any vein is incised the blood is discharged with pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear on the pressing, then it is necessary that you measure from the auricle the width of three fingers, and press with a probe, and do so in the bone.
And the amount of blood to be drawn is one pint. And do not draw more or less of it, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the repletion of the artery from him.
Approach the wound, and since it remains over the bone any cause of suppuration, then incise it to prevent purulent cautery.
Approach the wound with lint and cotton cloth, and apply care to it within until it is healed.
Chapter .iii.
On the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
When an old or new ulcerated sore occurs due to acidic humidity and qualities in the temples, or a sudden and vehement sore similar to those, and it is treated with methods of medical cure but does not improve, then we have recourse to this illness, the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his hair in the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple as it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in a few people due to coldness.
And if it is hidden, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and apply heat to the area with a rough cloth or boil the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly. Then you take the spatula, which has this form: And approach the artery with the spatula until you reach it; and press down on one side and extract it from the upper parts until you extract it from the spine and uncover it from its sheath, from all sides.
However, if the artery is fine, you will envelop it with the index finger's tip, and then make an incision from one side according to the length by which the extremities are shortened and tightened, and there will be no blood flow, because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise.
And evacuate the blood from it with a vacuum pump. To three (This line seems to be indicating a number of steps or repetitions in the procedure)
If the artery is large, you should tie it in two places with strong thread or cord, and not allow decay before the wound heals and ensure blood flow.
And make an incision in the excess tissue between the two layers, and do so at that time or another.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife before making the incisions in the extremities, and leave the site of that work alone.
And it is better work if the patient has a fever or a hot complication, because cauterization is of those causes that aid in drying the humidity, and therefore it is better to use it as a supplement.
And it is necessary to approach the extraction of arteries that the place of the old wound be cleaned thoroughly, and place powder on it properly made, and apply dry medicine to make the flesh swell and warm until it is healed.
And if during another observation blood flow from the artery occurs during the procedure, then you should try to stop the blood, either with a cauterizer or by filling the wound, and tighten your hand until the blood stops flowing. And if any of those causes are not present, you should place a hot compress over the site until the blood clots, and seal the site with hot water of intense heat until the inflammation subsides, and tighten as necessary.
And what is easier in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery made of two blades, since you have marked both places and wait for each one, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it can be elongated between the extremities, because it is not consolidated by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cauterizer:
The thickness of both blades should be equal. However, if the thickness of both blades is less than two, it is better, because if they are sharp like two knives close together, they will not cut through the flesh quickly.
Therefore, because there is some coarseness in those, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut easily.
And this procedure is better than any other and easier.
And the space between the two blades should be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Chapter fourth.
On the treatment of chests with acute and acidulous ulcers from cold.
When there are acidic ulcers and they are in the chest over the neck of the head, and no cause for improvement in them is found with any medicine, and at times the face of the patient turns red and walks as if it were ants walking on it, and the sores of this are extended, humidified until their hair falls out, and their parotids are scaled by the acidity of the tears, the ancient agro mesties used to treat these with this operation, and I call that cure a spassa.
You command the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead and make three incisions, equally spaced along the length of the forehead. If the length of each incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids, which are on the eyelid, and the third on the other side.
Be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. If the space of each incision is adjusted to three fingers width.
And if you have a sponge soaked in vinegar or dry towels ready, use them to stop the bleeding.
Then insert two pointed instruments into the incision, of which one has this shape: which is from the division of the temple to the second incision. Remove all the cartilage that is between two incisions and remove the bone chip that is on top of the bone, then proceed from the mid-incision to the second incision. Then straighten the first instrument and insert another tool called scissors, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
Stop the sides of that sharp tool at the cartilage and follow the bone, then push it all the way through to reach the mid-incision, and separate all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Continue the incision as long as it appears that you reach the cartilage, and then proceed from the mid-incision to the other incision.
And when the blood flow is sufficient, press the places of the blood clots with a compress.
Then pause in each incision for a short time, and press on the powder in vinegar and oil and vinegar mixture, making sure it does not turn into an abscess.
On the third day remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm water or tea, and treat it with basilica oil and other remedies until the sores are healed.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of abscesses by cupping and from heels descending from the divisions inside the head.
When someone has a painful and continuous abscess and the patient's heels are swollen and weak, and their eyelids ulcerated and their hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the front of the head with subsequent extension, then you should know that the substances and cupping do not come from any other veins but those of the divisions inside.
The best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave his forehead, and then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, small in length (and starts from the left temple to the right temple; and it should be an incision through the bone; and extend your hand from the eyelids of the temples which are painful due to massage), until the bone is exposed.
Remove all the blood with a sponge or dry towel and then fill between the two lips of the incision with cotton or dry towels. Then press on it with powder in vinegar and oil to prevent an abscess from forming.
When you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has decreased, it is then necessary to cut the bone starting from where there is no flesh, and treat it with an extract of darnel root which will help the flesh to heal, as if you took two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mixed them together, and made a paste that should be applied to these sores at the base of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what occurs in the ears.
All causes that occur in the ears belong to one of four species, either mineral or resembling minerals such as iron and glass, or from plants such as wax or beans, or fluid such as water, vinegar and their likes, or some animal.
Therefore, when mineral matter or something similar to it enters the ear, and the ear stops functioning, close the ear to the ground, and if you see the mineral, distill it using some volatile oil or camphor, and administer the extraction, make the patient sneeze with appropriate conditions, and apply camphor to the nose for the occurrence of sneezing. Then cover the area around the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear to its sides, since many times this is forgotten due to these causes.
If it is not addressed, administer the extraction with the instrument called gystic spicula, of which this is the form:
If it is forgotten with gystic spicula, that's good; if not, administer the extraction with an implement of little duplication (i.e., a thin cannula).
Therefore, if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of iron and insert the tip of the cannula into the ear canal and close the exterior of the cannula with wax and soft oil to prevent the cannula from being opened except for it. Then draw out the air with strong suction, as many times as you have realized (i.e., noted).
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, take alum powder or prepared with vinegar, and place a small quantity of it at the end of the cannula, and cover that area decently with it. Then insert it gently into the ear canal and extract the ear from moisture.
Therefore, if it is not forgotten with all the causes you have noted, you should be careful when cutting the skin that forms an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting it is that you first draw blood from the saphenous vein and extract it according to its virtue, and then place the wax between your hands and turn the ear to its sides, and make a small incision in the ear canal to release the pus in the area most pressing. And the incision should be of lunar shape to reach the mineral, and when the mineral is removed, close that opening with appropriate instruments; and sew up the incision at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that grows and swells, administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if you do not observe this carefully, take thin spittle according to this form: and apply the abscission of that fat which is swollen in the ear.
Do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and leave it in several pieces, and extract it from there with scissors or gystic spicula, or by abscission as mentioned above, since the extraction is alleviated.
But in water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze with appropriate conditions at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cloth, and massage over the affected ear where the water is located, and if this is forgotten, it's okay; but if not, take many thin needles and leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of these into the canal of his ear and sneeze on a stone of that side and strike another needle against the needle inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop this with mineral until all the water has been removed.
Therefore, do not stop this with mineral until all the water has been removed. And once the water is removed, take paper or cotton to dry it. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end toward the fire until it is burned as much as possible.
And you place a cloth and another one on top, and do this several times until all the water is expelled, and then strain that with a straw as was said before about the stone remover.
Furthermore, when extracting an animal, if it is a small object, proceed as previously said; but if it is of large size and causes swelling in the neck, then administer the extraction using the methods and instruments mentioned earlier, and this will make it easier to remove than all other causes that may occur during the extraction.
Furthermore, when extracting worms generated in the ear, if you have used the method and ingredients mentioned earlier and your treatment does not work, then you must observe the ear at the sun.
And if any cause of worms appears here, then you extract it using methods or subtle instruments; but if no cause is found, then take a narrow tube from below and a wide one above, as follows in form: Insert the narrow end of the tube into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if no improvement is observed in the patient, you seal and close the opening of the tube with wax as previously said; you administer distillations that have been used by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and observe it in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion, with which you infuse the medical oils into the ear using this instrument, is as follows in form: Make it of silver or brass, narrow below, with a small hole and flat above.
And let it be such that the stopper for the tube is in the concavity of the conical tube, where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it appropriately around the end of it; then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any medicine of your choice into the tube (which is in the ear), and then insert the reed with appropriate force and squeeze it gently until the oil is expelled in the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
The oil that will be infused into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire. Ensure that the cause you are going to distill in the ear is not too cold, because the medicines of the ear do not tolerate it.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of inflammation of the ears.
Some young children suffer from inflammation of the stomachs of their mothers that are not perforated, and this happens in some men, inflammation in the tissue of the ear due to a blow or rotten flesh there; and this inflammation sometimes occurs at the front part of the hole of the ear that does not heal, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
And that which happens at the front part of the hole that does not heal is in the greatest state of difficult healing.
And in that which heals, it is necessary to place the ear of the patient in the sun and observe it there. And if inflammation heals up, open it with a thin spatula, whose form is as follows:
If the end of it (the ear) is narrow, with one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be twice as wide to avoid damaging the ear.
And if the inflammation is due to rotten flesh in the ear or in the tissue of it, then you remove it with subtle instruments and make a deep incision until all the flesh is removed.
If inflammation is at the front part of the ear, you take a thin reed and warm it slightly with fire, then insert it gently into the tissue of the ear.
And if you feel inflammation with what the patient complains about due to pain, relieve the pressure by making an incision with ease; and ensure that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
You place a linen cloth on the ear according to the size of the hole that you have covered with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take any herb and soak it in water and grind it into powder, then apply it to the same place; and if you see the ear already dressed, you must remove it and replace it with another that you will cover with a cork made with olive oil, until the abscess is cauterized.
But if there is bleeding, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillations.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of athazel which affects the eyes.
Athazil, which sometimes affects the eyelids of humans and is moist at some times, dry at others.
Therefore, you should have them held open or bound with some sort of binding, and cut off the eyelashes at their roots, and place something over the area as described below.
But if pain with bleeding occurs, then you should cauterize the eyelid with a subtle cautery.
And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wounds heal completely when there remains no cause for their recurrence; and when they are cauterized with fire, the eyelashes are burned up and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of swelling that occurs on human eyelids.
When swelling that occurs on the eyelids of humans is caused by some factor similar in nature to swelling but more intense and lasting, it is called "mota."
Addition of thick moisture in the upper and lower parts of the eyelid.
Therefore, the procedure in this case is to determine if the swelling is coming from some foreign object that is harmful all around it; and the cause of this is light.
Therefore, make an incision along the length of the foreign object, and remove it completely with ease, and then suspend it with some sort of binding and cut off its root.
And if the shape is large, adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it heals.
If it is small, then there will be no harm to you as the anguent of the foreign object restores and absorbs it.
If the swelling is receding towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should clean the inner surface of the eyelid, then pull back the eyelid and suspend the swelling with some sort of binding, as you may need to make an incision. If the incision along the eyelid is long, this may indicate some underlying cause.
Make the incision, clean the wound with salt water; and care for the area until it heals.
Chapter 10.
To ask for care in the eyelid above the eyebrow.
Asking for the treatment of a growth that arises in the eyelid above the eyebrow, especially in children, which worsens their ulcers and aggravates their cataracts; and they cannot see the light of the sun due to tears being produced there.
Therefore, those growths often lie on the cheeks all the time and on the cheeks when sleeping; and the lower eyelids are usually wet, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the imminence of inflammation is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, the inflammation enters there.
Some method of operation is in that where the patient lies his head on your lap, and places a cloth over it and you apply heat, and make a circle according to the size that contains arsenic from all parts, and place that on top of it and press with your fingers all around so that inflammation is collected in the middle of the circle, and open a hole in the middle of that wetness with a spatula entering through the slit, but the slit should not be larger than the one made during lancing.
However, in the opening, it is necessary that you cut through the skin completely to reach arsenic, because in the most severe cases, arsenic is processed through a slit in the form of white chalk.
Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the edges and twist between the right and left hand until it is separated.
And be careful not to push too hard on the slit, so that with the spatula you do not touch the eye and damage it.
However, if the arsenic does not appear at the beginning of the slit, but you press in the slit a little and facilitate processing arsenic; and then extract it as previously stated; and submerge cloths from it in water and vinegar, place them over the area and strain them with sand.
And there is also salt that you place in the concavity of the slit to remove any remaining moisture from it.
And heal it with care until it is healed.
However, if an abscess appears at the site of the cauterized wound, treat it with plasters made from cedar until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On ways to examine the eye.
When ulcers of the eyes are caused by excessive pressure on the natural eyelashes and are chronic, it is necessary to examine them and find ways to treat diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids, which may cause destruction of the eye that is called tactinir del huel, and treatment is carried out in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with an acute medicine as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done tactinir per incisione e sutura; or with cannulas as I will say.
Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye towards your left hand, and if it is turned, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the one in which there is no division below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through it, and this should be - near the edge of the eyelid where the lashes are - near the lashes, and pull the thread from above with the eyelid, and turn it towards the nose.
And open the division inside the eyelid below the pressed lashes with a spatula entering from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal; and extract the thread and place it under the eyelid with small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with tweezers as in the figure of a mirror leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because it varies in men, as there are those who require a large incision in the eyelid according to the degree by which the eyelid is softened.
And open with the spatula on both lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal. And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes as is the thickness of a king's finger.
And place the scissors in one of the two angles of the skin, and excise it entirely, and suture the two lips with surgical thread or fine wool, and remove the blood, and let any excess threads adhere to both eyebrows with some glue if you want to do so, but if not, don't care.
And remove the stitches from the threads in three or four days and treat it.
And if you want, leave the wound without stitching, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and the addition of oil; but stitching is better, and therefore ancient practitioners prefer it.
However, if there is a need to examine the patient, it is a good action, and there is no fear.
This is another method of examination, and it is by marking the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then lifting the eyelid with three separated and joined needles according to this shape:
If it is not possible to use needles, then take a needle with thread and insert the thread in the middle of the figure, and pierce the upper eyelid near the larger lacrimal duct, and near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the threads equally and lift your hand with this elevation, raise the entire membrane on which it is marked as we have recommended.
Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for the inside so that it heals.
If an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, and treat the abscess with cautery and lancing, and drain it.
Some times the eyelash hairs are converted into the eyelid, so you must use for this what I have said of incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some cases.
Anoint the reed in this manner: You will transform the eyelid and cut the figure within it according to what I have described, and then carefully insert two reeds or thin sticks of a length equal to that of the eyelid and narrower than the space between them. You have made an incision at the ends of each divided part, where you have the threads.
Apply each thread with subtlety under the excess of the upper eyelid, and hold the reeds of each divided part tightly, and leave it for several days, as the membrane will die from the constriction and become denuded and eventually fall off by itself and be absorbed into the body.
If it is delayed, then break the thread with forceps, and care for the wound until it heals.
So when the membrane is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not penetrate.
And this is the form of two reeds that you will make as follows: and have the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On lifting hairs that penetrate the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are non-natural, hard, sharp and penetrate the eyelid, perform the operation in such a manner that you take a fine needle, pause it in a fine cedar or lemon beech wood, and ensure that you adjust the ends carefully and not harm them in any subtle way. The length of the threads should be equal to the width of a palm.
And prepare another fine thread quickly nearby, and use the ends of it if you wish.
Place the patient's head in your lap and position it towards the sun so that your work is visible, as this is a subtle and delicate operation.
Insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair that requires pressure, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
Pull the hair out and insert it in the incision, and let there be one or two or three hairs but not more.
Pull your hand out with the hair until it is outside the eyelid, and remove it from the incision with the natural hair.
If the incision is closed and the hair is not yet outside the eyelid, you will pull the incision to the divided part nearby with the thread that you have prepared, until the incision is opened from above.
And observe it with the view of the eyelid, as you will pull out the incision and the thread, and grind each tooth and clamp the eyelid, and leave the clamps for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it on good flesh.
If the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer natural hair and lift it up with it, or let it remain until it grows to an appropriate distance, and you lift it.
Chapter 13.
Of the treatment of this excoriation that appears on the upper eyelid.
When the eyelid is excoriated and it contracts when closed on one side, whether due to poor healing of a wound or cut or burn, and it is called leprosy, and this excoriation may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of a wound or cut or burn, or similar to their misfortune.
The method of the operation in that area is to cut through the consolidated tissue and separate the lips of it, place a piece of linen cloth on it, and bind them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use cure for the causes that dry it out or compress it; because if you do this, excoriation will return even worse and there will be no healing at all.
Use for that cause those things that soften it, such as fennel, and soak it with a solution of its seeds and root, or gum arabic, which should be melted with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it and heal with it.
The secret of your cure is that you perform everything without any consolidation, as it was at the beginning.
This operation that we have said is nothing but a correction of excoriation that does not restore the shape of the area as it was before.
Chapter 14.
Of the treatment of excoriation that appears on the lower eyelid.
This excoriation that appears on the lower eyelid, which is truly called excoriation; and it may be natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by a wound or cut or burn or others similar to them.
The method of the operation in that area is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And stretch the skin at the upper edges with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and incise it widely with a blunt instrument. And therefore, if the shape of the eyelid is restored as it should be, good; otherwise, take the edge and place it in the split shape, and with that convert the lower eyelid, and open the two fissures on the sides of the lower eyelid.
And the two extremities of the two fissures should be at two angles of the incision that you have made until they meet, and their angle formed there should be a figure of them when they come together.
And this figure is the Greek letter L: Lambda.
And place the skin in that area for the width of the sharp edge below it, which is the thickness of the eyelid.
And adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread, and heal those areas with what was said of the softening agents and plasters until it is healed.
And if excoriation occurs due to a split or stitch or burn, it is necessary that you make a flat incision on the hairs of the eyelid as described before. And separate with a plaster between two lips as described before.
In summary of the sermon on the treatment of excoriation whether it is above or below, the operation should be carried out according to the shape of the excoriation, which is in various forms of spots.
And the skillful craftsman always prepares means in every method that is possible to return the shape to its natural form or as close as possible, and the patient according to the operation and the instruments in the greatest discretion.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion between the eyelid and the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, that the eyelid is adhered to the conjunctiva or cornea and it is hindered by the ease of movement and natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you intervene at the outer edge of the lower eyelid, lift it upwards, or stretch it with oil.
And you incise the adhesion with a blunt instrument, which is not as sharp as the incisions, having a rounded tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the instrument without hurting the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it excoriates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And place salt water in the eye to rinse it, or distill it in rosewater dissolved in water.
Approach separating between the eyelid and the cheek with a spatula of warm water, place on the cheek a cloth infused in alum solution, and use a third day for consolidative causes until it is healed.
This seems to be the title or section number, but without additional context, it's impossible to provide an accurate translation. The number "xvi" appears to be Roman numerals, suggesting that this text may come from a European origin. However, without further information, I can't be certain.
On the incision of the nail and on the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the nail can occur in two ways: either it is nerve-like, hard and delicate; or it is non-nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture, which when struck, if it is hollow inside, immediately absorbs oil, becomes separated, and the oil is not inserted into it.
And both species do not begin until the tear duct extends beyond the large one, which gradually covers vision and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
However, the method of working on it is that the patient bends their head towards you, and you open the eyelids, raise the upper eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with oil of moderate thickness and extend it to the corners above. Approach taking a needle and pierce the skin of a cow or bull or ox, or something similar, or strong iron, or duplicate the tip of the needle slightly, and insert it into the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, hold the nail firmly; extend it to the corners above, excavate the skin around the base of the nail which seals the pupil. And in this way, you follow it with the skin to the back of it.
Approach you incise the remnant of the tear duct at its root with a scalpel or small scissors, and cut the natural tissue of the tear duct to prevent continuous flow of tears.
In some cases, the nail with its sole extended or strong may be like this, as we have said, and it should be excised with a lion's claw, which is the shape of it:
Be careful that with the scalpel you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause a rupture, and ensure that the pupil is pierced.
Approach the incision in the eyelid with a little bit of salt ground or lime made from sandalwood, let it sit for one day, and care for it with water until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle into it, or it is not filled with oil, then this type of nail is cured with medicine, and healed in this way as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you open the eyelid of the patient and take a scalpel lion with fine sharpness according to this form: refinement (or subtlety) And if it is rarefied and condensed and used in that remedy, then distill it from your own hour into the head oil made of sinander or rose oil or salted oil, and apply it to the other day.
Then you repeat the operation on it until everything that is in it has been removed, unless the counter-abscess forms in the oil, in which case you let it go, and at first you treat the abscess until it is healed.
Then repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The discharge of the eyelid flesh, if observed to be of great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and cut it from one side, and do not finish the incision so that you do not cause a flow of tears.
Then distill in the rose oil and sinander oil into the eyelid for as long as it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of hernia and what is born from skin growing into the oil.
Sometimes in the eyelid oil of axes, skin grows red and covers the pupil or is close to or extends beyond the eyelids and presses the eyelids at the sides and resembles a rosebud on a balcony railing.
However, the operation on it is that the patient lies down his head in your lap; and open the eyelids of that one and collect all that skin with convenient hooks or tweezers; and then incise the skin at the beginning until everything is finished with scissors, and be careful not to cut the oil that you must keep for your operation.
Make the incision with which you cut that one or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors according to what form comes close to this chapter.
Therefore when your incision is complete and all that skin is removed, fill the oil with salted oil or distill into it red powder similar to the powders of corrosive medicines, and place a piece of raw egg white over the oil until it is assured that there is no counter-abscess.
And if there remains some cause of hernia and the abscess is filled with pus and you fear an abscess counteracting it, then let go the oil and treat that abscess with whatever can dissolve it; and then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and similarly do with the skin growing into the oil of this type.
However, you must be sure to avoid all care of the oil free by natural means or by accident, act with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Chapter XIX.
Knowledge of red veins which are hard on the oil and prevent clothing from being worn, and loosen the oil for days.
Therefore it is necessary at first that you consider whether the oil in which knowledge is present is strong and there is no other illness except knowledge; if so, you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to lie down his head in your lap and suspend those veins with a hook or two according to your discretion, and that hook should be of double refinement like this:
or two hooks gradually on one body like this:
And those veins, which are sometimes fine and subtle, should be gathered together, with subtlety, and the blood withdrawn little by little until you see the veins to have receded and become slack.
And be careful not to injure the body at the end of the operation; if your action is before midday and firm in your actions, do not cut anything but the veins.
And when you have finished, then distill over the wound with green or red vinegar to burn away what has been left of the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that time, then collect all that pain subsides and apply something that relieves the pain of it, and leave it for several days until the pain is soothed and assured that it has become an abscess safely.
Then repeat the procedure as needed until it is healed.
And this is the form of forceps:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of a hernia at the nose.
When you treat a hernia with cautery or acute medicine as mentioned above and it is not healed, do not try to manipulate it, but rather cut through the abscess matured, extract all the moisture that is within it, and dig down until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
And it is called a sharp-edged head, and it should be made of iron or wood, and the head should be rounded like a pea that has been pierced through with a drill or alum pierced subtly (like this example below).
Place the sharp-edged instrument on the corrupted part of the bone and rotate it between your fingers and press gently until you know that the corruption has been shaved off.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and strengthening agents.
If the area is consolidated and good flesh grows back and the body separates from the wound and remains for forty days without being renewed, an abscess does not form, and there is no recurrence of the problem, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, do not try to manipulate it, but rather reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should make an incision with scissors or acute medicine, and when the bone is exposed, take three pieces according to this shape:
The end of the iron should be triangular and its shaft narrowed to the tip as sometimes it is shaped like this.
Place the iron on the bone, which is the lacrimal; and extend your hand a little beyond the wound, and rotate your hand with the three pieces until they penetrate through the entire bone, and the patient feels the air come out as their hand releases it.
Therefore, restore the area with drying and strengthening agents such as they have been prescribed.
Therefore, when the flesh and area has hardened, return the material that flowed out at the sides to the nose, so it is easy for the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the protrusion of the skull.
When the skull protrudes completely and there is no harmful swelling or decrease, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then place a warm cloth over their neck without incision and draw out pus by good suction; and apply liniment on the bulge made of catachrone, aloe, cedar oil, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the padding on the skull with little powder.
And the method of the powders is to take lion's wool, and each piece should be folded into four layers; and make powder from it.
Place one layer on top of the other according to the amount that the skull needs. And strengthen them with durable cloth and firm binding; repeat the suction without incision; and close the swellings and tighten the skull during the day and night.
But if the ligament becomes softened in between, it is necessary to be firm.
And close the ligament during the day and night as we said before.
If you see that the hernia has already been reduced, it is good, otherwise, repeat the plaster with powders and constriction and fumigation until it is healed.
This seems to be a heading or title for a section in the text. It's difficult to provide an exact translation without more context, but "Capitol" is likely the Latin word for chapter, so this could mean Chapter XXI (the twenty-first chapter) in English.
This line appears to be a heading or title for a section in the text as well, and it seems to be written in a language that is similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translation of "De la inscizio" from Italian or Spanish would be "Of the incision" in English, and "de la" means "of the" in both French and Spanish. "eminencia de la tunica uvea" can be translated as "prominence of the uveal tunica" in English. It's possible that this section is about making an incision on the prominence of the uveal tunica, but without more context it's difficult to say for certain.
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes out through the eyelids like a grain of sand, and you wish to make an incision, then the procedure is as follows: you introduce the needle into the edge of the uvea from below where it was divided above, and bring another needle up through the tear duct. Then insert the first needle again in its position; and cut the place where the double thread intersects and lift off the part of the uvea around the needle, and hold that spot firmly.
Then remove the needle and wait for the woolen thread soaked in oil of alum to pass through the eye and reach the suture.
Then treat the wound with something that helps it heal until the injury is healed.
Sometimes, a large protrusion is gathered together with a circle of cloth around the wound and then perforated with a thin spatula at its base, allowing the moisture to reach the white part of the eye, and causing the protrusion to descend quickly.
Then hold firmly until it is healed.
This seems to be a heading or title for a new section in the text. The number "xxii" suggests that this could be Chapter XXII (the twenty-second chapter) in English. However, without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what topic this new section is about.
This line appears to be a heading or title for a section in the text, and "De" is likely the Latin word for "of" or "about." "alconati" does not appear to be a recognizable term in any of the Romance languages (Latin, Italian, Spanish, French) that the original text seems to be based on. However, "alcone" is an Italian word meaning "eyelid," so it's possible that this section is about treating some kind of condition or injury related to the eyelid. Without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what this section is about.
This condition called "alconati" is not simply watery discharge from the eye, but rather something different.
The method of working on it is to have the patient place their head directly and steadily on a pillow, and then grasp their head with both hands and press gently until you see the discharge come out from the affected area. Then, let it dry without descending, and keep the eyes open, so that the patient can see the causes as they did before.
And if it does not descend, you should know that it is watery discharge.
However, if the descent of the discharge is not prepared as described earlier, then have the patient press between your hands and take a thin spatula, hold it over the white part of the eye (the pannicol) surrounding a small area of the conjunctiva near the cornea in the crown (at the location where it emerges), until the discharge is expelled.
Once the discharge is expelled, you should then distill water that has been infused with oil or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
Then treat the other causes until it is healed.
This seems to be a heading or title for a new section in the text. The number "xxii" suggests that this could be Chapter XXII (the twenty-second chapter) in English. However, without more context, it's difficult to say for certain what topic this new section is about.
Treatment of water descending from the head.
We have already said the specifics about the water in the division and what must be pierced according to the sermon declaring it, then you should choose the appropriate one according to health.
Then you should secure the patient between your hands on a chair and hold their head tightly.
And place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected eye, if the eye from which the water is coming is the left one; or with your right hand, if it is the right one.
And with your right hand take a lancet, if the affected eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
And place the point of the lancet near the crown for the thickness of the eye's white in the eyelid above the lower eyelash, and then press down on the lancet with your thumb.
And pierce the white part of the eye and feel that the lancet has penetrated due to blood flowing out.
The length of the path of the lancet to the puncture should be measured from the pupil to the end of the iris, and that is the crown of the eye; for you will see the iris with the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
Place the lancet into the area where the water is present and then press down on it once, so if the water flows out immediately, you should inform the patient to open their eyes immediately and let the water flow out of their eye.
And then wait for a while; if the water has flowed out, you should wait a little longer to make sure that no more water flows out.
When it is dry and no more water flows out, you should extract the lancet with ease, then gently press on the area with your hand a little at a time, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gemma into the water and use that to wash the eye inside; and then apply an external ointment or stopper or infused wool in oil roseate and albumen of egg white and ligua over the affected eye.
But we and those who are from our time apply a compress with albumen of egg to that eye.
And if you find it difficult to insert the lancet into the eye due to its hardness - for some people's eyes are very hard -, then you should take some sputum, which is called "alberid", and this is its shape:
Therefore pierce that conjunctiva and do not injure your hand in the process, and it is not necessary to make a large incision.
And then insert the lancet as previously instructed.
You must complete the treatment, prepare a comfortable sleeping area for the patient where they can sleep on their back in a dark room and prohibit any movements.
Wait for nature to take its course, and do not turn the patient's head to either the right or left side at any time.
Let the patient rest according to their disposition for at least three days.
And then move the patient to that dark room and remove the bandage from their eye, and have them look at various objects, and return them to rest on the seventh day.
It is not necessary to perform this procedure during curative hours or immediately after infusion. You must remove this because it can easily escape due to its great and violent movement.
If an abscess occurs, it is necessary to loosen the skin around it within seven days and correct the abscess with the same water that caused it.
Then you clean the wound and place a plaster on its oral surface to guide the healing of the wound for several days, as long as it exists in the most dark place.
And gradually direct it away from that place and investigate its causes.
Know that in alcohol you are not excused from the disciple seeing it several times, and then you must be daring with the operation.
And we have now learned of one of those who are called The Alchemist, and one said that he made fire in the Airy Magdame pierced with which water is drawn off.
However, we have not seen this in our land who has perfected it, nor has water been read about in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of magical seeds for which he who knows not these can use them:
They are made of herbs or iron specifically, and they are the extensions of them with this subtle triangular subtleness, the pointed end being in the shape of this.
Chapter 24.
On the healing of dead flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse fleshes some of which have a cause similar to the scorpion with many legs, or to the polyps feet; and this illness is called "polyp" because it resembles that foot represented. And from there is cancerous flesh, leprous, of dark color; and it is that which is called the lion's flesh, not dark.
Therefore, in those who do not have fraudulent or cancerous lion flesh, it is necessary to make the patient seize it with his hands and place it in the sun, break the nose open, and pick at the lions' flesh where it is found. Then remove that from the surrounding areas, and then incise what you have captured of it with a sharp subtle spatula between the parts where you know all the flesh has been removed; because if any cause remains for which abscission is possible, then you scrape it with one of the subtle tools until no cause remains. However, if it is lorded by pus or an abscess occurs, you must stop it; or if they are malignant abscesses, you must cut and cauterize it until it is abscised and all the cavities are left open.
And place salt or vinegar and water in the nose near the incision. However, if the nose is opened and moisture enters the palate, then you know that it has been cured.
However, if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you know that inside there is dead flesh in the puss sores of the nose to which abscission has not occurred.
Therefore, you must insert a file into it with some thickness, and use many nutz (small files), and pause between each nutz the amount of the finger or the thumb, and guide the patient and insert one end of the file into the nose with the ray or with another means that is possible.
And because this will be done, that you attract its smell to the channels of the nose until it reaches the back of the throat, which many observations show resembles this action by children in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
And pause the two extensions of the file, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a meat saw with the files on the file itself, and do this until you know that the flesh is at the file's teeth.
And remove the file, and pause in the nose near the drainage of pus a cup, and do this for three days or more until the pus that was left from the flesh is corroded.
And in the end, pause in the nose with a lead pipe for several days until it is cured.
However, if there is no cure, use it (the procedure).
And this is the form of the instrument for making capilla purge maker with which essences and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And do it with silver or herbs, which is similar to a small open lamp or little conch, and the metal is similar.
And if you want to, make a closed cannula like a cane, and the cannula of the capilla purge maker should be flat, open; with which you have when you suck out oil or any liquid that you want from the juices and causes.
Chapter XXV.
On the boils at the extremities of the nose.
Boils that are observed at the extremities of the nose and swell in some days to a considerable size before they burst, need to be treated according to the regulations specified for them.
And for this reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and let it drain completely. Then place a cushion or apply a hot iron or medicine to burn the area.
If the incision is delayed until it swells, consider if it has hardened, darkened and lost sensation, do not touch it with iron as it may be a cancerous abscess; for boils that hide such an abscess can cause great harm to the person who has it.
If the abscess is tender and not dark, and incision is possible everywhere, you should drain the pus from the patient and make the incision without fear, cure the area with what drains out and apply pressure until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suture of the nose and lips and ear lobes when the continuity is broken by ulceration or similar conditions.
Know that when the continuity is broken in one of these cartilages, the operation should not be performed unless in some men.
Therefore, when there is any reason for that, consider if it is a fresh ulcer with its own pus, and you should align the two lips of the wound with suture and place your hand over it until it heals.
And if the lips of broken continuity are already separated and each is healed, you must cauterize each part of its incision with pus until it comes out. Then you should align the two lips with suture and tie them, sprinkle pus from dragon's blood and let it dry on the plaster of dayfinicon or any other consolidating plaster, leave it for two or three days, remove it and replace it with another plaster until the sores are healed, and care for it with mouthwash until it is healed.
However, the method of suture is to attach the broken continuity with sutures or needles as in abdominal suturing, or attach it with adhesive as you have learned.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in the incisions inside.
Boils that occur in men in the incisions of their lips are caused by hard abscesses resembling pimples, and some of them are smaller and others larger.
Therefore, you must stretch the lips and incisions of each of them completely, place the abscess with dry sage powder until the pus is reduced, and wash it with vinegar and care for the area with astringent water until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of incision of the tight flesh attached to the gums.
Every now and then press on the tight flesh attached to the gum, which the ancients called albulus, so you must hang it up or tie it with a thread and incise it as necessary, and let the blood flow or lance it.
Then place a cushion over the site to be incised or another styptic powder or cauterizing agent.
If the flesh returns, incise it again secondarily and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return again.
Chapter XXIX.
For the reason of tooth extraction.
When on the surface of the teeth from the inner side and from the outer side and between the gums are attached sharp, jagged, or blackened roots that are yellowish or greenish and because the gum is corrupted and the teeth are loose.
Therefore, it is necessary that you hold the patient's head with your hands and raise his chin, extract the teeth where these sharpnesses and causes similar to sand appear, until there remains no cause for them, and do with the root and the yellowish and greenish discoloration and others until they are purified.
If what is at the beginning of the procedure remains, that's good; if not, you must repeat the procedure on another day and the second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
Know that teeth have various types of pliers of different shapes and figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the pliers used to extract the tooth from the inner side are different from the pliers used to remove the tooth between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of pliers should be prepared, which you will see soon:
Chapter XXX.
Tooth extraction.
It is necessary to take care of the tooth from its pain with all caution and delay in total tooth extraction because there is no substitute for the waiting time when it is extracted, because it is a subtle substance that excuses itself during the tooth extraction.
But when the patient is full of pain in that tooth, it is necessary for you to be absolutely certain which tooth is painful, because many times the pain deceives the patient and leads him to believe that a healthy tooth is causing pain, and you extract the former and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, because we have seen this in barber surgery.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and if you know it well, it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with spatula in which there may be some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of all sides, and apply warm it to the area or fine-tipped forceps gradually until it becomes soft.
And apply some oil or an ointment of strong consistency or structure to the area with forceps of good quality and hold the patient's head between your knees so that he does not move, and apply pressure on the tooth in the correct position, taking care not to break it and not to cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if the instrument is not forgotten, take one of them and put it there with ease and force until it is removed as in the beginning.
But if the tooth is fractured or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap the fracture with cloth and tighten it with a fine thread at the end so as not to break it during your compression on it.
It is necessary to work carefully with incision in the entire circumference of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not break and remains divided, and return over the patient because the pain may be greater than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity during the tooth extraction, because they do not administer what we have recommended; because many times they bring upon sick men great pains that are difficult to treat, and all the roots of the teeth remain, or some of them remain, or extract it with bones from the jaw as many times we have testified.
And before tooth extraction, wash the mouth with water or vinegar with salt.
And if there is a flow of blood from this area, as often happens, throw some vinegar on it and if it does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The form of the forceps should be long-handled and fine-tipped at the start, long in length, short in handle, and thick, so that they are not bent when working with them.
And should be such that the handles are sometimes thick until when they are narrowed, they are not bent, and they are short in length.
They should be made of iron from India and straight in length, and in the tips of these there are teeth that interlock and tighten strongly when pulled, and sometimes the tips of these are shaped like the beak of a heron (or stork) called ciconia, which has a strong constriction.
Capital. XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of broken bones in the jaws.
When the removal of a tooth that is broken remains for some reason, you must stop at the site and bind it with lint or tweezers similar to the beak of a heron (or stork) called ciconia or gawain, the form of the forceps:
The tips of these are made like a file or pliers.
And if you do not obey with these forceps or tweezers, you must cauterize the root and remove all the flesh, inserting the tool called atali, which is a small lever with this shape:
And it should be short in length with a large thick end, not bent to prevent breaking.
Thus if the root is forgotten, it will be fine; otherwise, help yourself with other instruments whose forms are as follows: The first instrument has a triangular tip with some thickness:
The form of the third instrument should be that it has a triangular tip and is very thin.
And now you are helped by this instrument, which has two arms whose form is as follows: And other instruments which I shall mention for tooth-shaving; for it is also done with this instrument that resembles a large claw, and this is its form:
the triangle-shaped twisted or short blunt tip, which should have some thickness, and not be too narrow to avoid splitting.
Also know that the tools for teeth movement are similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle craftsman himself determines, according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; because for those diseases that ancient practitioners would not have mentioned or paused over, they had no special instruments due to their diverse forms.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are split, or if they swell, place a hot poultice on it in its place with whatever is appropriate for the purpose from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and assist with this gesture which has the following form:
And it should be gradually made smaller, and kept in the mouth to prevent it from swelling or escaping until the entire bone is healed; then restore the area with appropriate medications.
But if there is a small purulence in the bone, cut out that pus and its blackness, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the care of teeth protuberances above the others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural shape, the form is unlawful, and more so in women, and especially in virginal women; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and cannot be sutured or lined with ointment, root it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument of the following shape; similar to a pig's tusk, made from Indian steel of sharp edge.
Make your cut with the following shape in several days according to the hardness of the tooth, and avoid cutting any other teeth.
And if a tooth protrudes excessively due to wearing down, grind it with an Indian steel file of the following shape:
It should be entirely made of Indian steel and the handle should be rounded; it should have several small pointed tips like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be ground gently for several days to prevent damage to other teeth and gums. Then straighten it at the end, and cut it with other scissors.
And if part of a tooth is split and the tongue touches it, you must grind it down to where the sharp edge of that fragment remains covered and sutured, and fill it in to prevent the tongue from getting hurt or the word from being spoiled.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with a gold or silver filigree.
When teeth are damaged due to shock and removal by striking or hunting, and the patient cannot chew food, and you have treated it with stiffening medications but your treatment has not worked, then in order not to let them spoil, strengthen them with a gold filigree and not silver, because silver turns green and becomes porous after several days, while gold does not change over time.
The filigree should be made with the appropriate thickness and fineness such that it can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the filigree and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and let it grow with one or several twists between the damaged teeth, until the wire reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Apply the filling to the damaged area where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is healed.
Your string should be used to tighten the filigree of the roots of the teeth that have not fallen out.
Cut off the excess filigree with forceps or pliers, and add them in each place with gestures, and turn and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to hurt the tongue. Loosen it gently as if unthreading a Roman thread.
But if it loosens or breaks, strengthen it with another filigree in all circumstances.
This is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown in various examples:
When a tooth or teeth are removed and their roots are returned to their original location and they grow again as we have recommended, and new teeth sprout.
Only skilled and wise craftsmen should do this.
Sometimes a cow's bone can be used for some reason of the teeth, and it is made in the shape of a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
On the incision of the ligament that appears in the tongue, which prevents speech.
This ligament that appears occasionally on the tongue, sometimes naturally, or which a person does not have by birth, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already been consolidated.
And the procedure is that you open the mouth of the patient and their head is on your lap; raise their tongue, and approximately incise the ligament nerve as far as the tongue's base is free from its recent congestion.
But if there is some hardness or knot there, and it is fixed due to injury consolidation, then you pour oil and cut it as far as the ligament has been incised and the knot has been loosened.
And be careful not to make a gap in the skin of the incision and to cut through only the arch and bring out blood flow.
And let it be washed with water, vinegar or cold water to rinse the incision site; and then place a clean cloth under the tongue, as this is the part of the body that the patient should keep moist at all times so that it does not consolidate again.
But if there is blood flow, place a piece of cotton soaked in vinegar; but if the bleeding stops, then cauterize the area with a cautery that is suitable for this purpose. And apply the appropriate remedies to heal it (the ligament).
Chapter 35.
On the removal of a salmon-like swelling under the tongue.
Occasionally, a painful swelling resembling a mole appears under the tongue, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and in severe cases, it swells so much that the mouth is filled.
And the procedure is to open the mouth of the patient facing downward and examine the mole.
And if you see a dark-colored or black, hard mole that the patient does not feel, do not touch it as it is cancerous.
If it has a whitish appearance with moisture, you pour oil on it, and then incise it with a thin spatula from all sides; if bleeding occurs during the operation, place cotton soaked in vinegar over it until the bleeding stops.
And return to your work once you have treated it with the appropriate remedies, until it is cleaned with vinegar and salt; heal it with other treatments suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the removal of moles with two ears (pedunculated moles) and those that are not attached to the urethra and other moles.
When there is a swelling in the scrotum filled with fluid (hydrocele), they are gland-like structures that can appear on the outside and are called pedunculated moles; when you treat them as mentioned in the division, but it does not heal, consider if the mole is hard, dark-colored, with little sensation, do not cut it with a knife.
And if it is red and the area around it is thick, do not cut it with a knife due to bleeding; let it mature first, and then either pull it out or let it break on its own.
And if it is white, round, and the area around it is thin, then it should be incised.
And the procedure is to determine if the mole has rested for at least ten days with cauterization or if it has decreased in size with some reduction; then place the patient face down, and hold their head in your lap, open their mouth, and the servant holds the tongue of the patient from below with a noble instrument of the following shape:
And it should be made of silver or brass, and thin like a knife.
As you press the tongue and show the mole to you, touch it with your finger, take oil and apply it to the area around it; then pull it out in pieces as far as possible. Or if you are pulling the mucosa for some reason, and the mole is incised with an instrument of the following shape:
Or if you are pulling the mucosa for some reason, and the mole is incised with an instrument of the following shape: And it is similar to forceps, but the prongs of it are curved so that the orifices of each are opposite, sharp, and the tip should be made of smooth iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, incise it with a spatula of the following shape: Sharp on one side, dull on the other side.
And after you have incised one mole, incise the other according to this method of incision, and apply cold water to the area to prevent infection.
But if bleeding occurs, apply a solution of coriander or mirtle leaves and similar to those used for styptic purposes until the bleeding stops, and heal it until it is healed.
And sometimes we find growths or ulcers other than those two ears, and incise them as I have said in the section on incising two molars together.
I have treated a woman with an ulcer that originated in her armpit, which was black and painless, and had already closed the armpit of her own accord, and the woman breathed laboriously, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and was approaching death if it lasted for another day or two.
The ulcer had grown so much that it burst through two openings within half a month.
Therefore, I will make an incision in one of the openings and pull out that one, and tie off its large portion, and then I will incise the other opening where the incision from the first opening meets, and I will close the mouth of it, and press the tongue against it, and I will insert a finger into the opening in the ulcer.
And I will cut out a large portion of it, and only a little blood flows from it. Therefore, the armpit of that woman is healed, and she should begin to drink water, and I will soon provide food, so that I do not continue to incise the ulcer for a long time, and another ulcer appears in place of it, which I will incise until it is prolonged.
Therefore, I will anoint and cauterize the armpit of her, so that it heals more quickly; and I will also walk around, not knowing what God has in store for me regarding that matter.
Chapter 37.
On incising an abscess when it becomes an ulcer.
When catarr develops in an abscess that is ulcerated and long, it is called a fistula; and if it is in the thick, round portion, it is called a bubble.
However, when it is cured as we have said in the division, and does not respond to your care, and sometimes an ulcerated fistula remains there and is subtle, then you must incise the one that is rounded; and if it is along its length and is bloody, dark or black, and is not sensitive, then you must be cautious with the incision, because in that case there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it as I have described its whiteness and length, you should take hold of the patient and press their tongue against an instrument that is shaped to match its form and place your finger into the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the section on incising two molars.
You must not incise it unless it is aligned with the natural term without adding anything, because if you incise too much, you will injure its speech.
And during the incision, use what I have recommended in the section on incising two molars, and take care of it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, you must use oil for cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterizing it is only with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, press their tongue against the instrument that I have mentioned, and take some of the water that was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the wound, which should not be thick or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument with the same shape.
The external part of the concavity in which the medicine is placed should be shaped like a spoon's handle, and the instrument with the medicine should be placed on the wound, and the patient should cough over their lap so that saliva or mucus from their mouth passes through the internal medicine, so that it does not cause any infection on the armpit of the patient and that it dries up.
And place your hand with the medicine and squeeze it over the uvula for about an hour until you see it turn black and swell due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, you can tie it with a thread and wrap it around the end of the finger, immerse the thread in the medicine, insert the finger into a tube that is larger than the thread until the thread adheres to the tube, and perform this procedure as many times as needed for the cauterization of the uvula, and let it dry and fall off approximately three or four days later.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and be careful to clean the area around the uvula with a cotton swab dipped in boiling water, and use the solution that is in the circuit of the medicine, and let it be cleaned with warm water, healed outside with an ointment, and inside with guargarismes until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is safer than incision and longer lasting without fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, which is healed by subfumigation in this manner: take camomile, hyssop, origanum, rue, sciceda arabica, chammomile, crushed, and similar herbs, and combine all or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; let the pot be well heated with moderate heat, and in one part of the pot there should be an opening, over which a concave instrument made of iron according to this method is placed; it can be made of silver or iron.
The intestine should be introduced into the mouth of the patient up to where the steam can reach the uvula, until the uvula is moistened.
Then insert the intestine into that moist area until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess, for it would constrict the abscess too much, which should not be done, instead you should make the incision of the abscess in a cautious manner.
If that instrument is not at hand, then take a cane and form a hole with honey in the mouth of the patient to keep the steam from burning their mouth, as the honey stopper prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Capital XXXVIII. (The numbering system seems to be referencing a medical text or book)
On the extraction of thorns and adhesions in the glans penis, and other causes. (This appears to be the title of the text)
Moistened areas adhered in the glans penis or thorns or any other cause. (The first part of a description of what this treatment is for)
Therefore, you should extract what is apparent from those areas, which can be seen, by pressing the tongue with an instrument only, so that it is clear what is in the glans penis.
What is not visible and hidden in the glans penis, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before food has been digested in the stomach, because a strong cause attached to the glans penis will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or ragwort root or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of sea sponge and force it into their throat strongly, then have them swallow it, for when it reaches the location where the thorns are, they will be forgotten. However, take an eel and boil it, then let the patient drink it while holding it firmly; or take a porridge and put it in their mouth and pull it out through their throat.
However, if those causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument made of lead in the following manner:
Although it appears to be a mix of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, the sentence structure, word choice, and medical context suggest that this text is in Medieval or Early Modern Italian. Here's the translation:
"And lift the patient's head upwards, and be careful to touch the bone of its neck, so that you can feel the bone and the cartilage or spine, or so that the doctor may touch it with his hand."
"However, it is better that the patient enters [the cavity] itself, because of his knowledge of the location of the connected cause and he feels it inside, then he pulls his hand up with the instrument, all according to the quantity that was prepared beforehand."
This seems to be a title or heading, likely indicating the start of a new section in the treatise. In this case, "Capitol" is probably a reference to a chapter or section number, and ".xxxix." means the thirty-ninth chapter or section. The numbering system may differ slightly from modern standards, as this text appears to be written in an older language.
"On the extraction of a pus-filled abscess on the neck."
"When a pus-filled abscess is treated with the medicine that was mentioned in the division of cure and does not improve, consider moving it to the neck of the patient, since you should be prepared with an instrument for that purpose."
"Therefore, if you see the pus-filled abscess, extract it gently and carefully with a small instrument or a delicate tool."
"And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the neck of the patient, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the cannula. Do this several times (until the pus-filled abscess dies and falls out of the neck) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day."
"Then grab a water-filled syringe, open its mouth in that area, and wash the opening with it; do not let any obstruction or dirt enter it, and replace the water every hour with fresh water, for the pus-filled abscess often begins to drain when the water is felt."
"However, if the pus-filled abscess is not drained, fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument that was recommended for the fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, and it will fall."
"Another method of operation in fumigation is to take an oil in which charcoal is burned and the oil is covered with a cover on one end, and the tip of the instrument should be inserted into that opening; and then start the fumigation; place the patient's mouth over the opening of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost before you know that the fumigation has reached the pus-filled abscess, for the pus-filled abscess will soon fall."
If the cat doesn't purr, you must perform subfumigation multiple times and prevent the patient from drinking, cause them to eat salty and alkaline foods, not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
This is the shape of the instrument with which arterial blood from the groin is treated when it appears; and it is similar to forceps in some ways, but it has a curve at some point. The instrument is placed on the patient, and its extremity resembles a stork's beak, which is covered, sharpened with a file, to ensure that it does not slip when compressing something.
Capital .xl (40).
In which is the summary of the discourse on the treatment of abscesses and their incision.
Abscesses are many kinds, in many ways, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in the perforation and incision of them by two ways, one is for the kind of abscesses that are filled with pus; and through compressing moisture.
The second method is for the places where this happens in the body, as an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy place is different from an abscess at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
Abscesses are some which should not be perforated unless they reach maturity or completion of their course.
Some abscesses must be drained when they are ripe and not allowed to mature according to their course, such as abscesses near a joint, because an abscess near a joint causes the prolongation of the problem until the pus is drained from around it, and its ligaments or nerves in that joint become corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or is an abscess belonging to a major organ, and if you delay the perforation of it beyond maturity, it will infect the major organ; or is near the buttocks, so drain it before it becomes ripe, otherwise it may spread to the sides of the buttocks and become a fistula, or be done in the area around it but not healed. It is necessary that you know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it has become ripe.
And know that it is ripe when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, along with the decrease in redness and pulse, and the increase in the abscess's sharpness, and other signs.
And know that the perforation should be made in the place below the abscess and where the pus is coming out during healing of the edge.
The perforation should be done along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in the joints or at the ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places that are not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use the perforation according to the member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait for the perforation until the digestion of it has been confirmed according to its course, as we have said; because if you perform the perforation too soon, the course of the pus and pain is prolonged, and the edges of it become hardened and its depth increases.
Other abscesses must be drained according to the thickness of the flesh or body depending on the necessity, or according to what the member needs.
And it is necessary to make a small perforation, and in large abscesses, a large and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
Other abscesses are those in which the neck should be concave and incised when it is done so that bread can pass and when it is made in a place that has already opened, such as buboes or carbuncles.
And of those who are incised with a section, there are three angles; and of these is the one that is incised in such a way as the figure of myrtle leaves, as in the case of abscesses from arthritis.
And of those where a round section and crescent-shaped section are administered, these are similar.
The one that is not like superficial abscesses such as lion's paw abscesses, you must perforate it with a shallow or simple perforation.
And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you must perforate it but be careful not to extract all the pus at that moment; having extracted a portion of it, apply pressure on the abscess for another day, then extract a larger portion, and apply frequent observation until it is healed.
Furthermore, if the patient is weak, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decline, as animal spirits often dissolve with the discharge of pus, and it can cause death for the patient, you should take precautions.
You should approach this chapter with great caution, and when you perform perforation on these abscesses, ensure that the surrounding area is clean, and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a simple incision, in which case you may apply some remedy from old wisdom; if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are numerous, you must pause at each step until everything is accomplished.
If part of the abscess is removed or if you have excavated it around its circumference, you must then cover it with old wool or thread made from cloth, like when you treat bread or razors, without moisture; hold it for three days, and treat and care for it with something that is suitable until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs during your operation, you must administer warm water and wine in which a cloth is steeped, and place it on the site of the bleeding, observing it frequently.
But if the bleeding continues, you must administer treatment and care, and apply powders that have been recommended in various places of this treatise and other medical texts.
But if it is wintertime, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you must apply poultices made of powder in wine and oil, and place them on the locations.
If it is summertime, and the locations are fleshy, you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, keeping them warm until the third day, as we have said, and you must then remove the abscess and clean it, and apply treatment to it that is suitable until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the understanding of abscess treatment universally, but according to the distinction already mentioned in each type of abscess and its individual methods of treatment through specific chapters.
Chapter XLI.
On incision of abscesses that occur on the head.
In the head, small abscesses occur, and there are certain types of nodes that contain tunics which are formed by them; these types are numerous.
These [abscesses] have blisters, and some contain moisture similar to lime. Some have moisture similar to powder and are similar to them, and some are stone-like and hard.
In the incision of all [abscesses], and in the removal of these [blisters], there should be no fear, as excising them does not counteract archery.
The operation for these [abscesses] is that you probe them with an instrument whose shape is similar to this one, which is called scissors, until you know what they contain.
For if it contains moisture, then you should cut it with an incision along its length in a superficial incision using this shape:
Start the incision along line B to line G. Once the moisture is evacuated, you should remove that part which contains the moisture, and leave no cause of any kind behind, as prolonged observation will return if any cause remains.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, or water and salt; fill the wound with this mixture and leave it for another day, as it will dissolve everything that remains of the membrane.
Then you should repeat the application of Egyptian ointment on the wound secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you are confident that no further cause of the membrane remains; then you should care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the abscess contains fatty nodes, you should incise it according to this shape: With an incision having the shape of a cross, make an opening between the two lips of the incision and cut it through completely from one end to another, and force your strength in extracting the membrane that contains this.
If your archery causes opposition, then do what I told you first.
And as for the cauterized boil, perform the section and treatment according to what I told you; and it is easier to make a section on the cauterized boil because it has little blood and little moisture.
Some of these boils are stones in the heads of some men who have none or very little moisture; this is caused because I made an incision on a boil in an old woman's head like hard, rough, white stone, which could not be crushed, and if someone struck it, he would be hurt.
But in other boils occurring on the head, this is not within this chapter, such as boils that come to the heads of children and are caused by reasons related to the ears, but the section of all these should be a surface incision.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part, so that the body will be relieved at the lower parts.
And apply such remedy as is necessary for treatment.
Chapter forty-second.
On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
They are observed to swell deeply into these boils in the neck and on the shoulders and armpits, and some swell deeply into other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and those that are produced between them, and all scrofula of these is from its own covering, just as in the nodes and boils of the head, as we have recommended.
And the kinds of these scrofulas are swellings, because some are stone-like and those containing moisture, and those that are malicious that do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that which you see with good disposition in the incision, of which the color of what is manifest is similar to that of pus, and it is bad in all parts, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, nor does it project, you should make a superficial incision on the upper part of the body from the line of G to the line of B, remove the entire scrofula, and stretch two lips of the pus or one lip if you have necessity of those, as we have said in the boils of the head, and extract that small one bit by bit.
And it is more careful not to cut the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that your hand is not hurt or it disturbs the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or archery and prohibit yourself from operating, then stop in the wound treated with vitriol plaster or other powders which cause bleeding, and let it rest for a while until the acuity of the boil subsides and the wound is softened and begins to be pus-like. When the blood is separated.
Therefore, return to your operation until you have finished.
And ask the patient if there is any other cause of the small scrofulas, therefore incise those and clean those.
And if it is for the cause of a large scrofula vein, then you must not incise that scrofula from its root. Then bring it with a firm twist and let it fall by itself without any harm.
And fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and sew it as soon as possible without any waste.
But if you see that there is waste due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you should incise the root of that one, and remove it and administer suture and what has been said.
And those scrofulas containing moisture, perform a superficial perforation there where the maturation occurs, and stop the perforation of what causes the base of the pus in the body, as we have said.
And apply perforation, mix with ointment and resemble those, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And when you see that the wound is cleaned, then treat it with generic flesh ointment until it heals.
Chapter forty-third.
On incision of the pus of a boil occurring inside the gallbladder.
The ancients made this incision in the pus, and I have not seen anyone do it in our land.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in men having scrofula, the extraction of the gallbladder should be avoided because it is not beneficial since all the veins and the major ones of the patient are there.
But in those who have cauterized boils in the mouth or gallbladder or two ears, when the illness is not in the bile duct, it is necessary to perform incision of the gallbladder to avoid the danger caused by obstruction.
Therefore, when we wish to operate on the epiglottis, it is necessary to incise three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four with a small section in the latitude between two circles according to size, so that the section should be in cartilage, not in the trachea, and this location is suitable for incision as it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are hidden.
And if the surgeon is afraid, it is necessary to extend the neck cloth over the goiter and then make an incision in the neck until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if any cause is found there.
Then incise the cervical vertebra as recommended, and it is meant on the section of the neck for the knife which is from that exit and by the dislocation of the voice box.
Leave the wound open for some time.
When the time has elapsed in which perforation is feared, attach two lips of the neck wound and sew it only with cartilage.
And apply medications that make the flesh grow together until it is healed.
And Al-Zahrawi says that the total of the serum which has been recommended, exposure means nothing but veins of some of these apostemas have already healed the goiter of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the artery of him is cut, and some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the wound for any respiration, and may be saved from death.
Therefore, order the wound to remain open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; and this malignancy lasts for three days; then order the wound to be sewn up, and heal it until it is healed.
And what I have seen by my experience is that a serving woman took a knife and placed it in her goiter and incised a part of the trachea, and I was called to heal him, and I made the wound as silent as the dead, and uncovered the wound and drained the blood that was coming out from the small wound.
Therefore, it was confessed that she had not incised a vein or trachea, and the wind came out of the wound, and I healed it until it was healed.
And the serving woman did not die if there was no cause in her throat, and after some days she returned to recovery of her condition.
Now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On the incision on an apostema that occurs in the goiter outside, which is called a hernia of the goiter.
This hernia of the goiter is an aposteme large according to the color of the body and it is a malignancy in women.
And it has two ways, either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural it is not a matter of cure.
And the accidental is in two ways of which one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other way is similar to an aposteme made by the swelling of an artery, and in this case there is fear. And it is not necessary to make a presumption about him unless he is small. You should examine him and if you find him similar to fatty lumps, and not suspended by any veins, then you incise it in the same way as you would with nodes, and extract it with what contains his flesh and bursa; but if not, you investigate his entire being, and place a cure over the area with what is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the incision of types of nodes.
There are many species of nodes and I have already said all their species in the division.
And it is necessary for me to recommend the difference between a node and an eruption when there is doubt.
Therefore, with an eruption is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of excess subsides; it is a complete putrefaction that now stops the fever, the pain and the heat.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that cartilage lion which is in the nose.
And it begins like a pimple and is made in the same way as a vesicle, either large or small, and they are of two species, either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are malignant, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, expose it and examine it at the beginning with a probe which is called intromes, according to its form as it will come in the chapter that is appropriate for this.
This is the method of inquiry of apostemes and all nodes, and it is that you take this probe and insert it into the area where the humidity is found in the aposteme, and you will turn your fingers around it little by little until you know that the probe has penetrated the wound.
And then you put your hand according to the size of the aposteme, and then extract the probe and examine what comes out of it.
If the moisture is forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section as mentioned in other lancetations.
If there is no trace of intrusion lacking moisture, then know that it is fat.
Dry it on the area with a cross-shaped incision according to this shape: As you have been taught, suspend that which has an incision, and excise the entire cyst with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, on it, and extract the pus from it with a ligature.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the healthy part, so watch out for it, and you should extract it in pieces before any cause remains.
If some cause remains, either too little or too much, tie the ligature accordingly.
If you see a small part remaining, complete the wound with some corrosive sharp powders and strengthen the wound, place it on top of the cauterized spot as an aposteme, and treat the other with another remedy until it is healed.
If it is a large abscess, you should incise both lips of it and treat it with whatever medication is appropriate.
But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or not pulsating, you should take care and fill the wound with sticky plaster made of vinegar and lime and keep it tight for two to three days, until the wound heals and the boil subsides; then return to incise what has been broken from the abscess.
Chapter 46.
On the necessary forms of tools in section and perforation.
Of these, there are the forms of intussusception, and they are of three kinds, which are large, medium-sized, and small.
The form of a large intussusception is as follows:
The form of a small intussusception is as follows:
They should be made of iron, of copper, or of well-cut handles, so that the instrument penetrates well in the lancetations.
And these are the forms of probes, and they are called probes, one of which is called a lancet.
They are of three kinds, which are large, medium-sized, and small.
The form of a large probe is as follows:
The form of a medium-sized probe is as follows:
The form of a small probe is as follows:
They should be used for lancetations, discharges, fistulas, and boils where the cause is either bone or other reasons.
They are round, thick, or lion-shaped needles, like large needles with which the skin is sewn and they are made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citron wood.
Black plums are experienced by the experts, who recall that through these openings the fistulas in their cavities should be reflected, which should be redirected with their lightness towards those reflections.
It is of three types, for some are long, others medium, and the others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness.
The experienced man makes a form from plaster:
The experienced medium man makes a form from plaster:
The experienced small man makes a form from plaster:
The forms of the claws are of multiple types, for some are simple, with only a curve, and they are of three types: large, few, and medium.
And of them are empty claws, and they are of three types.
Of those empty claws, some have two curves, and they are of three types.
And of them are ones with three curves, and they are of three types.
All these are necessary in their place.
Form of a few simple claws, form of it:
Form of a large claw with two curves: Form of a medium claw with two curves: Form of a few claws with two curves:
Form of a large claw with three curves:
Form of a medium claw with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which they cut and scrape the knots and abscesses, and they are of three types, for some are large, others medium, and the others small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The edges of those with which incision is made are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not held in such a way, but they are used together in the scraping of the nodes to avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and for that purpose the patient is healed and brought some tranquility through the cauterization which is necessary for the healing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the ligatures, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
Made from linen and similar to a needle with which alcohol is injected.
And in the pointed edge with hidden spatula, go to the incisions inside and outside, whenever you wish, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are concealed between the said devices for the perforation of abscesses and not perceived by the patients, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of those [people].
The forms of these [are] of three species; large, medium, and small; the shapes are:
They are made of lemons, round with some length, and they are fine.
It is necessary that these species of abscesses be large, medium, and small, so that by removing the flux of blood with speed in necessity, and then, when at first there is no medicine [available], you can drain it.
However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as in the armpits of the arms and chest, breasts, stomach, groin and similar [areas] of their fleshy parts that are moist.
And sometimes they are made with small tools resembling fishhooks according to this shape; through which the blood is drained when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of men's breasts that resemble women's.
Some abscesses are swollen in men's breasts like those of women, you should perform the treatment by having them sleep with their chest covered [in some way], and inflate the breast, and make them resemble a woman's breasts, and we recommend it as a remedy, far away.
For the one who performs this treatment, it is necessary to incise [the abscess] with a lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and excise all the pus, and fill the wound with carnation medicine, and sew the two lips of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
If the breast drops to the sides and softens in size like a woman's, then it should be cut in two parts so that its pus rises to the surface, with two incisions similar to a lunar shape, from which each one is contained within the other, up to the point where the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape from line B and line G. And excise the hardened material between the lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders until it heals.
If you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make because of the patient's discomfort and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with a caustic solution immersed in cotton and leave it until it corrodes the hardened material, and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from the side of the nipple.
The abscesses that come from the side of the nipple are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a pus sac.
And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this shape: from line G to line B. And when all the pus is evacuated from the abscess, you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
And the cloth should be left on and healed with an appropriate poultice until it is healed.
If the abscess of the species of nodes or scrofula is, you should cut it as has been said in the section on scrofula [treatment].
If the wound is extended in such a way that it exudes pus, you should apply a cautery as has been said earlier.
Chapter XLIX.
On the incision of abscesses that occur due to an artery or vein.
When an artery is broken, and the hardened material that is on top of it becomes consolidated, then sometimes abscesses occur and the signs by which it can be recognized that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: since when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and attached to the front of the body; and when you palpate the abscess with your fingers, you feel a sound.
The one who is swollen (due to a vein) returns to the body's manifestation.
If the ulcer is due to a vein (and not an abscess or strangle, neck, or other part of the body), it is large, so its cure must be avoided and the one in the external parts (head) should be avoided.
If it is due to inflammation of the arch's opening, divide the septum longitudinally (separating the bones) and approach the septum with sutures and the arch, and separate the surrounding tissues until it is exposed.
Then apply forceps on the needle and make it penetrate into the other side (opposite), tighten the arch with double tension in two places, which causes you to extract two arches that are located in the temples.
Then press down on the area between two ligaments with a spatula until blood comes out and the abscess is resolved.
And administer a treatment to induce fever until the ligaments dissolve, and cure it with appropriate means until it is healed.
If the abscess is due to section of vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and the septum, and insert the needle into the opposite side that you have your hand on, and run double thread through it until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you in the uva4 ligament of two parts and two extremities of the thread.
If you fear pulling out the thread, then insert the needle into the abscess through its entire depth and tighten the four threads.
Then cut off the abscess in its middle part until what is inside comes out, then you incise the septum's excess, leaving what is attached to it.
Then press down on the lump that you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and administer the treatment that is made with heat and ointment until it heals.
Chapter one: abscess resulting from twisted nerves.
Similarly, an abscess may occur in the arch and vein, and similarly occurs in nerves when it is caused by injury or excessive work, and so on.
The most common places for it are in the joints of the hand or foot, or any location where joints are injured.
The abscess is severe and resembles the color of other parts of the body, and occurs in the largest areas away from them and when it is tightened with intense pain, causing the patient to feel dazed.
An abscess is not aggregated in the chest, and therefore the septum is left open, and it spreads throughout the body and does not go to the sides or back.
Therefore, those in the joints should not be sewn up tightly, for it could lead to contraction.
But if it is in the head or forehead, open the septum with a spatula. If it is a small abscess, take care of it with forceps and excise it with scissors.
If it is large, suspend it with hooks, excise it, and close the wound with suture, and cure it until it heals.
Chapter eleven:
Chapter of sectioning an abscess that occurs at the chest (sternum)
The next chapter concerns a certain kind of fungus that affects the abdomens and other parts of the bodies of certain people, which is called "funguals." These fungi are characterized by having a subtle root and a large cap, and their lobes are usually closed, and it can be small or very large.
I have seen one such case, and in the abdomen of the patient there were two growths that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them in terms of color or size.
And the lobes of those growths were turned outward and split open, and moisture flowed from them all the time.
Therefore, you should incise and probe into the foot at the point of eighteen inches. And the other one at the point of five inches.
And the operation in the incision of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and if the color of the pus is white, humid, and subtle; then you should incise with a lancet, and there should be cautionery in your presence in the fire, because frequent observations must expel the section without blood; and if it bleeds, cauterize that.
And if the patient is poor and timid, protect yourself from incision with a knife; instead, take fresh lead and apply it to that abscess, using the method that has been described; leave it for two days.
Then adjust the string of lead around the constriction; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large piece of lead until it is separated and falls off by itself, without labor.
But if it is of large size, then during the incision there should be some cause for fear and terror, especially in those who are in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you incise the matrix of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
And care for it until the wound has healed.
And be careful not to incise a swelling of dark color, with little sensation, and regular shape, because that is an abscess cancerous.
And you will remember the crab associated with this.
Chapter 12.
On the cure of protrusion of the navel.
The protrusion of the navel is caused by many reasons; either through fissures in the abdomen, which allows the intestine or hernia to come out as it does in other ruptures; or through blood that flows from a vein or artery, as has been described earlier, or due to compressed wind.
But if it is caused by a fissure of the abdomen and the protrusion of the intestine, the color of the swelling is similar to that of the body; and there is no pain, but it appears in various situations. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then you should place it in that position with that which has been recorded earlier, with even greater diversity; and when you press it with your hands, as described earlier, it becomes concealed and returns again; and there is little leeway in that situation, and you must introduce hot water and vigorous work.
But if it is due to humidity, then there is no need for caution or concealment when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or compressed.
If it is due to blood, then follow these warning signs for the swelling: it becomes black and decreases in color.
But if it is due to rotten flesh, then the swelling is severe, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain size.
If it is due to wind, then touching it is harmless.
And the operation in that area is to consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery, a vein, or wind; you must be prohibited from treating it because there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter where abscesses due to arteries and veins were mentioned.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, you must command the patient to be standing and spread apart; then you should touch around the entire umbilicus with a probe, and command him to stand facing towards your back over his own two legs, and surround the umbilicus with a lancet in the area that you have marked with the probe; and extend the swelling at the incision points with one finger; and tie it up in the circular area with thread or cord and use an appropriate tying method.
Approach the wound of the abscess extended on the belly and introduce your finger into that cavity where you find it, and if you cannot find or protect it by the belly, then you extract it and force the intestine to the incisions inside the abdomen.
And if you have found a membrane, then take an uncus (an instrument); and cut off the superfluities of it.
If the arrow or vein is contrary to your incision, then encircle that spot and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong fields and pierce the circumference which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making the needles penetrate; and hold the abscess firmly in four parts over the needles.
If you want to, remove the needles and let the extended flesh fall by itself; or incise that which is thin and softens, and then care for it with water until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is of no flesh or due to moisture, it is necessary that you sink the abscess as we have said and draw out the pus or the moisture which accumulates there, and apply water to it and allow it to heal and consolidate the area.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of cancer.
We have already said in the division, of the types of cancer and in what manner it is possible to cure it with medicines, and that it is advisable not to cut or ulcerate it; we have also said that cancer arises from the womb and caution in its treatment.
And the ancients said that some cancers are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as cancer of the head (breast or genitals) and their equivalents in other members, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, it is not necessary to try to cure it, because I cannot heal it or have not seen anyone else do so, nor has it been brought to a good end.
And the operation on it is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient alone and purge him of black bile several times, and fumigate it if there is a manifestly swollen repletion.
And prepare the patient for the operation with the preparation in which it is located, and prohibit the use of any tools that are necessary for it; and make a deep incision all around with the saw, good perforation, until no cause of the reasons for it remains. Allow the blood to flow, and do not open it lightly, but press the areas and wash off the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the instruments.
But if your incision of the thick blood causes a cut in a vein or an artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and apply the other treatment to it until it heals.
Chapter 40.
On the treatment of edema.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the types of edema of water, and the signs of each type, for its cure with medicines.
And that which is cured by cutting is not the type of edema alone, and it should not be approached by cutting for the types of tympanic or hypoarchic edemas, because they are fatal.
And when you have treated this type of tympanic edema with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient already has debility or is affected by another type of edema such as if it is in the throat or abdomen and similar to these, be careful not to treat it with cutting, because there is fear of it.
But if you see the patient of excess virtue and he has no other illness except for edema alone, and is neither child nor old, the method of operation on him is to raise him between your hands and administer him an emetic to his abdomen with your hand, pressing the water out from the lower part of the navel, and take a pointed stick in this manner:
and is made of two pointed long parts, with a sharp extremity like a stick; but it should be short in some way, so that during the operation with it you do not enter the intestine, and avoid doing that.
And consider if the generation of edema is from the intestines, because then it is necessary that you with the section move away from the navel by about three fingers' width to the lower side and in its straight line above the navel.
But if the generation of edema is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' width.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, your incision should be on the right side.
And it is necessary that your incision be over the rib on which the patient wants to lie so that fluids do not accumulate at that site unnecessarily.
And perforate the entire incision with an instrument and enter into that section, lift your hand with the stick between the incision and the swelling and excise it; and if the size is less than a fingernail or around it.
And perforate the swelling to where the stick reaches the location of the water. And extract it and insert an instrument with this shape: and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or iron or lead, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end is incised like a pen, as often happens:
And on the outside of him, wear an armlet, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately put it over the instrument, so that it evacuates the water in the best quantity at that time, because if you evacuate more than is needed at that moment, the patient will likely die due to resolution of his animal spirit, or he will become closer to death.
Evacuate that amount according to the virtue of it (the water) and according to what you observe in the patient concerning the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of his condition.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water that causes it (the pain), immediately being held back by the plug which holds the thread on the cuff of which you are recommended to pierce, in this manner.
Then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it (the treatment), and draw out a small amount of water, and do this for some days with caution, and take care not to let water remain except in small amounts.
But if you fear the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and stir it up in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medications until he is cured.
Cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the extraction of the water (the fluid), as I have previously reported in that which is mentioned before.
Chapter 40.
On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary tracts.
Sometimes, one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of his mixture (the amniotic sac) is not perforated (or is too narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to perforate it immediately after birth with a thin cannula in this manner:
Then tie a thin lead wire around the cord (the umbilical cord) and leave it for three days or four days.
And when he wishes to urinate, let him be removed and brought back (to the bed).
And if you do not tie the lead wire, it is possible that the urine which flows through there will not close this opening (the umbilicus).
But the one whose umbilical cord is too narrow should be treated with a lead wire, as I have said, for many days until it is widened.
But in those cases where the umbilical cord is not in its place (the navel), it should be cut, because in such cases, the one who is born with the cord above his anus cannot urinate during delivery, until he lifts his penis to the birth canal above; and this is not conducive to generation, since the semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a serious illness.
The method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the end of the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp instrument (such as a feather), or make any cut, so that the meatus (urethra) comes out similar to the head of the penis, and the umbilical cord falls into its proper place.
And be careful in your operation of blood flow, because this often happens; and pause at the point where the bleeding occurs, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
On the treatment of an inflammation (albater) that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and ulcers, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Sometimes this inflammation (albater) occurs in the penis and is a dangerous growth of flesh.
One (the inflammation) is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant: it should be suspended with a thin thread and removed entirely until it is cleaned; then apply an Egyptian ointment (ointment made of crocodile dung) on the affected area, and apply the ointment daily until it heals.
If the abscess is malignant and colored, then you must administer a cautery close to its incision and lancing it.
If the abscess is at the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must open the abscess that is inside first until it consolidates; and afterwards take care of the outside, for when you treat the outside at the same time, it is not ensured that it will not be punctured.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here's the translation for this line:
Here's the translation for this line:
Here's the translation for this line:
Here's the translation for this line:
Here's the translation for this line:
Here's the translation for this line:
Chapter 77.
Here is the translation of this sentence:
Here is the translation for this sentence:
Here's the translation for this sentence:
Here's the translation for this sentence: Here's the translation for this sentence:
Be careful in surgery, avoid using a nail, as it may spoil your operation. The child's belt is naturally short, and it often grows in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen this happen.
Be careful with the modification that you make with scissors and linen, because forks are of proportional incision, so the accuracy above is the same as the accuracy below; therefore, as your hands press in proportionate two points, you will make an incision according to a comparison at a time; and this causes compression of the linen with a figure that contains the belt of the buttocks from all sides, so there should be no error in it.
The method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mainly, especially if it is small, and not do anything more than placing the linen on the buttocks only, and let him rest for another day.
Then do everything in that way that is possible so as to make the child happy by receiving his intelligence. Then make the child stand among your hands prepared and not be afraid; hide the scissors in your hand or place them under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the other tools.
Then place your hand on the child's buttocks and blow into the belt, and pull it out where the head of the buttock is, and then remove any accumulated material from the area with scissors.
The shape of the scissors used in surgery is as follows:
One pair of scissors should be blunt and the other pair sharp, so that the jaw of the scissors is not too narrow, and the length of both blades should be the same as the length of two handles joined together.
The mistake in surgery is to cut off the entire internal belt or make an incision into it unnecessarily.
Therefore, you should carefully stretch the area before making an incision with your nail at the site of the lesion and make the incision evenly.
If you cannot hold the area with your finger, then use oil and make an incision into it.
If the swelling lasts for three days without improvement of the lesion on the buttock, you should lance it carefully and remove the pus with ease, then make an incision as prepared.
Be careful not to cut into the head of the buttock, as this should be avoided.
Therefore, treat the wound with the powders recommended in the treatise on powders.
If you incise the belt properly and observe the edges above, you will avoid any problems.
And continue treating it with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On treating retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or solid matter, or blood clots or fibrous tissue, similar to those mentioned in the section on treatment methods.
And if it is not dissolved as previously mentioned and the cause becomes very severe in the patient, it is necessary to perform extraction on him with an instrument called a syrinx, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and be very thin like the cannula of a bird's feather with the thinness of a ray long in the shape of a palm and a half, to which there should be a fine tube at its head.
The method of extracting urine by that person is to take the fiel (a type of thin cloth or linen) and fold it in two at its edge, ensuring good lubrication; then introduce the edges of the fiel into the area behind the syrinx, and incise it if any excess cause from the linen is present. Insert the linen into the tube with force, and bring the syrinx close to the bladder and the album (a type of water-soaked cloth or sponge) to avoid injury.
Make the patient lie on his back, and wrap the bladder and scrotum with oil of olive and rosemary oil.
Then bring the syringe close to the scrotum with ease until it reaches the bladder; then fold the scrotum over to the opposite side of the penis; and push the syringe into that area, pushing it towards the bladder. The patient should feel relief when the cause is reached, and not be harmed as per this order, but rather guide it in the correct direction.
Then extend the thin cloth or linen slightly, as the urine will moisten it.
Then extract that (stone) and perform the cure for urine, using a syrinx and not ceasing to use it until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 15.
On the quality of clysterization (enema) of the bladder using a clampscrea (a type of tube or instrument) and similar tools that are suitable for that purpose.
When ulceration or an abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood clots are present there, or if it is blocked by a hardened growth, and you wish to distill waters and medicines in that area, then use an instrument called a clampscrea (a type of tube or catheter), and this is its form:
If the area outside of it is deaf, it is closed. And in that case there are three types: two from one side and sometimes the other.
At the beginning, there is a concave location where something accumulates, according to its quantity it is added until a cause is pulled from the humidities, and when it is pushed out, with what it is pushed out, and when it is expelled long (a sign of an abscess formed by the naphta in sea battles), it should be pushed out with a plug made of lard.
Therefore, to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the end of the plug into the moisture and push with it towards the upper parts, because the moisture is pushed into the cavity of the plug.
Then insert the end of the plug into the anus (as recommended in the enema), and push the moisture with it, because that moisture will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient feels relief.
Form of a thin catheter used to catheterize the bladder, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with a head shaped like a small feather, and the shaft should be straight inside.
Then grab the bladder with forceps and stop the moisture you want to catheterize in the bladder, then tie it firmly between two ligatures with a double knot, and heat the moisture over the fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the anus.
Then apply pressure with your hand on the bladder and the fluid until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
However, if there is no bladder, then you take a porous substance (likely a piece of cloth) and make a circle out of it; pierce the entire circumference of that circle; then forcefully insert the fingers into those passages, so they are rotated until you find the opening; and place the circle around it, as it would be sewn together, stopping at the point where you want to draw from the moisture (urine), oil, or water.
Then you tie that (the makeshift sheath) with the instrument in the same way as you did with the bladder, and apply pressure with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
Chapter .lx (60)
On the removal of stones.
We have already discussed the types of stones and their treatments with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the lungs and stones formed in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have mentioned that operation with the hand is performed on a stone.
The bladder stone proper is the one that is implanted in the bladder.
And they are narrating it with explicit explanation and brevity.
Therefore, it is said that bladder stones occur more often in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its consistency, and appears in gravel; the patient will strain to pass stool, and after a while, blood will appear.
Healing in children under the age of 14 is possible; however, healing in old people is difficult. However, young women should be treated in a different manner (possibly due to their unique anatomy and physiology).
If the stone is larger and treatment is easier, then it is contrary if there is a small stone.
Therefore, when treating this condition, it is important at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a catheter that extracts all the pus from the wound; because that pus sometimes prevents the detection of the stone.
Approach the patient with their feet and place them in a reclined position to allow the stone to descend to the opening of the bladder or to pass from that location after some observations.
Then prepare the patient, and let their legs be placed apart, so that the bladder is fully exposed, descending towards the opening on one side.
Prepare the necessary instruments for lithotripsy (stone breaking).
If you feel the stone in the space, you should cut it as soon as possible.
If the patient does not feel the touch completely, then you must anoint your left hand with oil and apply it to the patient's genital area if they are a child or massage it if they are an adult male, and insert your finger into their rectum. Then search for the stone with your left hand. And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
Press on it with your finger and remove it through the incision from which you made the opening.
Command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; command another attendant to extend the patient's legs upward and push down on the pubic bone in the area where the incision was made.
Then introduce a spatula with a rounded edge, the shape of which is as follows: Cut through the area between the rectum and the pubic bone (not too deep), and make an incision on the left side of the stone. The incision should be made along the stone and your finger should be in the rectum. Make a transverse incision, so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the size of the stone that can be cut off without difficulty, but not too much because a strong pressure on the stone must be applied from below with your finger in the rectum, and it should be done without unnecessary difficulty.
You should know that some stones have an angle or ridge, making it difficult to extract them.
The stone resembles a walnut in shape and is round, and comes out easily.
If the stone has an angle or ridge, align it with the incision.
If this is not successful, then you should try to apply pressure on the stone or squeeze it with gentle gestures, with the tip of your fingers pressed against the stone and not moving away from it; or insert a curved and thin instrument underneath it.
But if you cannot do this, then make a small hole in it and if blood flows out, drain it with vinegar of vitriol.
But if there are more than one stone, first press your hand against the bladder opening and make an incision nearby; then make a small hole nearby; repeat this process for any additional stones.
If the stone is large, it is advisable to make a wide incision because the patient may experience one of two possible complications: death or prolonged distillation of urine due to incomplete healing of the area.
But administer emetics to make the stone come out if it is not successfully removed, or use forceps to break the stone into smaller pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with ointment of aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. Then place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water on it, to promote the formation of an abscess.
Then turn the patient on their side, and do not remove the bindings for the first three days.
And when you have removed the bindings, pack the area with water and mud, and treat it with diaphetic and diaphoretic substances until it is healed.
But if an abscess forms in the wound that is acidic and corrosive, like if blood is congealed in the bladder (and this is known as urinary retention), then you should interfere in the wound and remove the congealed blood, because if it remains, it causes the bladder to corrupt and rot.
Then clean the wound with soap, water, and salt, and apply the appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And during the hours of treatment, you should always keep your hands on the patient and adjust the medications applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the vaginal meat, and urinary retention is prohibited, then treat it with something that promotes drying, because prolonged observation of this treatment is accused of causing dryness; and I have said and explained before that you should take a soft iron perforator, whose shape is:
of triangular shape, pointed, inserted in a handle.
Then tie the stone-catcher to the vagina below the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the vagina and perforate with ease until the perforator reaches the stone. Turn the perforator in your hand towards the small stone and perform the perforation gradually until it penetrates from one side to the other, because the urine will soon be released.
Then press your hand on the broken part of the stone from outside the vagina, because it is hollow and filled with urine; and the patient will be healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for any reason that prevents it, then tie a string below the stone and another above it. Then crush the stone between two ligatures in the vagina. Then remove it. And then untie the bindings and clean the congealed blood from the wound.
And there is no need for strings below and above the stone, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the upper string is unnecessary, because when the bindings around the stone are removed, the stone falls back into its place and the wound reopens.
And because of this, when you remove the upper string, you should lift the stone to the incisions above, or it will return and you will have to start again as I have said.
Chapter LXI.
Of the extraction of stones in women.
Stones in women are seldom formed.
But if stones are found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited due to many complications.
One reason for this is that a woman who has not yet menstruated is weak.
And the second reason is that you will not find a woman who is well acquainted with what it means to expose herself to a doctor if she is a virgin or if she has a husband.
The third reason is that you will not easily find a woman well-versed in this art, especially one skilled in surgery.
The fourth reason is that the location for incision on stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring prolonged pressure and causing fear.
If necessity arises for you to act upon it, then you must take a woman's foot that is knowledgeable and small.
If that is not available, then search for a foot that is skilled and subtle, or present a woman experienced in the art of women's health, or a woman who has divided her knowledge in this art.
So have that woman present, and command her to do everything you will instruct her, from the examination of the stone at its beginning; the reason being that she should determine if the woman is a virgin, in which case you must place your finger in her rear end and search for the stone.
If she finds it, press it shut with your finger and then command her to incise (cut) it.
If she is not a virgin, command the experienced woman to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, with her left hand on the bladder, and press it firmly with good understanding.
Then, gradually withdraw the stone from the bladder's opening towards the vaginal opening, until it reaches the place where you recognize the disease (the stone).
And make an incision at the junction of the intestine and bladder where you have recognized the disease and place the stone in that location, so that the finger does not remain pressed against the stone without reason.
Make the incision small at the beginning; then enter the scalpel into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, as much as you know that the stone will be extracted from there.
Know that the types of stones are small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have rough edges.
Therefore, you know how many types there are for this purpose, which you signify concerning what you intend to do.
And if you want to cause bleeding, adjust it in the location treated with vinegar and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation when the stone has been expelled.
And make sure that you have prepared the instruments that I have mentioned for the removal of stones in men, so that they can assist you in your operation.
If you want to cause bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is through the artery that is incised, then you should pause powder on the location and apply it with pulvils and stringent substances, but do not repeat this; instead, leave the stone and do not extract it, because a strong person will die from it. Then take care of the wound.
And when the coagulation of the blood has been given several days, and the area heals, then you can return to your operation when the stone is expelled.
Chapter sixty-two.
On the incision for hernia repair.
Hernia inguinal is not just an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is located below the groin muscles and contains the intestines, but it is called a hernia.
Sometimes it is in the actual fat located near the groin, which has been prepared by nature in the area of the hernia, until it becomes another hernia; and this is the sac of the intestine between the white sac that we have mentioned, but it is not correct.
The generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, so this material is infiltrated there, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck on the genitals.
This wetness has various colors: either it is turning to yellow or blood red, or purple, or black and foul-smelling, or clear white, and this is the worst.
And the signs by which this accumulation of water is known are: if it is in the white area (which we have mentioned), then the abscess is round and gradually declines in size like a figure of an egg, and the genitals appear, for the wetness contains it all over.
And if the wetness is in the fatty tissue itself, then the abscess is round with an indentation like an egg and for this reason it is considered another watery swelling.
And if the wetness is between the scrotum and the white area, then cut along the middle.
To know the color of the wetness, you should examine the color of the wetness in the abscess by cutting it open and looking at the indentation formed; and based on what is found in the indentation, decide whether it is inside or outside.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it, it is necessary that we order the patient to be bled if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty their body.
Then lie them down on their back for some reason or other, placing several cloths under them.
Then set yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow on the right side, who should extend his hand two fingers' width from the scrotum to the midline of the abdomen.
Then take a flat knife and cut the scrotum in the middle at about the level of the pubic bone.
Make the incision straight and parallel to the line of public hair, extending until reaching the white area encompassing it.
Excise that, observe and remember for yourself not to incise it; and your excision with which you excise by dividing should be suspended in the most yolk-like and subtly examined wetness according to the quantity possible for you.
Then pierce the swollen bladder full of water with a wide hole and drain all the water out.
Then separate between the two labia of the incision with sutures, and extend the bladder to the sides; do not touch the scrotum, but cut the bladder in that manner that is possible for you. Cut it all the way through or in pieces, especially the thin layer of it, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the water is processed from outside the scrotum at the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then close the two labia of the scrotum with sutures, and treat it like any other wound until it heals.
And if the bladder becomes rotten due to another illness, then you should put on the necessary vessels, drain the bladder, and treat it as mentioned above.
But if the water is accumulated in two parts, you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did in the other one; and if it appears to be an operation, then do it.
And absorb the blood, and enter into the incisions linen dipped in oil or in red-dyed oil; and place another linen that you have soaked in wine and oil over it, extending it over two genitals and the abdomen; and lay drapes folded and powdered on top of it, and lie them down on it as follows:
and take two cloths and dip them in linen dyed with carmine according to this resemblance; and make the ends with which they are pressed tight or with wet linen, and attach them to the undergarment of the undergarments, one end taking hold of the buttock towards the back and the other towards the pubic bone, and two ends on each side and two others above the knees, and all the attachments should be adjusted in the undergarment of the undergarments.
Some hernias are treated artificially with cautionery in place of suturing with iron; and it is that you take a cautery knife and make incisions in the place of the inguinal canal, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white chalk containing water is exposed, and then you take the cautery as follows: It resembles Greek letters.
Then pierce that chalk with the cautery and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then stretch the chalk and incise it, excise it with incisions, and excise it with a subtle cautery ignited; make an incision in that area as far as possible until you eradicate all of it; be careful not to let the fire touch your hand.
And know that this operation is safe and long-lasting without bleeding, and better than an operation with suturing.
But if you encounter an abscess during the time of suturing or cauterizing, or bleeding, then it is necessary to treat that complication according to what it presents itself as, with the appropriate treatment as described.
But if the patient is fearful and does not expect a second operation due to its difficulty, then administer perforation as I have recommended; and you must be certain that, based on what has been said about the symptoms, that this hernia is abscess-filled.
Then you must place the patient on an elevated cushion, and make a perforation in the abscess at the lowest part of it with a tube of thin reed or silk thread, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And make the opening wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then place a cloth over the area and press down on it to keep it in place, so that the water remains inside. Then treat that area until the wound is healed.
But if the complication is due to the discharge of fluid from the wound at that time, then you do not perform perforation; this is not done unless the white pus in the wounds' orifices causes a complication and prevents the release of the fluid, in which case it is necessary for you to place a plunger or instrument with which the fluid is extracted from the glands, following the prescribed form; or adjust the opening of the wound with a small stopper.
And know that the fluid returns and accumulates after about two months or more; and when it has accumulated, then perform perforation according to the prescribed method, for the patient will pass their days in this manner.
Chapter LXIII.
On suturing of a fibrous hernia and its treatment.
Know that in suturing this hernia, there is great fear of danger even in the best arrangements; therefore, I advise against it and recommend that it be left alone for a better outcome.
And I remember the operation in that case and the characteristics of abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that abscesses are born in the bodies of which the genitals are composed and are caused by several factors: either by acute angry fluid that is infiltrated into the genitals or by injury.
And the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body and it is not found in pain, and this is a severe abscess.
A large boil has been lanced, whose color is dark and does not show any signs of healing.
Some wounds are made due to the tension of the arteries, and because of inflammation in those areas where a memory (scar) has already developed or inflammation of veins.
However, what is due to inflammation of the arteries is recognized by the dispersal of the boil when it is pressed with the fingers; and it is not necessary to touch it.
However, one that is caused by inflammation of the vein should not be dispersed from it for any reason with compression using the fingers.
And it is possible that an incision should be made over this type (of wound) and over the other fleshy areas; and you insert the sutures of the genitals, and place the gauze at the sides above, and extract that from the white cavity, and release the suspensories of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensories again that you release from all parts of the sides of the abdomen.
If the hernia has already consolidated with the surrounding flesh, then you must extract the hernia and suture it.
If there is an adhesion caused by some reason within the cavity or between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and suture it with a round incision.
However, if the adhesion is due to growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you must suture everything there, and extract the hernia as mentioned before.
When your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and vinegar, and then take care of it with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of a hernia caused by a rupture.
A ruptured hernia is a boil enclosed by some covering similar to a scrotum with softening of the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult for the patient.
In the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the memory (scar) that precedes it.
Nevertheless, we must say operation in what was done at first.
And say that it is necessary to retract the patient over an elevated table; and place the suspensories of the testicles at the sides below; and place the sutures of the genitals with fingers in the groin areas where they are proven to be strong; and have another servant who can extend them with great tension.
Then place the spatula with a sharp, narrow blade for a transverse incision through the vessels until they are exposed.
Then remove all parts from that area as mentioned in the incision of an artery, which are located near the temples.
Then place a double-edged needle in that area, and pierce the first with it where you have said the wound occurs, and pierce the other wound with the second needle at its end. Then make an incision in the middle area with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and remove what has been accumulated from foul and corrupted fluids.
And take care of the wound with treatment for other wounds where you want pus to be generated in order to cause the vessels to fall apart, since it is not harmful.
However, if the wound occurs in all areas, then you must extract the testicles or cut off the testicles to disconnect them from the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nutrition through the incision of the vessels, and they become atrophied, or be cut off in order not to help them.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision that extends in the cavity of the abdomen on the sides of the intestine of the stomach, so that the intestines protrude from one of the intestinal loops.
This rupture can be of the cavity or an extension of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: blows, falls, shouting, heavy lifting, or similar reasons.
The sign of this (type of hernia) is that it occurs gradually over a long time and not suddenly, and it has a swollen boil near the navel because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
The sign of this is when it occurs due to an incision in the abdomen: at the beginning it causes intense pain suddenly; and it has a swollen boil near the sutures below the navel, which is precisely the intestine, and the body of it protrudes beyond the sides of the abdomen.
Some wounds are overlooked with the intestine and is called forgotten intestinal hernia (hernia entestinal zirbal).
Some wounds are made with ventositas (a medical instrument) and some wounds run in the intestinal fissure and it is held, and this is very dangerous for the patient, and some wounds cause bad pain and especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this disease (type of hernia), caution is required as it can be dangerous, so it must be avoided to hunt in that area.
The procedure for that operation is to instruct the patient to gently push the intestine back into its cavity using their hand, if necessary, and then secure it with your hands around the waist, lifting up the legs.
Tie the sack which contains the testicles at their divisions, and cut open the sack of the testicles entirely; and then insert your finger into the two labia of the section as needed to divide the section with it.
And if the division can be enlarged to the extent that the testicle may be forgotten.
And remove the ciphaque which covers the sack of the testicles, until the hard white core of each division is exposed.
Then you insert your finger into the testicle, between the white hard core and the covering of the scrotum, and between the layers of the scrotum, and free it from any adhesion that is at the back of the scrotum.
Then take hold of the scrotum with one hand and, using your left hand, stretch the white hard core away from the scrotum and lift the testicle towards the section division; and command the assistant to extend the testicle outwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
Look for any causes of the hernia wrapped in the hard white scrotum. If you find anything, you place it outside the abdomen.
And then cut open the section of the scrotum that runs with blood and pus as we have recommended in what we have said.
And apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and wait until it heals; and administer the stitching that we have recommended (and sometimes the white scrotum is cauterized, which we have said should be done near the incision for fear of bleeding, but this happens often); and leave the stitching until it falls off by itself.
If the healing is delayed, let boiled water be embrocated, and wait until it falls off as we have said.
Cure the wound with another remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-six.
On hernia ventosa (on bladder hernia).
In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has been cured by iron (by surgery).
And in the early days they said that it was treated as we have recommended for hernia by water: namely, that you lay the instruments near the incision with ease; and you cut off the abscess with what opens it, until the instruments fall out.
Cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
Of the dislocation that occurs in the joints (or shoulders).
Sometimes a disruption happens in the joints (or shoulders) as we have mentioned, and it requires treatment.
Do not give the genitals any cause of hernias to the genitals; and if there is one, it is a small matter and should be returned at all times.
But if the duration of time with it is prolonged, a small incision should be made in the scrotum until the hernia comes out into the scrotum; and this happens because the scrotum (or testicles) is extended, which is in the joints as we have mentioned, causing the scrotum to become soft, and the area should be treated and cauterized.
The treatment of this is with cautery, as previously mentioned.
Sometimes it is healed by ironing in this manner: and the patient will lie on their back with their legs spread apart, and the area of the dislocation should be treated with cauterization by burning with an iron strip as wide as three fingers.
Then strengthen the scrotum (or testicles) white that is below the navel, until it becomes visible.
Then take the rod and place it on the prominent area of the scrotum (or testicles), and press it against the abdomen.
Then place the two prominent areas at the end of the rod of the scrotum (or testicles) together, and sew one with the other.
Then extract the end of the rod and do not insert anything into the scrotum (or testicles), nor extend the hernia or other causes as you know in the treatment of internal hernia.
The treatment of this is with the healing of sores, and when the fields are inserted, clean it and restore the sore into its place until it is solidified, because the scrotum (or testicles) will contract and the prominence of dislocation is not adjusted.
Cauterization is better in this location, as it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
Sometimes the scrotum of the testicles in some men becomes soft because the flesh that is between it is softened, and its care should be taken.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is caring for it in the treatment of this to make the patient lie down with their legs spread apart, and insert the entire scrotum that has become soft into the natural scrotum; and then bring two folds together with stitches.
And if you want, sew the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm stitch.
Then insert between the stitches, and take care of other sores until they are healed and the fields fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of my memory I mention it here; and its remembrance is only necessary in two ways, one because this knowledge is in the science of the doctor when he is asked about it, and knows the cure for it when it occurs; and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of animals for our benefits such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by cutting (or amputation), or by incision and stitching.
But in the method of amputation, the procedure is that we should seize the animal in hot water until its genitals become softened and lined up. Then take those with your hand into your hands until they are resolved and do not appear again.
But in castration by incision and stitching, it is necessary that you have the animal and press the scrotum of it with your left hand.
And tie them (the testicles) with a suture, and make an incision on each hole with one cut.
And make an incision of those that you have cut off. Do not leave any cause on the testicles, but the subtle scrotum which is above the bladder.
The method of amputation is better for castration because it leaves fewer causes for the animal to desire sex.
Take care of the sore until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the care of hermaphrodites.
In males, hermaphrodites occur in two ways: one is where a space appears in the scrotum, and within that space there is a sign of a female-like mound with hair.
And sometimes, that person also has a urinary canal in the scrotum.
But in females, it is different: the female mound above the pubic bone resembles two male testicles slightly, with a small amount below the public hair, like the scrotum of a man and two testicles.
The care is of three types: one for men and one type for women. It is necessary to incise the affected flesh and arrange it within the area where the problem escapes from, and also to care for it with the treatment of other diseases.
In the second type of men who have a urinary canal in the scrotum, neither treatment nor operation is done to it.
Chapter XXI.
Of looseness and flesh protrusion due to female causes.
Looseness that is adjusted naturally within the area that is tightened and is kept under control with care, but sometimes it is aggravated in some women to such an extent that it is spread out like in men and enters the vagina.
Therefore, you must remove the excess looseness with your hand or with a scissor and incise it.
Do not continue to incise too deeply, especially in the area of the vaginal opening, so that bleeding does not occur.
And care for it with treatment until it is healed.
Born flesh is flesh that comes out of the mother's womb to fill it, and looseness is exited from the vaginal area as if by childbirth (and for this reason some of the first ones called it "cadaverous disease"), so it is necessary to incise it as looseness is incised and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the treatment of arachnoiditis.
Arachnoiditis is when the female mound is not perforated, or if it is slightly perforated. It can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by disease that has occurred previously, and it can be due to excess flesh, subtle or thick stitching.
It is caused either in the mother's perineum, or in her costal area, or in the upper or lower abscess of it, and avoid coitus, engagement, and childbirth, and prevent menstruation as much as possible.
The recognition of that condition is made by the midwife, if the opening is obvious, it should be cauterized; but if it is not obvious, you must search for it with your fingers or with a ray.
But if the opening is due to subtle stitching and is near the two labiae, you must cut it and tear it apart.
And place your fingers on the two labiae, and place your fingers where you find the most swelling first.
The woman should be on her back, her legs spread apart, and apply force to separate the two labia until the subtle ciphus is broken and the opening is opened.
Then take wool, dip it in oil and place it over the area, and apply heat to the wound so that the wound does not become consolidated.
But if the ciphus is large and thick, then you must cut it with a lance or mirror broom (mirtle).
If the obstruction is caused by a tumor, then suspend it with a thread, and make an incision in it.
And are the medicines that stop bleeding without incision, such as aconite and dragon's blood, and quicksilver, wrapped in linen cloth.
Then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from being easily closed.
Hold it for a few days and administer hot baths of limewater.
Then let it be healed with other means of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes during the birth of another creature, it happens that an incision should be made according to this method. If it is for cancerous ulcers, then to the cancerous ulcer that is in the mother, there should be no opposition to iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of diarrhea, dysentery and red hemorrhoids that happen in the anus of women.
Diarrhea is recognized when mucus flows continuously from the veins' openings, and when chronic diarrhea occurs and it becomes purulent (pus-filled).
I have already mentioned in the division the types and signs of these, and I will say which receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore, I say that diarrhea and theyls (pus-filled ulcers) when they occur in the cervix of the mother and do not manifest to the senses, there should be no treatment with iron.
But those that are in the cervix of the mother that can be felt, those are the ones that are cured.
And it is necessary to put the woman in a hot bath and apply a linen cloth or rough cloth with scissors or sharp-pointed blades to make an incision.
And apply powder over those (the incision) to stop the flow of blood from one of the non-incisional powders without incision, such as aconite and similar ones.
And wrap her feet in warm cloth for an hour and place it in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make a decoction of wormwood and milk thistle seeds, and marshmallow root and similar ones.
And apply barley flour mixed with honey, wine, and egg white, and make a plaster with water on the back of her.
And if the blood is separated (clotted), that is good; and if not, make it adhere with two leeches, and to the nipples without incision.
And apply wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or the juice of angelica or the juice of gurravia with white wine and make it adhere to the area; and treat the area with mouthwash until it is healed.
And heal it until it is healed.
Title. LXXIV.
On perforation of an accidental hernia in the mother. (This is a guess, as it is difficult to determine the exact meaning without additional context or understanding of medieval medical terminology. The text appears to discuss medical procedures related to various body parts and conditions.)
Various kinds of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as those caused by crabs, lapidated abscess, ulcers, buboes, erysipelas, fistulas hemorrhoids, gurarrias and typhus, among other abscesses. (Again, this is a guess based on the available text.) And I have already said about these diseases their kinds and their signs, as well as their treatments in the division. (It is unclear what "division" refers to without more context.)
And it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the cauterization of an abscess that occurs in the mother when it is one of those accompanied by pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done. (This sentence seems to suggest a discussion of a specific medical procedure for treating a type of abscess in a woman.)
Therefore, it is necessary for you to consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with impact and pain and fever, and sometimes it swells and if you feel that catches over it, then do not operate on it, but cure it with something that helps with maturation until the acuteness of the accident subsides. (This sentence appears to offer advice on when to perform surgery on an abscess in a woman based on its symptoms.)
And then it is necessary that you restrain the woman on a bed with two beds; recline her on her back and place her feet apart from each other farther away from the abdomen, and open her legs widely, and place her arms out of sight below her shoulders, and let each person attend to what is appropriate for them. (This sentence seems to describe how to position a woman for surgery.)
And approach the woman following the direct left side and administer the instruments with which the opening of the mother's abdomen is made, the shape of which will be appropriate for those circumstances that arise. (This sentence appears to describe how to prepare for surgery on a woman.)
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you place yourself next to the woman and enter the instrument into the abdomen of the woman up to the point of the abdomen, and what goes inside the woman from the instrument should not be more than the point of the abdomen and the woman should remain quiet. (This sentence seems to describe how to insert an instrument into a woman's abdomen during surgery.) But if the instrument is larger than the point of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you place powders on the texture of the abdominal point to prevent the intrusion of any instrument into the abdominal point. (This sentence seems to offer advice for avoiding injury during surgery.)
And it is necessary that you place the force that runs through the instrument from the left and that the one who administers the instrument turns the handle until the opening of the abdomen is made. (This sentence appears to describe how to operate the instrument during surgery.)
And when the incision appears, and it is touched with the hand and lanced and moistened, then it is necessary that you cut off its head with a spatula of lard. (This sentence seems to describe how to prepare the incision for further surgery.)
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary that you place a plug made of wax soaked in rose oil or other oil with some stickiness in the incision in the abdominal point. (This sentence appears to describe how to close the incision after surgery.)
And cover the mother and over the penile wool, clean wool immersed in water in which are boiled bad things. (This sentence appears to describe how to dress the wound after surgery.)
And let it be healed for about two days with gargling that is appropriate until it is healed. (This sentence appears to offer advice on post-operative care.)
And some days are washed the mother and the wound in such a way that it is consecrated with water and honey, and with water in which rosemary or long aster root is boiled, and return to gargling. (This sentence appears to describe post-operative care for the woman.)
And if the wound is inside the mother and swollen, then it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, having a cure for it as was said in the division. (This sentence seems to offer advice on when to perform surgery again or how to care for the woman.)
Title. LXXV. (It is unclear what follows next without more context or understanding of medieval medical terminology.)
To show women how to treat miscarriages when they occur unnaturally according to the figure (This sentence seems to describe a specific topic related to women's health and reproduction, but it is difficult to determine the exact meaning without more context or understanding of medieval medical terminology.)
It is necessary that the woman recognize in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman expel at the parturition out of her and desire to smell the air, and above it is rubbed with what comes from the part, and hastens the expulsion of the miscarriage, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it is the emergence of the child on its head, and the second one with it or suspended or hanging from the navel. (This sentence appears to describe how a woman can recognize a natural childbirth and the position of the fetus during labor.)
Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary that the woman's belly be compressed so that the fetus comes out gently, because when it comes out on its head, the second one follows, and it is cleaned of these superfluous things with good cleaning. (This sentence seems to describe what to do during childbirth once the position of the fetus has been determined.)
But if it is another type of birth that is not natural and not acceptable, because when the miscarriage comes out on its feet and its body is expelled in front of its head and its limbs, then one hand or foot. (This sentence appears to describe an abnormal delivery.) The head or hand of the patient is turned towards the abdomen, and the neck is strongly bent over the collarbone, resembling an unacceptable figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all those causes, and to avoid errors and disappointment.
And you should display the whole figure of it, and what method is in it for it to be understood and established on it.
When the birth is coming out of the head naturally, and it is very strong in the woman and difficult to give birth to, and sometimes its power has already weakened, then do what women usually do, and evaporate the vaginal fluid with fenugreek oil and moist oil.
The midwife should place a small sponge dipped in water between the woman's lips and tear the second one, or dry it with her fingernail as far as the wetness reaches. The midwife should press the abdomen of the woman until the birth comes out.
But if it does not come out, it is necessary that the woman be lubricated with hen's egg white and fenugreek mucilage with a comb.
And call him (the husband), command him to be quiet and make him vomit with a mixture of emetics; open his mouth and nose for an hour because the birth will soon be forgotten.
And if the two other parts of the birth are forgotten at the beginning, it is necessary that you reduce them gradually with ease. But if the instrument does not obey, have the woman lie down on a stool and raise her feet up, and place the stool on the ground; keep the woman from falling forward during the impact.
And if the two parts have not turned inside out and the birth dies, then incise them and extract the rotten part of the birth or tie the body to the hand with a cloth and extract it, because that will soon be forgotten.
When the birth is on its feet, it is necessary that you push them upwards, and turn the fetus head down, grab it by the neck and pull it gradually.
But if it is inside the vagina, then you should command him to vomit and make him cough with emetics because it will soon be forgotten if God wills.
And if it is not forgotten with the recommended remedy, then you should gradually return the fetus to its normal position because that will soon be forgotten with a little more effort.
And if everything recommended is forbidden, then take alum mucilage and dissolved gum, grind them well in the mortar, and anoint the woman's vagina with the resulting paste on the lower abdomen of her. Place that sponge in warm water until you obtain the hypogastric bones.
And if the separations of it are swollen, then give him subfumigation with myrtle and rest him. And after an hour of subfumigation, you should make him vomit and clean his mouth with a sponge, and raise the lower part of the vagina with gentle pressure, because the birth will soon be forgotten.
The position of the feet hanging down one of the arms. Find a way to reduce the arm, but if you cannot do that, lift the woman and make her turn around.
And if turning around is not possible, have her lie down on the bed and strike her buttocks violently, and administer the remedies that I and recommend of mucilages.
And if the labor has begun, make her lie down on a bed and study the reduction of the arm, and pull the fetus by its neck in the normal position, have her vomit and command him to compress himself until it is forgotten.
The position of the fetus on the expanded neck with the opening at its mother's waist. It is necessary that the midwife have the baby's hand and gently turn it little by little with ease.
And when the hand is pulled out and it is finished, then rest on the spot with the recommended oil and mucilage.
Command the patient to swallow little by little, and when you have made him do that, then place a cushion under his head and command him to incline it straight towards the right side, and command him to compress; and make him vomit with a mixture. Prepare the birth on the left side.
When the mother is suffering from terrible pain in this manner, consider it, and then you shall incise the second opening with your nail until all moisture has been evacuated.
If the baby is suspended on the face and neck of the mother, then you shall incise the navel, to prevent it from being retained and dying.
Then push the baby into the birth canal until it reaches the pelvis, and command the woman to press her loins, and it will come out easily, if God wills it.
Delivery of twins or multiple babies. Know that twins are born in the loins, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and late to happen; yet it happens due to nature, not artificially.
Count those, whether they be more or less, as a second opening; separate them by cutting the ligament in their navel, distinguish each one. Sometimes it happens easily naturally, and sometimes it happens due to an unforgivable act, such as recommended.
If they are difficult to deliver, you shall perform the childbirth and proceed to what was said about abnormal figures, then you shall treat them as recommended.
If the mother is subtle and performs what promotes ease and subtlety, and slowness, and if she is skillful according to all figures as prepared by the art of medicine for her salvation.
Remember that it forms in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Sometimes the number of periods can be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and it is necessary to verify if a woman has aborted within five or more, for this reason was made the measurement by the glorious sages.
And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, for great harm can come from such a similar appearance, and therefore she should take care of it.
Chapter LXXVI.
On extracting the dead baby.
When you take care of a dead baby according to what was said in the division of medicine and it has not been delivered outside, and you are determined to use force, then you must consider whether the woman is healthy and free from any accidents where danger is feared for her.
Then the woman should be placed on her left side with her head inclined downwards and her hips raised.
And the assistant shall take one of two parts, or bind them to the left side to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the baby.
And then you shall moisten the mouth of the woman with oil, and with mallow juice and fenugreek, and seeds of marigold.
And then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and juices, and insert her hand into the mother with ease, and surround the place where the fingers are in the baby.
In such cases, you must consider whether the baby is ready to be born on its head. Then you shall place your fingers in the ears, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, in the shoulder blades, or under the hip bones, or near the ribs.
But if the delivery is on the feet of the baby, then you shall place your hands in the groin or the middle of the ribs.
And you must hold the finger with your right hand and bend its curvature in the place between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with ease and place your finger in one of those places that were mentioned earlier, until it reaches the blocked cause.
And place another finger alongside it, or the third one if necessary, to attract it inwards and not extend it according to its straightness alone.
It should be bad all over, so that the situation is alleviated as it is with tooth decay during its removal.
And in this case, you must make sure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the woman should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and turn it around what is retained.
Thus, if the delivery of the baby is delayed, then you shall tie your fingers together in a place closer to where it is coming from; and do this until the entire baby is delivered.
If the hand is extruded before the other and cannot be reduced due to constriction, then wrap it with a cloth; and carefully extract it completely, and incise it at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
And in the same way, it is necessary to do so with the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the object is large or it is difficult to insert it because of constriction, or water is trapped in the head, then place a spatula between them and split the head and extract the water, or cut it open with an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will resemble that of other instruments as described in the following chapter.
Perform the same procedure if the object is of large size by nature: then make an incision with an instrument such as an algamatus or alundat, and carefully extract the bones with forceps as described earlier.
If the head is extruded and constricted, use a pair of forceps to break it into smaller pieces so that the moisture in the area can drain out.
If it is not complicated or blocked, you should incise the head as soon as possible.
If the abscess of the abdomen is opened or is pus-filled, it is necessary that you perforate it to let the moisture inside drain out.
If the object is on the feet, its attraction and direction towards the mother's mouth should be light.
If it is constricted in the abdomen and feet, you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and feet to let the moisture inside drain out.
If the other members are stopped and turned back, place your left hand inside; if the mouth of the uterus is blocked, insert your right hand into the cervix and search for the head, then grab it with the mentioned instruments and pull it towards the mouth of the uterus, and introduce a finger or two fingers and push it further in.
If the mouth of the uterus is constricted by an abscess caused by pus, do not rub it excessively; instead, administer a mixture of moist and fatty substances. Apply ointments; follow the patient in warm water that softens and moistens.
If the object is on one side of the body, try to pierce it if possible; administer the substance mentioned in the live fetus case.
If that is not possible, incise it into pieces and extract them.
It is necessary to remove any cause within the second stage (of labor).
When you have completed your task, administer the cure for abscesses caused by the uterus as mentioned earlier.
If there is a flow of blood, direct it downwards into salty water and administer the other cure.
I have seen a woman in her womb whose body was already dead, and on top of that fire another woman was lying down, and the second one was also dead by fire. A pus-filled abscess occurred on one of the limbs and it swelled up until fire erupted from it, and it began to emit black smoke.
I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied some strong-attracting ointments on him, and extracted a bone from it, and after a few days, another bone came out; I was very amazed because there were no bones in the abdomen.
And I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
I healed the wound and extracted many bones from it, the woman living in such a way for a long time, her arm became paralyzed.
I did not wonder too much about this, but rather that it was a sign and assistance for what the physician administers with his hand in treatment.
Of the shapes of the instruments needed to extract the object.
Shape of a lever for use with the uterus:
This is the shape of a strengthener in which the two arms are locked, with two rods on each end of two poles. This medicine must be very subtle when used as a suppository, and it can be made from oil or from the root of the plantain.
The diameter of each tube should be twice the width, and the edges of both tubes should have a thickness of one finger. And the length of each tube is half a palm, and in the middle of two tubes there are two adjustments that have already been fixed, the length of which is slightly more than a palm, and the diameter of each is about two fingers or slightly more.
These two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened with the prescribed medicines as you turn them.
Make another similar substance, equally subtle and light:
Make it from oil or the root of the plantain, similar in shape to forceps. However, at the end of them there should be two adjustments like this, and the length of these adjustments is one palm, and the diameter of each is about two fingers.
When you want to open the mother's belly, do as follows: place the woman on a bed with her legs hanging down, and open that which is between her thighs. Place your hand over the instrument similar to forceps, as when you use them to grasp, according to the size of the mouth of the mother's belly that you want to enter with it.
The ancient remedy known as vertigo:
Make the medicine in the form of a pill, which is called Empelium.
Make the medicine in the form of amisidat, which is called Amigdalitis.
And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, like scissors sometimes, and occasionally it is made long like forceps, according to this shape, with teeth like the teeth of a saw that are cut and ground. Make the medicine in the form of a small Amigdalitis:
Make the medicine in the form of an Uncia having a spine:
Make the medicine in the form of an Uncia having two spines:
Make the medicine in the form of a spatula having two ends, with the head detached:
Make the medicine in the form of two thin spatulas:
All these instruments should be used with skill, and when many are multiplied and the species of it are prepared, the craftsman, who is more agile in its operation and more skilled, should use them according to his quantity.
And do not stop using these instruments, for their need is not excusable.
On the extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is retained, it is necessary to command the patient to hold his breath, and then you should make him vomit by pressing on the stomach and the nose, and if this causes him to vomit, that is good.
If not, you should take a handful of herbs, including lavender, wormwood, anise, chamomile, Arabic senna, cinnamon bark and Saint John's wort, and use them to perfume the mother's mouth. All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water and left on the fire.
And place a hollow cane in the mother's mouth, and keep it inside until the steam reaches the cavity of the mother.
And make him vomit as previously mentioned, and the second tooth will be expelled quickly.
However, if this treatment persists and the second tooth does not come out, command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sage or milk of althea, and insert it into the uterus and search for the tooth there. When you find it, take it out little by little, but be careful not to push too hard so that the mother does not contract excessively. The ribs must be bound tightly on both sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is narrowed, we have previously recommended treatment with vomiting and steam therapy with herbs.
However, if it has not been expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, be careful not to overdo it in repeated attempts at extraction, but rather let what comes out of the mother's mouth lie on a cloth, and fumigate and treat it with tetrafarmacon; as this will cause it to dry up within about three days and dissolve and be expelled.
When the patient becomes unconscious and rises to the head, and to the stomach, and this harms the sick person; therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations suitable for this.
Moreover, anciently sub-fumigation of garlic and dried figs has been spoken of.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated should be designed to retain menstruation and postpartum discharge.
It can be made of copper or earthware.
The narrow end should be placed in the cone and the wide end on the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be carried out over the arms of the fire.
It should have an opening through which the sub-fumigation is consumed and repeated another one.
Cure for an unperforated child's bottom.
When newborn children and their unperforated buttocks swell up thinly and are painful, these should be massaged with oil and applied heat. Therefore, the midwife should pierce the swollen area with her thumb; if not, she should pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful not to touch the anus.
Then cover that wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure it with an enema until it is relieved.
But if you fear that it may become swollen again, then stop the piercing for several days and stop it when the child wants to pass stool.
And there occurs swelling of the anus due to ulceration or abscess; therefore, that consolidation must be incised, and it should be treated with what has been said about cure and lead.
Cure for fistulae that occur in the anus.
Fistulae that occur in the perianal area, low and thick, should be cauterized near the anus or in the space of one division.
It is either a fistula or abscess.
And when that node is old and corrodes from foul white moisture or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulae penetrate through it.
And those penetrations are recognized by what is emitted from them through discharge and swelling; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation (discharge), and often it comes out of them through worms.
And sometimes those fistulas appear in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and sometimes they penetrate into the hip joint and into the nose of the uterus.
And that which is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is to place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe or iron into the fistula, but only if it's not too painful.
But if it is too painful, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
If you do not feel it at all or there is no cause for evacuation, diarrhea, worms, or swelling as mentioned before, then you should know that it is not penetrating and you should take care of it accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or penis, the meaning of it is simply discharge of that urine and avoidance of that area while the location is being treated with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the hip joint or bone and pain occurs in the surrounding area, then the sign of it is that the probe goes into the joint if there is no pain at the bone, and pain in the surrounding area of the fracture; and that pus will soon appear from it; and that no medication works on it, nor does it heal with saliva.
And in all these fistulas healing is not achieved easily, and the healing of them is long and difficult work for foolish physicians upon which they rely.
But in the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I shall recommend to you, and what I have already tried.
And the patient should lie down with his legs elevated and his hips raised towards the stomach, and place your hand over them; then insert a thin probe of lead or iron into the fistula if it's not too painful until you feel the probe in its location.
And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then insert your finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe coming out from your finger penetrating, or if you feel something between your finger and that spot, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and do not work on it then, because there is no healing in it, as I have already said.
But some might say that it heals in some men.
And of the medication for which healing is hoped, it is that you ignite cautery in the fistula as described before and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistulas are adjusted to fit together like the feathers of a bird's wing.
And cover it with bandages until the tissues are healed, and treat it with medicines that heal and strengthen the tissue, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healed in a certain time by another treatment.
If the probe is inside and does not penetrate into your anus, and between it and the spot that appears as a tumor or cyst, and sometimes the fistula occurs on what appears to be a cyst in the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the skin dry with the probe; and continue drying until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is released, and through the probe it is cut and catheterized.
And clean the tissues surrounding the fistulas that resemble a bird's feather pen and do not remain in it for any reason.
But if blood flow sometimes comes out between you and your work when you clean those tissues, you should use millet and a light instrument to cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire heals well: it adjusts the tissues of the healed areas, and drains the pus by drying out the moisture.
And cover it with bandages or with a cushion until the wound gets better; and then treat the sore with hard healing saliva.
And those medicines that are drying and draining; when they are restored, it is healed and there will be no recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate it.
If the wound is closed and there is a thin membrane or flesh between you and her, and it appears to be ready for penetration, then there is no operation on him but according to faith and hope.
The cause is administered in three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to cut it open inside, so that you can achieve the cavity of him for you to enter there and cure it properly without cutting into the hollow containing the intestine, and taking place immediately from the patient's body without his will; and place a dressing over the wound as we have said, or use another sharp instrument on the wound or on another, and clean the pus that is cut inside near the anus, as we have said, or the wound or another instrument of sharp edge, and clean the fissured flesh that is in the incision, so that it can be closed with a crust; and then force yourself to restore the whole wound by cutting, and if the openings of pus do not consolidate and remain open at the parting of the anus, and the fistula remains open, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you enter the wound into the fistula, it is near the anus around the surface of the body with a cord and at the edge of the anus, then take a sharp instrument like a needle prepared for piercing as follows:
and enter into that fold covered with five layers or around those layers; and then insert the needle into the fistula until it achieves the cavity of him.
However, if you penetrate into the edge of the anus inwardly, then you pull out that thread as you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends together, and stretch each one, and leave it for a day or two until the thread penetrates more deeply into the flesh; and then stretch it as far as those fleshes are penetrated, which are between the ends of the thread and where they meet.
And then care for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
However, if the fistula's opening is not penetrating, then you make it penetrate, in any way you are prepared, but it should not be painful because it is not for you to do this so as not to cut into the intestine; and place a dressing on it until it heals.
The method of using a splinter with a sharp curve on one side and the other end flat, so that it does not cut unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
Stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
Diarrhea occurs in two ways, either it is like charcoal passing from the rectum, or it is similar to oil from mustard. From these it can be small or large, and the blood flows from them constantly and it is one (single), and there are clots, and they exit from the rectum, and at the ends of it.
However, those which exit from the rectum in months of little moisture, from which yellowish water or a small amount of blood with continuous clots, and according to the color of the body.
The treatment for that which is within the rectum is to command the patient to sit and expel it before the rectum dries up and diarrhea appears. Then you take a hook or whatever you have with your nail and approach it (the affected area) and make an incision in it (the affected area).
But if hooks are not available there due to the moisture and softening of these (things), then take them with a rough cloth, a comb or wool floss, and remove them using tweezers, and then make an incision in it (the affected area) and sprinkle some cautery powders on top of the incision, so that they are close to the cauterization; or cauterize it according to what is described in the chapter on cauterizing. And treat those with the other treatment until they heal.
If the rectum does not evacuate (obey), then you anoint the patient with a cathartic in which there is slight bitterness, and it should be washed with water that is in the rectum and that will help to evacuate gently when the patient defecates.
But if diarrhea is outside the rectum, the cause of it should be made light (eased), and you take them with your nail or with a hook, make an incision in them, and then treat them with the water that I have mentioned until they heal.
The one who makes an incision should administer stitching of them in this manner: take thread and insert it with the needle into the opening where the diarrhea comes out, and take out the diarrhea at the edges above, and make the needle penetrate the opening of the other side, and wrap the two edges of the thread over the edge farther from the needle, and do this transversely; tighten the diarrhea with strong stitching, and tie the thread and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, leaving one untouched and not stitching it, so that the excess blood can flow out from there.
Place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the rectum and place it there, and place it on the anus and command the patient to rest. Leave it inside until it falls out (on its own); and when it is expelled, treat those with salve or the other treatment until they heal.
Since they have been neglected for a long time and are not effective in that medicine, it is necessary to cauterize them with the tip of the spatula or your nail until they become wet and the discharge below stops, which prevents consolidation; and treat those until they consolidate.
Then you remove them with great haste before they become hardened and are scabbed over; and treat those until they heal.
Know that abscesses are crucial, and they do not appear in red spots similar to clavicles, but rather throughout the body and more prominently in the sides of the thighs and chest, and they should be suspected from pain.
Then it should be incised what is around the clavicle, and kept with tweezers or a hook, and it should be removed from its opening; and treat that.
And if you wish, you can cauterize what is described in its own chapter.
Verruca (warts) are small rough, fistulated round elevations on the surface of the body, and clots occur in more children.
The treatment for it is to stretch and incise it, or tighten it with thread or cloth until it falls out. And if you wish, you can cauterize it, as described, with fire or with a strong medicine.
Moreover, an ant-like elevation, small but furrowed or large and fistulous on the surface of the body, moving towards the anus, if touched it becomes inflamed like a formication (itch) and formed around the body. And when this happens, it should be treated.
The cure for this is to take a thick cannula or a cannula with a sharp point, place it on the formication inside its circle; then turn your hand along the cannula within the circumference of the formication and press it in the skin, and eradicate the formication from its root.
If you wish, do this with an iron or steel cannula as follows:
Make the partition above the cannula thin, soft (not pierced), covered so that it appears swollen and the rotation of it is hindered.
And if you want to cauterize the formication as described in the cauterization of an athlete's foot in the chapter on cauteries.
Of the instruments that are administered to make a cauterization.
Cauterization is sometimes made with silver or lead or melted iron or hammered; and sometimes it is made with small and large instruments according to the patient's condition, since the one who receives treatment for small children should be small; and those whose buttocks are soft or painful, their cauterizations should be small.
The form of a large or small cauterization is:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is attached should be wide as follows; and it should have a distinction where the bag is attached in this manner, just like sometimes.
And the end below, which is inserted in the anus, should be soft (not open) like a lion's mouth, narrowing towards thinness; and on one side there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should correspond to the thickness of the rays, and make the smaller one smaller.
And the bag in which are placed the medications of animal bladder or sheep's wool should be one palm in depth.
It should be perforated by many openings as it is rolled up; and if the space between the openings is thick, make it thinner.
And carefully insert the needle into those holes, using a strong thread from the same needle, or surround them; adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be tight at the head of the cauterizer between two distinguishing marks with a strong pull, and cauterize each hole: However, the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the bag with the medicine, heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
Place the patient on their back and raise their legs up; place a cushion under them or a blanket, as is customary among men; then oil or albumen of egg white or mucus of fenugreek or similar should be applied to the end of the cauterizer and inserted easily into the anus with ease. Then take the bag and squeeze it with two hands and press it vigorously inside until everything that is in the cauterizer is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cauterizer and the patient lowers their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine is missing in this way, take as much as possible; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more effective.
However, if you cauterize it in the diseases of stomach solution and its symptoms, then you must repeat the cauterization until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a subtle lancet and leech, for with these leeches are the children criticized.
In treating ailments.
I have already stated in the division of treating ailments what is suitable for the free man, and I say this: the treatment of those with more serious afflictions and medicines according to their needs.
Therefore, I say that ailments are differentiated according to what they are caused by and the area where they occur.
The causes of ailments are often such as injury from stones, or wound from sword or axe, or blow with a spear, mace, arrow, or similar means.
Ailments that occur in the parts of the body are such as a wound on the head, neck, foot, stomach, or chest, and similar to those affecting various members.
I recommend the treatment of certain ailments according to this reasoning and rule, and for other ailments you should consider different reasoning and rules.
I begin with simple head ailments, for the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by a stone or similar object, and the patient has already bound the headband only and the wound is large and you fear that the patient will develop an abscess, then immediately puncture and drain the cephalic vein as quickly as possible, and do not delay; and extract the blood according to the amount of its potency, unless any other reason prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is flowing from the wound is scant.
The phlebotomy should be made on the opposite side of the affected part, and keep the patient away from overeating, wine, and heavy foods.
But if there is any reason for caution, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or wine.
Wait on the wound if an abscess develops, apply oil of roses or wine that has been steeped in it.
But if you are sure of an abscess, wait on the wound, if it is fresh and the air has not changed the powder that I will recommend for you.
If the air has already changed it, then wait until it is healed with some ointment before it.
But if the wound is large or from an incision of the abdomen and similar, and the edges are not properly aligned, then align them with sutures as I will recommend for you.
But if the wound has already exposed bone and tendon, and is not properly sutured but only supported by a small suspension, then incise it again and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh under bandages, and order the patient to avoid heavy foods until healed: eggs and bread cooked in broth or similar until it is healed.
If the wound becomes gangrenous and does not adhere to the bone, you should incise it all thoroughly and drain it, and treat that area.
But if in these ailments it is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been amputated by medicine, you should examine the artery; if it is gangrenous but not amputated, you should incise it with a spatula or lance, and if necessity compels that what I have said does not suffice, then cauterize it before the blood is amputated.
If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of them is light; therefore, you should sprinkle this powder on them, for it solidifies before the air changes them.
The method of using the powder is as follows: take equal parts of oil of thistle, dragon's blood, and non-extinct herbs; grind it all together and sift it, then fill the wound with it and compress it firmly until it adheres to it, and coagulate it with blood.
Apply this powder on top of it with pulverized linen and let it remain there, but do not remove it until the abscess has formed, for the medicine is not effective until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done alone, when there is no pain or bleeding from dragon's sap.
Then perform this operation in serious diseases when it is necessary to pause on them and tighten, and these are recent wounds that have not been affected by the air.
If the air has affected them, especially in summer, then do not use this position for this powder, but rather treat those with what was previously said, unless you are to pause on sores that have been treated with an ointment of various herbs, or that you are to poultice over those powders made from wheat flour and water and honey that produce a powder; and treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, you should extract this with forceps.
And you will say the treatment for fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
For wounds on the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is treated like a simple wound on the head.
But if the nerve or artery in the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, do not apply cure directly to it, but rather avoid any treatment that causes violent stiffness, such as zinc and zinc oxide, which harm nerves and contract them. And do not apply any cause of frost to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is with the brain, which is the head of all members.
And if this is treated with light medicines such as being washed with soft water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and thus when it is washed with soft water and other remedies in this manner, and soothed with moisture.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or sew the lips of it, and treat that with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound has depth or occurs in its base, powdered, then you should perforate it in the most depressed area.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, separate or dry it up, or tie it, or cauterize it if the need arises.
But if the vertebrae of the neck or all of it are cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should adjust the lips of the neckbone with sutures on the neck of the vertebra and do not touch that; elevate it and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with proper support, and allow it to rest for several days; and treat that with soothing poultices with stiffness and inflammation until it is healed.
But if the wound has entered into the bone with danger, you should perforate that, and if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that can be; and what cannot be handled, allow that to rest until the wound dries up, and separate it and the swelling and pain around it should be alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, you should sprinkle powder on that which has been recommended to you. But if the wound is formed as a fistula, treat that with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
If it is a wound caused by a lance or knife, and sometimes the depth, you should consider whether the patient feels windiness from the wound; if so, you should know that the wound is fatal.
And if the depth is not great and the wound is recent with blood, you should pause in the first hour on powder, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of it and return to the heart and increase the patient's pain, but rather allow it to heal gently and remove the dressing twice a day.
And if the dressing is not present, you should pause in the orifice of the wound and allow the fluid that comes from the moisture to drain out; make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is applied remains in place.
If the wound has passed for three days or more and the patient does not experience spasm, tremor of bad heart nor constriction of veins, and sometimes good dispositions occur, then you know that the wound is saved; and then take care of it with a few and with other treatments until it heals.
If the healing is delayed and the wound has remained open for a long time, then you know that it has become a fistula; treat it according to its nature.
If the wound is from incision of space or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what comes before suture (if large), or with powder (if small).
But if the wound has already caused decay in the bone, and it is already filled with pus, then you twist the wound and try to extract those pus pockets, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then let it heal over that the wound may be relieved, for the extraction of them is eased.
And in other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the remedy for care is the same as what has been said.
Of abdominal wounds.
The condition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small or medium-sized.
A small disruption is done in a difficult manner, and since the reduction of it is very difficult, if you do not insert it into its place immediately, for it swells and grows, making the insertion of it difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two cases mentioned above.
You should know that abdominal suture is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and necessary for stitches of other wounds of the body.
Two other proper sutures are specific to other wounds, but they are especially important for abdominal stitching.
And I recommend to you each one with exposure and explanation.
Therefore tell that if the wound is small and there is a cause of intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the small disruption as previously mentioned, or when the intestine has come inflamed due to cold air.
And therefore when this happens, it is necessary that you heat the intestine in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or that you take it in warm water, camphor, spike and wrap it with it into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes you find that in which there is stiffness, and it is better to use only water in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and wormwood are steeped, for this relieves the insertion of it with little effort.
But if the insertion is not relieved by this treatment, then you cut the disruption a little with an instrument with which you make small incisions of wormwood.
The primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and not necessary to cut immediately, nor occupation due to lack of necessity.
Of the instrument, see its form:
The one rounded part sharp and the other non-sharp, the end should be thin but not as thin as a spatula, it should be slightly blunt.
And therefore when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, it is necessary that its reduction should be according to its natural form, in its proper place if possible over what has happened, for this is better.
But if the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, place their legs as far apart from each other as the head; and if it is above the abdomen, then you must place their head and feet as far apart as possible.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must place your attention and reflection quickly to ensure that the side where the wound is is farther away than the other.
And thus it is necessary to administer this in large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, prepare what is ready, and make sure that the one who will minister it is among your most trusted, who should hold the disruption completely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and prepare to cover up what might cause another suture.
This is the common suturing method: one that takes a needle, or a count of needles depending on the size of the wound; and place it at the end of the disruption of the thumb, and tighten the needle once, without putting thread in both ends of the knot, with the two ends of the knot and the two ends of the string that is below the knot of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added two ends of the knot and two ends of the string, and they are done four orders.
Approach the wound with a firm double-edged blade around the needle's circuit, and some observations of both sides simultaneously, and approximate the lips and wound for a proper fit; and leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that place, and approach it as firmly as the first needle; do not cease this action until it is necessary with the needles to complete the contraction of the wound.
The needles should be of a moderate size between coarseness and finesse, because fine needles easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to pass through the skin, hence it is necessary that they be of moderate size in both coarseness and fineness.
The needle should not be inserted into the skin too close to the edge of the wound, because the flesh should not be easily cut and the wound should heal before it is consolidated.
And do not prolong the stitches so that the wound is prevented from healing.
Then make incisions at the ends of the needles so that you do not injure the patient during their sleep; and pause over the pulp of the stitches, which should be spread out all around, and leave them until you know that the wound is healed.
These types of stitches with needles in this manner are most suitable for small wounds, because it is enough to sew them up with one needle or two around that area.
However, the second stitch is more common: and it consists of sewing all four sides, of the skin and two edges of the opening, in one observation, with a needle that is firmly wrapped around both coarseness and finesse.
Then when the needle has penetrated these four sides, you should withdraw it from that side of the partition from where you began, in order to draw out the pus rising up on the other side of the wound, so that the stitch is as strong as a sewn seam with cloth, which are stronger.
And pause between each stitch the thickness of the finger tip.
This stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch, I sewed the wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was wounded by a sword, and it was the rupture of the wound greater than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the belly button of the same place and was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it when the intestine had been outside for 24 hours.
The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured it and it healed; and may it live for many years, and it will continue in its condition.
The other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by miracle, since I did not cure it with a gargle, because it was in a place where no gargle or any medicine could be found, instead I waited over the wound for two observations every day and rinsed it continuously with honey water until it healed.
But I will tell you two types of stitches according to the narration of the Word.
And it is that you begin by sewing the skin, and insert the needle from the outer edge to the inner edge.
And when the needle enters the skin and at that point pulls back enough so that the tip of the finger where you inserted the needle is left; and then insert the needle from the inner edge to the outer edge in the other end of the member.
And when you have made it penetrate once more, then make it penetrate again in that same end of the member from the inner edge to the outer edge; and leave the tip of the finger that is on that side, and insert the needle into the other end of the opening from the inner edge to the outer edge.
And make it penetrate with that same penetration in the skin in the part that you had made penetrate into the intestine in the tip of the member towards where all of it penetrates.
And then begin at that side and sew the other side with the one that is of the intestine in the other direction, and withdraw the needle from the skin that penetrated, and bring it back to that skin and sew the other side of the member with this extremity; and withdraw the other needle from the skin that was inserted there.
And do this once and then another, and do this again after each observation until you sew all that is outside according to the example given.
And the summary of this method of stitching is that you sew with a skin stitch by which you sew fur, so that you sew the skin once from the side of the end of the skin, and leave the other side until it is complete.
However, the second type of stitch that I will tell you, which is called Gallia, and it is from there and recommended by them, is to sew as follows: gather all parts together according to their corresponding parts, so that the sides are united properly by nature; and apply the other side of one part and the other end of the member to the other end of that part, and this is done as I have recommended.
Push the needle into the end of the affected part at the incision outside, and make it penetrate inside that same incision only, and remove two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside the incision at the other two ends of the suture.
Then turn each of those (threads) and make each one penetrate from the incision inside out to the outside of the incision at the other two ends of the affected part.
This method of suturing is better than common loose stitching, and it is the suturing that requires careful consideration.
This is a text by Guidonis.
And many say that the belly's stitching should be corrected with two needles, so you insert one needle through each of them, and begin from the start with the needle you have at hand, and make it pass through the other hole according to the stitching of those who sew hearts together.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
But the remedy for ulcers is judged like other ailments.
The cause is because when you achieve the recent ulcer with the patient's own blood before the air changes it, and reduce the intestine and sew it up properly, then stop over that carnivorous powder.
And if the air has already changed the ulcer, then stop over those medications that are presently in your presence until they become solid and the threads can be inserted and it is consolidated, and take care of it as with the treatment of other ulcers until it heals.
But if you are not present with the medications, then stop over it immediately, because it begins to rot, put old wine and change it every two days as you have taught me, until it heals, because simple ulcers do not require other medication in most cases.
But if you fear that the ulcer communicates injury to the main limbs, then it is necessary that you immerse sheep's wool in boiled oil or raw oil and stop it over the area between the joints and leave the rest alone.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the patient's intestines, because it has gone unattended for many days, then you should cauterize that with black stiptic wine, especially if the purulence occurs in the intestine and makes an exit through the cavity.
And you should know that healing of a large intestine is easier than in thin intestines.
It is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive healing from wounds that occur in it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins that are there, and the size of it that is in them, and the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your judgment as you would sew together intestines.
But if it has passed time and has turned green or black, then you must tighten it with a needle over the spot that is discolored from it, because in tissue there are veins and arteries, so blood will flow out.
Then insert what is another lymph there, and stop two ends of the needle hanging outside the wound, because on top of you it will be relieved from the attraction of it, you should sew up the tissue and the flow of pus from the ulcer.
Recall the treatment of ulcers when they occur in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, it may be possible to restore it in some men, because I saw one who was plagued in his belly with piercing lance and the ulcer was on the right side of the stomach, and the ulcer was old and made a fistula, and it healed through care and persistence.
Then I continued the treatment of it because it was not completed in healing, but I continued to treat it carefully until the area is healed and the wound is consolidated.
And I saw the area consolidated, so I turned to the patient who had an accident in his belly; and not one should fear because of this accident and ruin in their many decisions eating and drinking, but let them take baths and exercise in their usual manner.
And some experienced people say that when an ulcer occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it must be tied in this way: and you take large crumbs; and then adjust the two lips of the ulcer and stop one crumb of those with its mouth open over the two lips of the ulcer; so when you take it in your hand and tighten its mouth, detach the head from it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
Then you stop another crumb near the first one, and do not continue to make crumbs one after the other according to the size of the entire ulcer.
Then return that [part] and its wound; and let the attached capsules remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed, and do not harm the patient in any way.
It is possible that the intestine may be stitched with a fine thread made from animal gut, which is thinner than a needle; and it is necessary that you take the end of this thread of intestine, make an incision, and then sew the end of it with the thread, wrap it, and insert the thread through the intestine, and sew it up in several places, and reduce it at the incision.
This method of suturing with ants is not to be trusted or relied upon.
If the wound is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then you should not rely on this method, but resort to surgery instead, since it will not heal the area completely.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess that becomes necrotic and old, and turns into an ulcer that does not heal and persists for a long time without being drained, is universally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
A fistula, in truth, is a hard, white nodule that does not cause pain and has a concavity similar to the concavity of an asclepic's stone; for this reason, such an ulcerated abscess is called a rizated abscess, meaning asclepic's stone.
An abscess in men is moist and drains pus, but the fluidity subsides after a few hours. Sometimes this liquid becomes moved, is thin and thick, and can be either viscous or watery.
I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the treatment for each with medicines in the classification.
Therefore, it is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistulas, which is performed by surgical intervention using a knife.
Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; as such, there are fistulas that reach veins and arteries, nerves, the spinal cord, the intestine, the bladder, one of the ribs, one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed like that of the hand and foot; and these are those that provide proximity to the main part of the body and similar areas.
Therefore, one of these types of fistulas is among the difficult-to-heal diseases that do not receive treatment and occupation with it is laborious and involves ignorance.
If one of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach the areas mentioned and you expect healing and hope for its discovery, but wish to learn more about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows a straight path, insert it into the area.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with tender lead, for lead, having a lightness to its body, is relieved and curved in counteracting the twisting.
And if the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to touch it with probing.
Therefore, close the orifices with other orifices, for the moisture that you use to plug one will pass through the others and run out of them.
Then, examine carefully, according to the method available to you, whether this has bone or nerve, and is the concavity of a long fistula or close one, or is a fistula with horrible movements and is on top of everything with all your strength, all your questioning, all the questioning you gave the patient, and the discovery of pain should be your compression with your hand on the spot, and similar to the signs and causes of an abscess.
And when you have been standing over all those causes with true attention, then go to the cure according to confidence: it is that you consider whether this is an apparent fistula near salt, far from joints, or of nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places which I told you about.
You then dry the fistula according to what has been said in the narrative of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and rotten flesh, and that which was born in the orifices of the skin, or nails and similar, and cure that within which has healed.
If the fistula is of deep length, and according to correctness, you must first incise it as far as possible for you, and cleanse it of all its rotten flesh; then administer warm poultices covered in medicines acute, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron.
You then perform this some number of observations until the acute medicine has burned all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
And then restore it with fresh gauze which produce healthy flesh until it has healed.
If it is not healed by this, you then cauterize it according to what you have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then you examine it and incise it as recommended if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
If the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackness in it, you remove that to the point where the corruption has been contained entirely; then cure it with what causes it to be fleshed over until it has healed.
And if it does not heal and bleeds like that, you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; then you examine further and carefully reason about it and cleanse it with your last remaining strength, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healed, it is good; and if not, you know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been achieved, and in that case it is not to be cured but only let it be.
If the rotten bone is small, or can be pulled out, then you pull it with delicate forceps which are suitable for that.
If they are moving bones, you perform the extraction of all those carefully, and do not leave any cause with your strength.
If any cause of the moistures opposes you, and in its incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise the leaking flesh or skin here, and deliver the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then wait over the wound that could possibly heal the wound, and leave it until the environment of those bones is covered with flesh and leaking skin, and guard the wound so that it does not consolidate, and constrict the incision which you have made in your operation.
Having said that, if you fear, wait on the wound submerged in oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian honey, or one of the green ointments, for when they burn those leaking parts, and the bones are separated from their adhesion, and the attraction is relieved.
If it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bone, and what is rotten from it is only the face of it, then you remove that with resin only to the point where the blackness and corruption has been removed, and then restore the wound.
If what is rotten from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then you make the necessary incision to close that and incise everything into the location where the corruption has been achieved, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you what applies to a man in his thigh, that you place it aside and assist him in your operation.
A young man of about thirty years old experiences pain in his groin, and from within the parts worsens with material inside the body up to where the material reaches the groin, and this is pus material, with large abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
And then the time was extended due to the error of doctors until the abscess had burst, and materials gathered from it, and its healing was delayed until the wound became fistulated, and pus formed in the openings, which all gave off putridity and the moisture of the body.
And then the care of many doctors continued for about two years, not with wisdom but with art, until I was called.
I saw the opening of him and the materials that flowed from these openings with great force, and le corps de cet homme tait totalement stable et sa couleur tait citron.
Then I entered one of these openings and reached the bone.
Et je me rapproche et inspecte rapidement toutes les ouvertures, et je trouve que celles-ci arrivent  leur point d'origine tout autour de la cavit.
Ensuite, je m'approche et incise dans un de ces orifices jusqu' ce que je dcouvre une partie de l'os et que j'y trouve une putrfaction qui est terreuse et corrompue; elle tait dj corrompue une partie de la cavit en aval, jusqu' ce qu'elle ait pntr dans la moelle.
Et je garde cette putrfaction corrompue et prpare de l'os dcouvert.
Et je suis sr que cela n'tait pas dans l'os mais cette putrfaction qu'elle a t carte et prserve, car j'en ai dj limin une partie.
Et je place la gurison de cette plaie avec une mdecine consolida pour un long temps, mais elle n'est pas consolide.
Et je reviens et inspecte encore l'os de manire similaire au premier examen, et j'y trouve une continuit de la putrfaction dans l'os.
Et je conserve cette putrfaction et je m'engage  faire sa gurison et sa rparation, mais elle n'est pas rpare.
Et je reviens pour une nouvelle inspection et ne poursuis pas  inciser l'os peu  peu particulirement et  perforer la rparation de cet os, et il n'est rpar que lorsque j'incise autour d'un pouce de lui, et cet extrait avec sa moelle, et je lui applique ensuite des mdicaments pour la gurison, mais cela s'amliore lgrement et se soigne.
Il n'est pas ncessaire d'inspecter  nouveau cet os et de couper son extrmit, mais il faut la prparation de la fragilit de cet os et la faiblesse de sa tolrance ainsi que la peur de mort car il s'y est avr dans toutes les circonstances en raison d'une insuffisance d'vacuation de sang malade.
Et il se soigne entirement, et il n'y a rien  cet endroit de l'os carn qui durera, et la prparation de cet os est bonne dans son corps et renforce sa vertu, et il conserve ses dispositions et ne fait pas contraire  ceux-ci lors de ses mobilisations ni de dommage dans aucune circonstance.
Mais si l'os est dplac dans le corps, alors il faut que vous le coupez selon cette mthode : vous prenez modrment et fortement cet os  l'extrmit de celui-ci, et commandez  quelqu'un d'tirer celui-ci vers le haut ; puis vous attachez ce lien de laine plus pais que le premier lien ; ensuite, vous appliquez ce lien sur la chair qui est sous l'os dplac, et tirez cette extrmit pour que la chair soit  ses bords, et alors vous dcouvrez la chair au-dessus du point o vous souhaitez le couper, et vous faites en sorte que le coup ne lame la chair.
And a table or stool is placed decently beside the bones, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to use a saw which does not cut through corrupt flesh.
It is necessary that the saw is over the small corrupt part little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear on its surface to sensation, perhaps the sawing of it will be seen later.
If the bone is corrupt and not evident, one part is continued with the other, and the corruption is at one or several places within it, then you should cut through all the skin completely; and then place a cushion and saw that part where the corruption ends, and continue sawing on the other side until the corruption is completely removed.
Let the sawing follow the location of the corruption, as I have said.
If the corruption is at a joint, cut through that corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but trickery.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, it is necessary that you investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and that you cut through it, and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and that any trickery be corrected by you, as long as it does not harm your veins or nerves.
And you should know which saws and blades are suitable for cutting these bones, depending on the location of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare all types of operation instruments appropriate for that operation.
And you should know that this operation means something to you concerning the type of instrument that is needed; when you have extensive study and experience in the methods of this art, as well as knowledge of various diseases, then you will already have prepared what is appropriate for each of the instruments, for all diseases.
And you are forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will require as simple ones with which to proceed according to your prohibition, which you will test on others. Forma de serras (saw blades):
Shape of another saw:
Size of another saw: large
Shape of a ray (or splint): Let the head of this ray be in the shape of a cross-headed nail and let its points be shaped like nails driven in.
It is not advisable to press the joints if they are corrupt or have a large opening.
Shape of smaller scissors:
Shape of pliers (tongs):
Shape of another saw made correctly: should be arched upwards and the sharpness of it made of iron, and its limb should be made like a dagger point. The shape:
Shape of scissors with concavity:
Shape of another pair of small scissors:
Shape of another pair of scissors with curved ends:
Shape of small scissors resembling a tweezers (forceps):
Shape of smaller teeth:
Shape of another incision tool that resembles a saw and its edge is used to cut bones in various locations:
Shape of the saw that is used to cut through bones (osteotome):
The end is triangular and sharp.
It is made of Indian iron, and it seems that all the causes mentioned for scissors, teeth, saws are covered by this.
Cutting through bone edges (osteotome) and cutting tendons (tendonotome).
If the edges become thickened or for an intrinsic or extrinsic reason, or if you have treated the corruption with medicines and the cure does not help, or if the corruption spreads to a limb without any known cause, then it is necessary to cut through the limb up to where the corruption is, so that the patient escapes death or a more serious injury to the limb.
The sign of the person affected is that the limb turns black before it has been seared, or if the blackness spreads to the limb until it reaches the root and takes over the entire body; thus, take care to cut through the affected area.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous bites such as from a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and similar creatures.
If the corruption or injury is at the end of the finger, then you should cut through the finger and not give space for the corruption to enter the hand.
If you get to the wrist, then you should cut through the radius bone and not give space for the corruption to enter the forearm.
If it affects the elbow, then you should cut through the arm up to the joint.
If the corruption spreads past the elbow and sometimes reaches the shoulder joint, then it is the death of the patient; and administering another cause other than this in treatment is a waste of virtue (or effort).
Similarly, if the corruption affects the foot and spreads to the toes, then you should cut through the toe bone.
If it takes hold on the heel of the foot, then you should cut through the entire foot. However, if it penetrates into the ankle joint, then you should cut through the calf up to the joint of the ankle.
If the corruption has reached the ankles, there is nothing to be done except dismissal and letting the patient die.
The method of cutting through the limb or sawing it is that you tighten the ligaments on the side where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament on the other side; extend a ligament at the sides away from where you intend to cut, and extend another ligament towards it; separate the flesh between the two ligaments using a spatula or other sharp instrument until all the flesh is exposed; and then make the cut or saw through.
It must be placed that the linen is folded from all sides so it does not touch the area, and comes to the patient's wound adjusted and cauterized dressing.
If bleeding occurs during the operation, you must cauterize the area thoroughly or place some powders to restrain the blood flow; then return to your treatment as soon as it is finished.
Then tie the affected limb with a suitable ligament and care for it until it is healed.
I recommend that you use an ointment for a man in his foot, which I also recommend, this is because it occurs to him blackening in his foot with a condition similar to burn caused by fire.
That corruption initially affects the affected area and then spreads throughout the entire foot.
Therefore, that man should prepare himself by applying poultice that accelerates healing to the affected limb with the intensity of pain and burning sensation, and he incises that foot into the joint, and it heals.
For a long time, that corruption has been occurring in the hand, as indicated above.
Therefore, it comes to me, and it is performed to remove that surplus with what can be placed on the hand of medicines, returning the corruption of the body; and the surplus does not spread and begins to affect the other affected areas starting from the hand.
He called me to incise the hand of that patient, but I did not want to do it because of the risk of spreading the corruption, and rather fearing the danger of cutting off his hand, for the virulence of the illness was great.
And since he lost hope with me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and it healed.
I have not added to this narrative except for helping with what is known about this illness and as a signification by which it should be understood and followed.
Cure of sinuses and the quality of clysterization with medications.
If an abscess occurs in any fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until pus collection occurs, then it should be broken and perforated, and pus should be released from there, leaving the area like a vessel, and the bandage that is placed over it as fine linen, and no secondary corruption occurs, and it does not press on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
But if the space continues to expand until corruption enters any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment is to incise that bandage entirely as it is rolled up, and moreover when it is thinned and made like linen, and make sure it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the bandage will stick and that the corruption has not occurred as a result of secondary consequences, and if there is a gap in the bandage, then cure it with clyster.
And it is considered to be a sinus, and if it is large and the arm that is affected has a fetid odor, then clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine which is oil, vinegar and zinjabar crushed into small pieces, and placed in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and effective.
Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; clysterize the sinus with this mixture, and tighten the orifice of it, and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then extract that with caution; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the stench is gone.
Sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when the above-mentioned medicine is not available; and you take the ashes of wheat, place them in water, and boil that until the sinus has been purified.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then clysterize it with water and honey mixed with crushed zinjabar, or with vinegar and honey mixture, because by nature honey purifies and cleanses, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and moreover when in vinegar there is an excess of stringency and dryness.
And when you find that the sinus has been cleansed for several days and you are convinced that it is healed, then clysterize it with a solution that makes the flesh soft in it.
And take some diaphinicon and dissolve it in rose oil and stiff vinegar; or clysterize it with certain medications and other remedies that have the properties I mentioned earlier in the treatise on enemas.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula for clyster, then you should widen it gradually with a small iron and pause when it is wide enough covered with Egyptian oil or basilicon oil until it is widened.
Similarly, if the orifice is wide, you sew its lips together with a stitch and leave it in the amount in which there is no addition during clyster.
If the orifices from which the arm flows up to the armpit are raised at the shoulder, then dry that in the base of the pit so that the arm can run inside, because when the arm is bent in the bend of the joint, the flesh is generated there.
If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the bone pit as you wish, then you must pierce and prepare the limb with the necessary preparation so that the arm can easily run out of it without any obstacle from the arm.
But that which is over the sinus opening, which you constantly moisten to release what accumulates in the arm. And so that you know if what runs from the arm is a lot or little, or is digested, or not digested.
And so you examine the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there, and if there is an abscess there.
And when your medication is prolonged in that manner, and you see the material that has been discharged onto the sinus opening adheres or is adherent, then you must detach or wait three days, and when you detach the wound, then you change the cloth for another and renew the dressing.
But if the sinus has a large space with subtle pus, do not despair of the adherence of it, for healing comes close, for some men have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and from those is made the contrary of it.
And if the sinus is discharged for many days without digesting the arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you must adjust the medications to dryness, and if the medications are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried just as with a diaphoretic ointment when there is excess addition of zinc.
And the later treatment is that you take diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and add to it an old guaiacum substance, and mix them together and use it.
And it seems similar when there is no arm, use diaphoretic ointment, honey that is thickened inside, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and crush them together, heat the mixture over the fire, mix it with linseed oil, and apply the mixture to a linen cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and apply the linseed oil mixed with the crushed myrrh and aloe that you have thickened inside, and sprinkle it on a linen cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered with long aristolochia and the root of celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and centaury flour, and you use these simple ingredients or adjust them, crush them and sift them, and powderize over the honey that has been recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the joint of it, and you make an incision in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistula treatment as described before.
Of the treatment of phlegmon and the scratching of nails, and adding a digit and cutting a section.
Phlegmon is an abscess that you should not remove the nail of the toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can be strong in other places, and when it is prolonged and its healing is expensive, or it becomes an infected abscess, or it is corrupted, and it eats away at the root of the nail, and strongly corrupts it all, and it carries its corruption to the bone inside that smells fetid, and the end of the finger is cut off, and its color is made black.
And therefore when you have it with what has been said in the division and do not confer your treatment, then you must incise with an iron all the superfluous material that is broken off of the nail and cauterize the wound near it, for cautery is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy, and you do not want to compress the tissues at the edges of the nail, and it begins to push and pierces it, then you must pause a sharp needle next to the edge of the nail that pushes the flesh, and drive it up and incise the flesh gently, and place on what remains of the flesh medicines that are corrosive until it is completely moistened; and apply ointment to it until it heals.
If corruption has already invaded the bone, then it is necessary that you incise the bone and extract it, because no time is healed when the bone is corrupt.
And if the rot and corruption continue to spread within the bone, then you should incise it as soon as possible according to its location, and provide care for it until it is healed.
And if the nail is struck with percussion or pressure, and intense pain occurs, then you should first anesthetize the patient, and then cut the nail with a spatula having a sharp transverse incision from top to bottom, making sure the incision does not reach into the skin where the nail ends, as this will cause intense pain for the patient and lead to excessive growth of the surrounding tissue in the area; and provide care for that location using something that alleviates pain.
And if the digit is swollen, which often occurs in men of all ages, it is hard and fleshy overall, and hard in the bones or hard in the nail.
And those who are born with a joint abnormality, or whose abnormality is in the digits of the said joints. But if it is born with a digit abnormality in the said joints, or the joint is very weak, it is diseased.
And of those who are born with fleshy growths, the incision is easy, and you should incise it with a long knife to remove the abnormality.
But if it is born with joint abnormity, the treatment is difficult; and therefore, avoid abscessing it.
If it is born with the said digit, then you should incise the skin around the bone at the beginning with a round knife, and use a suitable saw to remove it, and provide care for it until it is healed.
And consolidation that occurs in the said digits between their motes observed or due to human birth defects, or consolidation of wounds or burns, or similar, it is therefore necessary to remove that consolidation before the digits return to their natural form.
And place between their bandages of the infused oil in rose oil to prevent them from consolidating easily, and separate between them or place a thin layer of lead between them until it is consolidated as necessary.
Similarly, if there is consolidation in any of the said digits with the palm, then you should remove that consolidation according to its preparation and suitability for the member's figure.
From incision of veins, they are called varicose.
Varicose veins are called "vices," and they are swollen, thick veins filled with mucous-like substances that occur in the limbs of the body, and their greatest danger occurs in the legs, especially in travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer purging of the body with black bile several times using strong emetics and draw blood from the basilic vein.
The treatment for them with iron is done in two ways: one is that it is incised and the black blood is extracted, and the other way is that the vein is raised and everything is removed.
The incision is done in this way: first, the leg is wrapped with hot water until the thick black blood is resolved, which is a dark substance from the leg, and then the patient's leg is stretched to the most superior part of the thigh above the ankle and below the knee with one bandage, and the vein is cut in one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and the black blood is raised with the strongest hand from the lower part of the leg above and below the vein until the desired amount and what you want to extract is removed, which will alleviate the patient's condition.
And apply that, and tell him to avoid foods that cause black bile production.
Repeat the treatment by anesthetizing when the veins are filled and you notice this in the patient.
If the elevation of them is done in this way: you check the patient's leg, if it is swollen with pus, then immerse it in hot water and wrap the leg with hot water until it softens and the veins are overflowing; or exercise it forcefully if there is no bath available, until the member is heated.
And then cut the cords on the correct side of the vein with a long or short incision depending on whether it is at the front or back of it, or in the bottom part you should use the scalpel.
And then open the cords with scissors and peel off the vein from all sides until it is felt, and you must recognize that which you see descending darker.
And therefore, when you see the white cord, you should recognize that it is a vein.
And then place the rod under it and lift it from the cord until it is raised and moved aside, and suspend it with a hook or lion's paw.
And then make another incision parallel to the first one for three fingers, and peel off the cord above the vein until it appears.
Approximately translate the given sentence: "Then raise that and incise it in the posterior section (of the body), and approximately extract that and elevate it into the cavity from which it protrudes through the second section, and approximately extract that from the section above it."
"Then extract it from the section that is above all sections, when it has protruded entirely; and then incise it."
"If you are unable to extract and elevate it, then insert a sharp needle with a strong double thread through it and pull it out, or insert the lance and rotate your hand around it until it is caught." "Be careful not to incise it, for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate the knot and the pain may worsen for the patient."
"When the whole has been expelled (or pulled out), place a poultice made of wool soaked in vinegar and both olive oil and un-olive-oiled oil over the wound, and let it heal."
"If the wound is contracted with a curvature that encircles it in such a way as I have mentioned, you must then cut through the entire curvature and the areas of encirclement, and suspend it with sutures until you elevate it completely."
"Be careful to not incise the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult to elevate (the knot); use your discretion in this matter."
The following is the form of the incision on the wound:
It is not suitable for the incision to be made thus like in nails nor of acute extremity so as not to injure the vein; and it is of large flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut through the vein due to its subtlety; having excessive thickness as we have said.
Extraction of leg vein.
This vein is produced in the thighs in lands like Ategi in the Arabic lands, in lands of Arabia and India with scant vegetation and where there is no herb or grass.
And it is said to be produced in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
Its formation is caused by decay, which comes from the intestine, as venomous snakes and worms and parasites breed between the intestine and the flesh.
A sign of its occurrence is the swelling of this vein in the thigh, and the area becomes inflamed; and from there, the vein begins to emerge from the site of that inflammation, which appears like a plant.
When the end of it appears, then you must cover that area with a leaden object weighing one dragon and two dragons, immerse it in water and hang the lead suspended from a leg.
And for as many days as any cause takes it to the edges outside, encase that in lead and leave it. If the pain persists, then you should make an incision in it and cover the remaining part; do not incise that which remains inside unless it has already emerged, because if you incise that, it contracts, goes into the flesh, causes abscess and pus formation in the area, and leads to a bad ulceration.
Therefore it should be treated gently and removed gradually until it is completely expelled from the body without any remaining cause within the body.
From this vein, it has been expelled in some men whose length was five palms and one digit, and I have already heard of one that reached twenty palms long.
If it is incised during the time of treatment, insert a probe into the cavity and penetrate it with a long probe along the body until all matter is evacuated; administer pus from the area for several days with medicines; and treat that with the care of abscesses.
This vein often recurs, and more so when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it frequently causes pain, and it is expelled from each wound it forms.
Therefore treat that as we have said in the previous section, with what has been mentioned above.
Of a cut on worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
This disease is known in some places as cow disease because it often invades cattle and there is only one type of worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, which moves through the body upwards and downwards, and is finally manifested in the sensation of each member until it bursts the intestine and comes out.
Its generation is due to the decay of certain humors, such as worms, snakes, and parasites in the abdomen.
It is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it is expelled to the nose, causing violent sneezing which enters and destroys the nasal cavity, and this happens many times.
Therefore when you want to cure that and remove it, do not do so unless its movement and manifestation at the sensation is known, and then you must press what is on top of it and what is below it firmly and tightly, and apply heat on it and remove it.
If it is bound in the flesh and not absorbed, you must wait for it to die, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you see that it is expelled at the nose near the head, press on the forehead firmly and tighten it, apply heat to it, and remove it; and the patient must use cleansing of the body with medicines evacuating foul humors, and be careful of foods producing decay.
Of an incision on sciatica.
This disease is called sciatica in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is felt as pressure on one member after another.
And I have seen this as I will advise you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and found her arm swollen and saw a small inflammation on the brachial vein of the arm, which had been torn open for an hour, and then saw the inflammation move upwards like a worm creeping along, but less conspicuously than silver flowing from place to place.
And then he goes into the pain of that location and settles in the muscle, and stays there for an hour.
Then correct the other body by entering the other arm.
Then I tell him to rotate himself throughout the entire body as he sees fit; and it was very amazing to me at the transformation of it and the swiftness of one member after another. He had already seen before that in the most severe cases according to that method, but I have seen many more who claimed that pain is transformed from one member to another. But I did not see this in the ulcers as it occurs in women.
He did not think it was that, but rather it is because the woman was old, where the body and veins were exposed, and in this case, that windiness [inflammation] appeared as a transformation.
And it is necessary that it does not appear in this retroactive treatment in those who are weak and have bodies with veins softened by moisture.
And as you wish the treatment of it and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply ointment to the ulcer as we have said, instead you should strengthen yourself over it and gently and dryly press it until the constriction is released, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see the ulcers on your own body, then cure that by excretion of the body and by expelling windiness with it, and coat it with pills made from wormwood and pills of serapion and similar substances.
Of extraction of thistles.
Thistles are diverse depending on the species and the location in the body where it occurs, since their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, mute ones, they are solid ones; and some have three angles, and those with tongues; and those with thorns.
And of the symptoms of the scurvy is when you catch thistle and pierce the bone, and it is excreted from the cavity that is above the brain, since this can cause strong vomiting, blindness, dizziness, fever in ulcers, inflammation and fever of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and loose stool with bile, and loss of speech and destruction of voice, and excretion from the wound of white moisture similar to powder, and eyes discharging fluid similar to the softness of the flesh.
Therefore, if these symptoms appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and extraction of the thistle, unless it is necessary.
But the symptoms of thistle when it catches in the heart, which is near the left breast, and feels like something hard stuck in there and not empty; and the movement of the thistle is similar to that of the pulse, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is a burning sensation at the extremities, sweating, fever, and fainting; and therefore know that death descends upon it quickly.
The symptoms when the thistle has pierced the lung are manifested by foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are congested, and the color of the patient is changed, and he breathes heavily and demands cold air.
And if the thistle catches in the scrotum that is near the foot, and pain occurs near the small ribs, it should be treated with great and intense pain and sighing, but not all of the limbs of the muscles are affected.
And if the thistle catches in the stomach, then there will be strong vomiting from the wound of something indigestible.
And if the thistle catches in the abdomen and is stuck there, then a tear from the wound appears, or cloth or hernia that is torn apart, and there is no hope for healing by the extraction of the thistle.
And if the thistle catches in the bladder and is expelled outside with urine, then some cause inflammation in the external parts, and there is great pain over the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
But other limbs such as the face, neck, neck, shoulders and back, and their equivalents, are saved in the majority of cases if the thistle does not obstruct a vein or artery and it is not poisonous thistle.
And I recommend to you what I have seen of the nature of these thistles, which indicates something about your treatment.
The cause is that an arrow pierced the tear duct of the nose in the nasal root of a man, and you extract it from the other side, remove the earwax from his ear, and it heals, and no harm comes to his nose.
And another arrow pierced a Jew in the eye, which entered his nose, closed his eyelid, and was hidden, so it could not be removed except for a small tip adhering to his shaft, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow with a lion head without earwax.
The Jew was saved, and no harm came to his eye.
And another arrow pierced a Christian man who had been shot in the neck, an Arabic arrow with earwax, and it was deep inside his neck; then you incise along both sides of it, and it was already submerged in his neck; then you soften it with that, and carefully extract it, and he recovers.
And another arrow was extracted from a man who had been shot in the stomach; at first it seemed he would die by that; but after passing thirty days without any change due to his condition, you incise over the arrow and tie it, and he recovers, and no further harm comes to him.
I also see a man in whom an arrow was shot in his chest, and the wound has healed over it; after about seven years, you incise the wound to remove the arrow.
I also see a woman in whom an arrow was shot in her stomach, and the wound has healed inside it, and she does not experience any changes due to her condition, and the woman does not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
I also see another man in whom an arrow was shot in the face and the wound has healed, and the arrow is removed; here, there is no great pain, as with similar cases.
And extract the arrow from the man of the king who had been shot in the middle of his nose and it has already declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called to treat him within three days of his wounding by the arrow.
Then I probed the wound of the arrow to find out if it was narrow; and when I did not feel anything there, I felt a prick in his right ear, so I thought that prick might be from the tip of the arrow.
I filled the area with plaster containing astringent and digestive properties, assuming that the location is suitable to reveal the arrow's location so that it can be cut there.
No harm came to the location where the arrow had entered; I continued with the plaster for many days and no further harm occurred; the wound healed during that time, and the patient was released from the external incision after several days, until one day he felt the arrow in his nose and informed me of it.
And then I applied an acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up, and with the probe I verified that it was indeed the tip of the arrow; I carefully extracted the small tip that was attached to the shaft.
And then I closed the wound with that acute medicine until it opened up and I could clearly see the tip of the arrow; after some time I sent word to him for up to four months.
When the wound is opened wider and it becomes possible to insert forceps into it, I remain cautious and work on it with various tools until one day I take hold of it using forceps designed for the purpose, as described in the end of the chapter, until I remove it; and then I restore the wound.
Some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely, without any further harm to him.
I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows according to this rule and significance that I have not mentioned, because the divisions of this art and the difficulties of that one are not understandable through narration or understanding these texts freely.
The wise craftsman considers much in little; and what is present regarding what is absent; and he must perform new operations and invent new instruments for the descent of foreign causes of the art when they occur.
And so I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they are shot, but according to two methods: either by attraction to the location where it entered or by the contrary of the other side.
And the arrow that is shot through the location where it entered or is an artery in a meaty location and is shot and lost.
If you do not immediately remove it, you must leave it for some days until the flesh that surrounds it can be softened and its exit is facilitated.
Similarly, if it is shot into bone and you do not remove it immediately, you must leave it for some days and move it daily with traction and motion, until it is expelled.
And if the abscess does not open by itself in about several days, then you must perforate around the sack in that bone of every part, very subtly into where it is expanded by the abscess, and then extract it.
But if the abscess is buried in the body and not felt, you should explore it with a probe, and if you feel it, you should draw it out with suitable instruments for extracting it.
And if you cannot approach it due to the swelling of the wound and the length of the probe, and it is not a bone or nerve or vein there, then you should make an incision on the wound until it is expanded and it is possible to extract the abscess.
And if it is covered by a layer of flesh in which it is embedded on all sides with every effort you can make, then you should carefully separate the flesh where it is located; and if you cannot approach it through the removal of the flesh in the fracture of the earlobes and twisting of those until it becomes necessary.
And when you perform the extraction of the abscess in any location where it is, you should use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes obedient; and be subtle with very gentle care not to break the abscess and make difficult its drawing out and extraction.
And if you cannot approach it at your time, you should leave it for several days until the surrounding parts can be opened, and apply it to where it is alleviated. If a counterflow of blood occurs in it, you must administer what has been said about treatment in its section.
Be careful with your incision of the vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer remedies in every possible way for the evacuation of the abscess; and do it with ease, tranquility, graduality and firmness as I and you recommend.
Therefore, you should press the abscess to make the patient conform to the figure in which the abscess should be evacuated, because it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible based on the figures.
But those abscesses that are located on the opposite side or which have already begun to expand towards the outside, or make the margin of the abscess bulge with feeling of the part above the adjacent skin and sometimes prominently; then you should see about it; and the incision should be according to the amount in which forceps can grip; and apply pressure to draw it out because it is easy to extract.
But if it is held in the bone, you should turn the probe against it until the abscess penetrates into the bone, and expand it with your fingers, and draw it out.
Otherwise, leave it for several days, and apply it to where it becomes suppurated.
If the head of the abscess is in that place, you should push it with it.
But if the head is cut off and you want to administer pressure, you should insert it into it, if it is closed, a concave instrument to enter the concavity of it in the cavity of the abscess and then push it with it.
But if the abscess is concave, you should push it with a strong instrument entering into it because the abscess is relieved by that.
And if the abscess is inflamed, you must concave all the flesh in which it is located, if possible with what is available, and take care of it with what is suitable.
And if the abscess is in the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the ribs, and it is near such that you can touch it with a probe, and it is possible to dry it out on it, you should dry it out on it and be careful not to incise vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and care for it until it heals.
The form of forceps for drawing out abscesses:
The ends of them should be like the beak of an eagle that are made with a saw when they catch hold of the abscess to prevent it from being damaged.
And from those are made various types, large, few and medium-sized, according to the size of the abscess and its extent, and the size of the wound, and the tightness of it.
In this way, as if it were the tip of an arrow, relieve the indentation in the concave hernia and push out with it.
Venous ligation (or tying) procedure.
The veins used for venous ligation are usually ligated with silk threads. At the head (or neck), there are usually 16 of them. There are usually two pulsating veins, which are near the ears, called "auricular" veins; there are also two herbs visible in each temple, and two veins that are in both eyes (these are called lacrimal veins); a vein located at the midpoint of the forehead and another at the end of the nose; two veins that are at the neck; two veins that are on the upper lip; two veins that are on the lower lip, these veins are called "angelic"; and there are two veins that are under the tongue. These are the veins that are known as "pulse veins." The veins that are ligated in the arms are usually 5. Of these veins, one is the cephalic, and it should be ligated with wild silk (or uncultivated); the people call it "the head vein," which is also called a tributary, and it consists of a branch of the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic; the people name this one "the main vein of the body," and the basilic vein is ligated in the domestic vein, and it's named "cubital"; the common people call this one "the abdominal vein;" the brachial, which runs down the arm, and it is ligated at the wrist (or lower end of the forearm); and it is the one that is lanced (or pierced) and is visible; the cephalic tributary, which is between the aforementioned vein and the smallest vein; and it has two branches.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is located near the bend of the wild silk (or uncultivated) latissimus dorsi muscle; another is called the saphenous, and its location is near the lower end of the domestic cubital vein; the sciatic vein, and its location is near the lower end of the wild silk (or uncultivated) latissimus dorsi muscle; in the leg there are other veins similar to these.
The benefit of the veins near the ears is in treating ancient catarrhs (or inflammation), emigration, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins depends on what I recommend to you: it is that you should shave the patient's head and wash their head in the occipital region where both veins are located with a large cloth moistened well; hold the patient's neck with a bandage so that they appear in two places near the ears, and make sure the bandage is applied at the locations of the veins near the ears in two depressions on the head; and you should do this with your fingertips, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your fingers, here you should try it.
Then take the scalpel lancet (or small knife), which is pointed, and insert it below the vein into the cavity where the lancing (or puncture) will enter the bone. And raise your hand over the vein and cavity at the incision points and make an incision in the vein with the pointed instrument (or lancet). And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths or around that amount; and make the incision deep enough as desired.
And apply pressure with your fingers and hold it until it stops bleeding (or heals).
And at the beginning of this book, there is a discussion about making incisions and their cauterization.
However, the benefit of the two arterial veins located in the temples for venous ligation is in treating ancient and evil emigration, ophthalmia (inflammation of the eye), chronic recurring eye conditions, and acute congestion of the eyes.
The quality of the operation (of lancing) that one should perform is as follows: restrain the patient's neck with their chin pushed towards their chest until both veins appear to your perception and the pulses of the veins become evident; then you shall attempt to proceed with caution.
Then raise the collar above the vein at the partition and point it towards you, insert the lancet in the incision below, lift the vein upward, and make an incision in that way as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the constriction of the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and press on that area with your thumb and strengthen it with a strong pressure; leave it until it is healed.
And the explanation of theirs (the previous instructions), as well as the incision and attraction, has been given at the beginning of this treatise.
And therefore, the help of lancing the vein on the forehead is similar to the lancing of the jugular vein in ancient cases of facial pain, migraines, and inflammation or festering ulcers.
And the quality of lancing that one should perform is as follows: the patient should hold their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and take the instrument that is called "fossor," which has this shape:
Place the point of the fossor on the vein at its top and strike it with the tip in the manner of use, and let the blood flow according to the amount that you wish; then release the patient's perforation and hold it until it is healed.
Sometimes, the lancing is performed with a large lancet, but it is not necessary that the lancet be of acute extremity as other lancets, rather it should be of broad extremity, and lance it transversely because the bone is close and strong, and the lancet would break easily in it if it is thin.
The help of the two veins that are in the tear ducts of the eyes due to scabs or inflammation and sores in the eyes, as well as facial pain, is:
The quality of lancing is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage and you should lance it (the vein), while standing above their head.
The lancing should be done transversely across a short distance with few punctures because there is not much flesh in the area, and if the lancet is thin, it will break easily at its end.
Let the blood flow as much as you need, and press on that area with your thumb, and hold it for a new day, then release it.
The lancing of the nasal vein is given for acute fever and violent cough, as well as facial pain, migraines, and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
The quality of lancing it (the vein) is that the patient holds their neck and places your left hand on their nose, take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the nasal cavity according to rectitude because the vein does not appear to perception there, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary that you press the lancet gently and let the blood flow according to your need; hold it for a night because it heals easily.
The help of lancing the two guiding veins (venae comitantes) is for the constriction of the glands, the beginning of leprosy and various pains and itches, as well as painful and corrosive ulcers like herpes.
The quality of lancing those (the guiding veins) is that the patient holds their necks firmly with both hands, and the artisan stands over the head of the patient, who should be seated on a chair.
And proceed with lancing the long vein (vena longa) using a large thin lancet and make small punctures gradually; extract blood according to a measured quantity or as necessary; and make it look like the other vein.
Then release the bandage and compress both veins with a moderate pressure to prevent the patient from becoming overheated, and leave it until morning because the wound is healed.
The help of lancing the small veins (venae algericae) is for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and painful and corrosive ulcers, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of lancing those (the small veins) is that you should seize the patient before you, hold their neck with a bandage, roll back their lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more so because in the area around those veins are small dark veins; and then make an incision for each one with an incisional incision.
If you doubt which one it is, and do not know which of them, then you should incise the larger of those, and make an incision that is most obvious from those.
Then make it seem like two veins that are above the lips. (It appears this line might be referring to making a cut in a shape resembling two veins, possibly for bloodletting or surgery of some sort)
But of the two veins that are below the tongue, it is more advantageous for the carotid artery in the neck to be near the larynx, for throat diseases, illnesses of the uvula, and oral diseases. (It seems this line suggests that there is a specific location to perform a certain procedure due to proximity to certain organs or areas)
And the quality of performing that procedure is that the patient lies on their back with the head slightly raised, and the tongue is lifted from below, looking down at it, and from one side of it to the other, and the color of each vein is gradually darkening. (It appears this line provides instructions for a specific positioning of the patient for a procedure)
Then perform the incision on each one; and be careful not to injure your hand during the incision of those, because they are arteries below. (It seems this line is providing a caution regarding the risk of injury or harm during the procedure)
And the veins that are incised in the elbow are the ones that it is common for all men to have, and the incision of them is done according to two methods, either by using a mirtilat or olive oil diluted; or by cutting with a sharp knife and calling it "alnessil," and this is the method: (It appears this line is discussing multiple ways to perform a specific procedure on the veins in the elbow)
the veins are thus as often seen, and it is necessary to open the concave veins filled with apparent large blood, and those that contain thick clotted blood. (It seems this passage continues to describe the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
And this incision is smaller and more subtle in extent, and it is necessary to make an incision of fine veins containing thin clotted citrus juice. (It seems this passage continues to describe the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
But the advantage of incising the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that it drains blood from diseases in the neck and the throat, as well as from legs and stomach. (It seems this passage explains the benefits of a specific procedure involving incision of one of the three main veins)
It is necessary for the person performing the incision to be cautious when making the incision, because below it there is an artery, and if it is missed or misaligned during the incision, it will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is not appropriate to incise it with a sharp knife, but rather cut it using "alnessil". (It seems this passage continues to provide cautions regarding the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
If the basilic vein does not appear in a clear manner, you should look for another one or seek its branches; or incise it at the end of the arm, because that is apparent; and cut it using "alnessil" as previously stated. (It seems this passage provides an alternative method for locating the basilic vein)
If you want to incise the arm, then you should move your hand before the bend of the arm, touch the location between where you know the wrist is and find a suitable place; and place your hand on it with a cloth; and press the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using "alnessil" as previously stated; and be careful that the blow does not hit the area of the artery. (It seems this passage provides further instructions for incising the veins in the elbow)
And when you press it as you strain it, the swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it. (It seems this passage provides a caution regarding the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
And if you see blood flowing during the incision like that of a child, and the blood is thin red, then you know it is arterial blood; and you should be aware and wait for a long time with your hand on it; and remove your hand, and if the blood is separated, which can take several observations, then you should strain the arm and release it. (It seems this passage provides further instructions regarding the procedure for incising the veins in the elbow)
Keep the patient dry from urine, and be vigilant over them, lest they worsen for several days until they are healed.
If the wound is not drained, and there are times when you cannot be present for the treatment, then incise the artery if it appears to you; since the extremity will contract and the blood will drain from it; or take a probe, and open that, and take a ligature and tighten it around the area of the vein with narrowing, and apply leeches into the other day.
And if the blood is drained, it is good; and if not, care for it with water that follows the location of the powders absorbing blood flow.
The draining of the blood from it (the wound) is difficult due to small size of the wound location and the possibility of tying the arm.
But venesection (bleeding) from the dark vein is beneficial in extracting blood from the subclavian part of the neck and the part below the chest; because it is composed of branches from the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
The venesectionist must be careful in the venesection of it (the vein), because afterwards there is a nerve; and so if you adjust during the puncture for venesection and pinch the nerve, this will cause paralysis, and healing will be difficult, and the limb may not heal completely. And this nerve should be carefully observed, and if it is hidden in some people and subtle and not visible, then one must pause the venesection with the same venesection tool and cut through the artery instead, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, you must make an incision along its length.
The benefit of venesection of the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves headaches in patients.
In this manner, if you want the venesectionist to puncture the olive oil vein or the myrtle vein, since it is safe for all veins as there is neither an artery nor a nerve nearby.
But nonetheless, abscesses (pus-filled areas) may appear in some people when they are not venesectioned at the first percussion, but do not notice this abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that venesection is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope for recovery and caution against disease, and that venesection is made in one of the veins that are in the arm, namely: cephalic, dark (blue), and basilic; and that it is done at the beginning of spring, during the day in spring and autumn, and in winter near the time of eating, when signs of accumulation appear.
Venesection should be made on the third day or the next day if at least three hours have passed since the meal.
Venesection that is administered, but only when it is necessary or convenient, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any time.
And it is necessary that children under the age of twelve are not venesectioned, and pregnant women should not be venesectioned except from the fourth month to the seventh, and old people (viels) should not be venesectioned who have passed sixty years.
And if someone wants to be venesectioned in some way, it is necessary that they clean their intestines before venesection with a lion's clisterium (an ancient medical instrument for cleaning the rectum), if there is a large wound retained in them, so that the veins do not become congested with superfluidities during venesection of the intestines, which are pure, and so as not to harm the main organs.
And venesection should not be done for those with sacred dysentery and leprosy, nor for those suffering from illness or drunkenness before it has subsided, nor for those with dropsy; but venesection should be feared during colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and multiplication of the genitals and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils and any cause that dissolves virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
Then consider in subtle analysis of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medications if it is within reach to him.
Then bathe if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise through some exercises in order that the blood be made subtle.
And pause the phlebotomy of him on the day's feet during third hour, as it has been said.
And make sure the feet of that person are guarded on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, excessive pain, cough, and similar to them.
And in his chamber, make the causes be present with the use of which the custom of men with aromatization and scenting, balms, and similar to them according to the amount of possibility.
Follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is placed above or under the one who is to be bled.
Then draw out the patient's arm, and apply it with your hand to the phlebotomist two or three times; and then tighten the ligature or tourniquet, and compress it twice.
The ligature should be tightened carefully, because if the ligature is too loose, or the ligature is excessive, it then prohibits the flow of blood; or if it is moistening, and then you prohibit the heart from expelling blood.
Then the ligature, cover the person who is to be bled with your hands between their entry where the veins are inflamed and declared by sensation.
Then the phlebotomist anoint his phlebotomy with a little bit of antique oil specifically; and then pause your left hand's index finger over that vein, at the location where the phlebotomy is to be made, so that the vein leaks a little, and the percussion is stopped because some veins are like cords fleeing, and from those it is necessary to phlebotomize, and from them it is full of ventosity, and when you pause the phlebotomy over that one it contracts, and the phlebotomy is discovered; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
And therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be firm and vigilant in all these matters.
Then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is punctured in one attempt, that is good; and if not, you try again after a little while, or hastily, if the location is not punctured.
And if the location is punctured, or the patient cries out, you leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the ligature, because great pain will cause an abscess to break or not enter into bathing.
Then try the phlebotomy if necessary.
If the opening is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then you try the phlebotomy in that place according to rule and adjust the opening a little, and do it hastily before the location is punctured, because the location is punctured in many people with little opening.
But if it has already punctured, then you do not try again on that spot, because there is no excuse for you; and pause on some part of the oil opening, because it helps the flow of blood. And it is better in this place to use oil and not other oils.
And similarly, the oil opening is administered in every phlebotomy in which the prohibition of heart blood is used for phlebotomizing the veins, and it is made with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is paused on one of those over the spot, because the blood is made subtle and turned when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated in the location of the phlebotomy, which often happens, and more so with one who has not been bled for that day, or in the opening of the vein little, and you catch it, and pause on the spot sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
It is necessary to do this with the completion of the blood from that vein or another vein.
And if a black or green stain remains in that place for several days, do not notice it; and if you wish, pause on some cause of alloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calmative or similar to them.
Often abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy from the basilica (artery).
Therefore, pause your hand over it, and if you feel softness, then your compression on that one, it is a bad swelling; and therefore be careful to pause on something of what has been said, because great pain will flow from the artery blood.
Make an embrocation with what is astringent, so that the spot becomes hardened, and take care of it with other treatment until it heals.
It is necessary to draw blood from every man according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color that comes out over the blood, as it appears.
If the blood is black, you should let it flow out until it stops; and if you see it thick, you should let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you should let it flow out until its sharpness subsides.
For the person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting on a certain day, you should widen the incision of the vein and make the veinlet large.
For the weak person, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him in small amounts, and the cuts should be tight.
The best method for bloodletting from a vein is to make a transverse incision, not a puncture.
This method of bloodletting prevents the flow of blood and damage to nerves, and is more effective and safer than bloodletting according to length and width.
When fainting is common during bloodletting, you must take care of the person after bloodletting with a piece of bread soaked in milk-grain wine or plain oxymel, heated; and let the bleeding stop in three or four days.
If there is a complexion problem, you should take after bloodletting a drink infused with myrrh syrup or scented honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or scented and fragrant syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting due to a large amount of blood loss, you must drink water from meat and scented, subtle syrup, and use fragrances with something, and bind the patient's legs with that.
Use other causes mentioned in the division on fainting by evacuation for the treatment of these conditions.
Whoever wants to emaciate their arm and dissolve their blood gradually by bloodletting each day, must do it for the person who has bloodletting as a means of evacuation, and the virtue is mild, which slowly eliminates blood according to the strength of the virtue in consecutive days.
But if someone wants to emaciate their arm and expel blood intermittently, and their body is strong, you should do it approximately seven or eight hours after the first bloodletting.
But if someone wants to drain blood from the body in the opposite direction of where it flows naturally, you should do it on the second or third day.
But in a body with excessive blood that is heated and sharp and causes fever, you should expel the blood in one day and drain a large amount of it, making the opening larger until fainting occurs, since you will have observed all the conditions for bloodletting; and you must place your hand on the pulse of the blood to prevent death from occurring due to fainting. Since many days are dangerous when the bloodletter is ignorant or negligent.
And it is not necessary to drain the arm and expel blood daily, as the orifices of the veins are closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, that you should press strongly on it and bend it slightly, since that is very bad.
Leave it to be bloodletted again later; or wait for the coagulated blood in the vein openings to dissolve; or place a plaster of turmeric or sage on it, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling subsides.
If the need arises to expel blood again, and there is no excuse, you should make an incision on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "the brachial artery" is bloodletted in the area of the elbow or wrist, when it is not constricted or hidden, since it consists of those areas.
The quality of bloodletting is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the cannula becomes blocked and the vein appears clearly.
Hold it tightly with a moderate constriction; and make the bloodletting transverse, not longitudinal or according to the length.
Make the opening wide and your bloodletting shall be at the joint of the hand with a small incision.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, you should wash your hand in cold water and let the blood flow into the water until you meet your needs.
But if you are in the summer days, you are excused from washing your hand in cold water, and the body is kept cool in cold water during winter.
And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins, since there is neither a pulse nor nerves here.
Bloodletting of the radial artery in the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
The quality of bloodletting is that you tighten the hand slightly or with your other hand, since it has been placed in cold water, until the vein becomes inflamed and clearly visible to the touch; and make the bloodletting transverse; and if it cannot be seen from any angle, you will not know where to cut.
Keep your hand carefully during the lancet operation, as the nerves of the affected area are now exposed without flesh.
Dip your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow from there, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will clot in the vein opening and prevent further bleeding.
When the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you pause on oil and salt over the vein, so that it does not coagulate quickly; and similarly, it is necessary to do in all narrow places.
The advantage of this lancet operation on the left hand is that it benefits patients with liver diseases.
Perform similarly in the lancet operation on the other side as you have done before.
The advantage of the saphenous vein lancet operation is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases, retention of menstruation, lung diseases and ulcers or old sores, and their similarities with other diseases.
The quality of the lancet operation is that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction over it until the veins appear; then on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein should be pointed out, and from there it branches towards the face of the foot, forming multiple paths.
Therefore, lancet the bladder by making an incision wide or towards the side of the cavity should be done, as it is better and less painful.
If you lancet the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it on the foot surface, and perform your lancet operation with the one you used transversely, as if you want to incise it.
Let the lancets be sharp.
However, the withdrawal of blood is forbidden; then immerse the foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow from there until it is drained.
If the lancet operator errs in the first viewing, then immerse it again with the lancet in a little more, as the location is safe; and do not fear the trickery, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
Similarly, perform on the saphenous vein of the other foot.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, the location should be pointed out below the wild thigh bone.
The advantage of the lancet operation is for sciatica pain when it is caused by bleeding.
The quality of the lancet operation is that the patient bathes, and hastily and strongly massages their buttocks from the lower part of the back to the area above the heel for four fingers with a thin long bandage, which is not visible except for that.
Therefore, when it appears, then you lancet it according to any method that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise it with an incision or sever it with a section, as the location is safe.
It is in more men than women; and if it thickens and does not appear to the sensation of everything, then lancet some branch of it, and it is the one that appears at the foot's heel towards the ear and the ankle.
Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow as much as you want.
Loosen the constriction and place your hand over the location of the lancet incision carefully, as it heals easily.
Regarding ventosection and the qualities of using those [instruments].
Ventosections are for corns, or warts, or verrucae.
Ventosection is performed in two ways: one of them is with incision and bloodletting, and the other is ventosection without incision.
This ventosection without incision can be performed in two ways: one with fire or without fire.
The locations where ventosections with incision and bloodletting are administered are twelve parts of the body, among which one is the location where ventosections are applied, which is the back of the neck; and the middle part of the collarbone; ventosections on the chin below the lower jaw; ventosections in both palms; ventosections on the heel of the foot; ventosections on two fingers; ventosections on both thigh bones; and ventosections on both buttocks.
Ventosection does not draw blood from the veins but from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not capture its virtue as with lancetation; nor is it necessary to perform ventosection with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the entire body is drained.
If the disease causes ventose (an abscess or boil) either by illness or continuously, administer it at the beginning and end of every month, as well as in the middle and at any time.
Therefore, when ventose (abscess or boil) occurs in any of those cases, and especially if it is in the third week, then command that it be drained within two or three hours after its occurrence.
In addition to ventose (abscess or boil) of the neck, when it causes heaviness in the head and leads to collapse of the eyes, it is necessary for evacuation of the entire body.
This ventose (abscess or boil) is in the location of cephalic puncture.
And it is not appropriate to use one who has complete purge or one with a catarr, because it causes great harm.
Nor should the elderly be used, and those with cold illnesses.
However, the one who has been standing over it continuously should be given forgetfulness; and for this reason, you must command the lancer to rest his hand slightly away from the ventose at the edges.
Ventose (abscess or boil) of the axilla is in the location of puncture of the dark vein and basilica: and this causes asthma, constriction of the chest and scissuring of the stomach stump, coughing, and repletion.
It is necessary to shave the ventose (abscess or boil) in the axilla slightly, because if it is left alone, it causes weakness in the body and stomach.
Ventose (abscess or boil) of the armpit causes accidental pain in the head and otitis (ear infection), emigranea (migraines), prefocacio (feverish headache), and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the location of puncture of the basilica.
It is necessary that you command the lancer not to press his hand for incision, so as not to pierce the artery and cause blood flow.
Ventose (abscess or boil) under the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similarity to illnesses that are in the mouth, and they are in the location of puncture of the alveolar artery which is between the two lips.
But the ventose (abscess or boil) made between the two fingers causes caphatan, which is caused by repletion of heat.
Additionally, the ventose (abscess or boil) between the two creases of the palms is related to the puncture of three veins, namely the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all these veins in the skin, and the small veins from other large veins are attracted to the three veins.
Command the lancer not to proceed with incision, because the location is exposed flesh, and there are nerves and arteries there.
It is a ventose (abscess or boil) that is lanced on the buttocks and causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
It is necessary to command the lancer that the ventose (abscess or boil) be large and hard, because the location requires strong incision; thin, subtle ventoses should be cut out with a knife, and it should be incised with incision.
However, small ventoses (abscesses or boils) in the legs show manifest minor symptoms, as they drain blood from the entire body, cause chronic cough and abdominal pain, bladder problems; cause bothyng (swelling of the testicles), and are found at the puncture of two veins: the saphenous and the hepatic.
However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
And from the ventoses that are found near the anus, the additional symptoms are similar to those of the ventoses in two legs.
The quality of the position of the ventose is that you press the ventose at first and suck it out with early suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventoses; rather, press them lightly, allow them to stay slightly, and let the humors come to the location by natural means. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the location redden, swell, and the inflammation of blood appears.
Then you incise and repeat suction little by little, and pay attention to the position of the body.
Whoever the man is who has rare and tender flesh, you should incise him once and not let it be closed, to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated.
Command the leech to enlarge the incision and make a small opening, and apply the juice easily.
If the blood is thickened, then you must incise it twice, as in the first incision the passage of subtle liquids and moisture is opened. But in the second, obtain the pressure for the extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very mucilaginous, then make a third incision to achieve the purge.
Lastly, when we want to draw out little by little or in small amounts of blood, it is sufficient for us with one incision.
If we want to extract a large amount of blood, incise with many incisions; and if it is known that the blood is thick, then you must incise with deep incision.
And the term "incision" refers only to the depth of the cut.
If the wound is deep, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, you should apply oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of marigold, or oil of cumin in the summer; and if it is wintertime, apply oil of garlic, oil of iris, oil of camomile, or bloodroot oil to similar ones.
If there is excessive thickening, apply oil of amaranth, oil of balm of Gilead, oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
But if the leech has large pores of tender flesh, then oil must be prohibited, and you should apply water or boiling water with salt to their open wounds, or water from cumin, or water from bordeaux, and similar ones.
And for the one whose blood has excessive moisture, wash their wounds with vinegar or water of myrtle and sumac and similar ones.
And for the one with excessive thickening, wash their wounds with old vinegar, or water of savory, which is thyme, or decoction of anise, or camomile, and similar ones.
It must be ensured that the wound is protected from bathing; having it bathed immediately before or after bathing for an hour or two, and sleeping near the wound.
What must be done is that the leech should wash his hands before bloodletting.
First, consider: if the leech or the person to be bled is choleric and has sharp blood and inflammation, then you must take cooling remedies such as milgranes acidic, endive in vinegar and lettuces, and dandelion, and similar ones.
And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, and acidic foods, and similar ones.
And for the one whose complexion is dry, you should administer almond syrup or anise syrup of seeds and sumac, and a moderately odorous drink between winter and spring; and it should be recommended that he drink and eat in moderation, and avoid poultry, game birds, rabbit, and partridge.
And it is necessary on the day of bloodletting and lancing that he drink more than eat.
And it should be administered to drink in certain hours to some men with tarragon alum, or medicines of mastic, such as mace, or peppercorns before bloodletting or after lancing or near, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and they should not take that scalding.
But the wounds that are not incised are wounds that are stopped on the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, in the joints, and the anus, as these members cannot withstand incision over them.
But it is not desired for them, but rather the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a wound on the nipple in anemia of the blood of the nose; and it is used to dissolve dry and viscous swelling of a member, such as stopping on the abdomen and umbilicus; as it thins the member and scalds it, relieving pain by resolving swelling.
And it has already been stopped on the throat when it occurs in their suffocation or hoarseness, as by strong attraction it overcomes hoarseness and eliminates hoarseness from its location.
And similarly, when it is stopped on the liver and spleen, it overcomes swelling in those trapped places.
These wounds are administered with juice only; and some are administered with fire.
And some are administered full of hot water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is to make the wound filled and large, which is hot water alone or water in which are cut herbs suitable for it.
Forma of ventouse applied with fire: the width of the orifices of two fingers, as we have formed it; and the size of the prick should be the size of a palm; and it should be in its length, in the location that is in the circumference, the size of the circumference, the trauck (tool) should be small according to the quantity that fits in it an awl.
Let it be made of lard or citron rind, thick edges, lion's mouth, smooth and clean to avoid injuring the member in its position on it.
And let it be placed at the bottom of it (the affected area) across a lard or iron rod where the candle is held with fire.
And let this ventouse be much larger than the one that we have recommended; and let it be as little reduced in size as possible according to the illnesses and the state of the one using it.
And the ventouses for children and weakened ones should be others than the ventouses for strong and robust ones.
The quality of placing this ventouse on fire over the member is that it extends the opening with a suitable amount of wood before a little amount of wax candle, and place it on the middle of the transverse rod in the middle of the ventouse, so that the fire is ignited around the edges to avoid burning the body of the patient.
And let it be placed over the member of the patient, and the said ventouse should be placed on the trauck that has been mentioned until we have ventouses and do not need the aforementioned and steam comes out over that trauck, then the ventouse will soon dissolve.
And ignite the opening according to its method, and repeat if necessary.
However, in a ventouse used for the illness of pleurisy, with water (not a transverse rod or trauck), and it is not applied by placing it but rather filling it with water and placed on the member only.
And this is its form: The larger this ventouse, the better it is because it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguisuggas are not administered in motz members (joints) but in the members where it is not possible to place ventouses due to their small size, such as fingers, gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of skin, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that have been found sanguisuggas in muddy water pools.
And let them be laid in muddy water every day and night until they become ripe, and no cause remains in their stomachs; and let the body be evacuated at first with phlebotomy and ventouses; and let the member of the patient be cleaned until it becomes red, and let it be placed over it.
And when they are filled and cased (sealed).
And if the juice of the location with the ventouse can be extracted, it is more helpful as a remedy.
And if not, wash the location with vinegar and coarse water, scrub and squeeze it.
And if the bleeding of the body continues for a long time after applying sanguisuggas, and it becomes resolidified, immerse a cloth in cold water and place it over it until the resolidification is released.
If the bleeding multiplies, sprinkle it with vitriol trissate powder or similar stiptic causes until the bleeding is suppressed; or place over the location the largest size of cooked fava beans and leave them until they adhere to the location, and the bleeding will be stopped.
If necessary, repeat application of sanguisuggas when they can be changed.
If the use of sanguisuggas is prohibited, clean the location with fresh blood or insert an awl into the locations until bleeding occurs; and let it be placed, for they immediately draw close to it when they feel any blood.
And when you want them to fall (from the location), sprinkle a little of allium tristate powder, salt or ash over it and wait a short while.
Just as the process of the third part begins (with removal), so it is with restoration. This chapter is more closely observed in the art of medicine; and it is restoration for fractures and accidents in bones.
O, son, understand that the foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who disregard the books of the Ancients or read nothing of them take pride in this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the wise in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it for a long time, but have only applied what follows after lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding until I extracted the science from them.
And let us devote ourselves to experiment and study during the course of our lives.
And you have already described in this chapter everything that concerns the highest science and upon which has been experienced the best; since here I abridge it for you others and deliver it from the occupation of elaboration; and abridge it at the end of the abridgement; and show it at the end of the demonstration; and form new forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition to the demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
The Sum of Fractures and Collections from those which are necessary for the premise, before I begin the remembrance of fractured bones and various types of each. Therefore, I shall speak in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters at the beginning of which the craftsmen and those who study this noble art are satisfied and stand still on the truth of those, namely you and others like you who know or can learn this noble art.
And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or break occurs, you must first seek for leeching or ligature of it, or whichever one is appropriate, except in cases prohibited by some reason, such as debility of virtue, or the patient who has fainted, or old age, or a time of violent heat, or of excessive cold.
And it is content with food consisting of cool herbs and the flesh of birds and hares; and we forbid thick meat and filling with any food or all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of cauterized abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member.
Then return the patient to his original regimen with which he usually takes care of himself.
And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient is fed with nourishing foods of thick and heavy and rich consistency in which there is viscosity, such as food made from cooked wheat flour and water, rice, cabbages, beans, veal, hog's flesh, large fish and similar foods, and with this regimen is made the coagulation of the fracture more quickly and easily.
And you should know that the bones splintered in men who are in the first age of life and in the old ones, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying up of their members.
But nature adjusts and binds any cause similar to glue in the case of a broken bone on every side, where there is swelling that adheres to it until it is consolidated and held together, until the end of the thickening and firmness comes, such as heat at the beginning, until some reason does not prohibit that from its work.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, foods with gravity and thickness and viscosity, as we have said.
And you should know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of members, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the hand bone, and similarly all others are different among themselves.
I shall come with the remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately.
Variety of fracture within itself. And the species of fracture in their meteyssas are diversified; for it is called a curved fracture another which occurs in the star-shaped bones; and some are called fractures according to the length of the bone: and those which are in the shaft or crossbars, whether proceeding or not proceeding, such as the fracture that is made during penance when preparing to write, and is a fissured fracture in the head, and a fracture with cleft or disruption.
And every species has its own pain or torment in the restoration of it, as will be remembered later separately in their places.
Symbol for the fracture of a bone. And for that the fracture of a bone is known: it is twistedness of it, and the prominence and sensation of it in feeling, and is that which compresses it with your hand.
Therefore, when it is not in a twisted location nor does it appear to be broken, you must gently probe the bone with movement and if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It may be a twisting or a small crack, therefore it is not necessary that you press on it with your hand and compression; pause over the location of the medicines of which memory comes to mind at this moment, which is suitable for the area; and tighten it by subtle constriction.
And know that the location which is arched and not split in two or something else that does not happen in the stomach, as it remains completely intact, then it is necessary to begin with your time the correction of it, having applied cauterization to the area.
And if cauterization has caused an abscess, leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and tie it according to any method that you can with delicacy and skill.
And know that the restoration of the location and the piercing of it is easier than surgery on bones where this occurs.
And strengthen it according to what comes to mind regarding the location.
But if in the bone there is a fracture, then it is necessary to perform an extension of this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
Position yourself with the member to be tied according to its natural shape, while the parts are being extended from the broken limb; then proceed with making the addition return in an ingenious and any way possible in their locations.
And take care to not cause harm to the patient by your operation on it or injury; and proceed according to your ability with which you apply one bone to another in their best forms.
It is necessary at that time to take advantage of your ability to touch it with your hand, and if you find any other cause here, correct it and tie it according to the amount of your power.
Exercise forceful extension and compression, as foolish doctors often do by causing abscesses through their operation or causing contraction in the member, as we have seen through the operation of their foolish watchfulness.
And the quality of the constriction of a limb in rest is the one I recommend; therefore, know that fractured limbs are varied in their smallness and size and in the shape of those.
And for small ones such as the arm and thigh and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be of thin wool.
But for large ones such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a hard and thick wrapping, because the hard wrapping strengthens the limb in all parts with constriction binding, so that nothing enters into it.
And begin with your careful alignment, pause appropriately in the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings according to the member; and strengthen your hand a little with the linen.
And approach that to the most superficial part of the location above the fracture, and strengthen more than necessary with your constriction on the location of the fracture. And approach the extension of the wrapping from the location of the fracture a little, and soften the small constriction gradually until you grasp a large piece of it.
And approach another band and wrap it over the damaged location with the wrapping, and approach the wrappings to the lower part of the fracture; and your operation should be in the constriction of the wrapping and in the softening of that according to what has been said in the first wrapping above.
And approach the intervals between the layers of leather or wool that are binding the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and do not pause for any other cause.
And approach the other band, and approach over these properly made stitches as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location, and then pause on that where the abscess is located and that which oozes the inflammation; leave it for several days; and then strengthen over the stitches.
And the stitches should be made of tough cane reed, or well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm branches; and they should be wide according to this shape and this figure:
However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, but not too much, and the length of the pin according to the size of the member; and apply pressure on the splint with another bandage as per your initial binding; and apply cloth properly as mentioned in the binding instructions; and this binding should be as per the location of the fracture more, and as it is farther from the fracture, the binding becomes less.
The wires should be moderately thick and thin, and made of flax; if the wires are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some foolish people using ropes instead of wires in binding, it is a great error, when the binding is not even.
And thin wires are not appropriate, for you will not achieve the desired binding with them, and it is not necessary to have space of one finger between each splint.
If the patient is injured by the ends of the splints near the binding at the location, then place a piece of felt or camel's wool padding over it to avoid injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by an abscess, and there is rupture in the ligament, and I will recall it in the following chapter according to its specificity.
You should know that a completely broken member is not strengthened with splints on the first day; the reason being that the member, when large, does not require splints immediately but rather after about five or seven days according to your assurance of avoiding abscess formation.
And this is the method of splints used by ancient physicians, which are applied over fractures, dislocations and twists.
Common splint method for healing of fractures, suitable for complex injuries and more for women and children, since it is applied over that which does not require heat or cold: take powder from grinding wheat, and it is the marrow of the flour mill grinder handle that moves the wheel inside the mill walls.
And make it as such, but if it is not available, wrap it with egg white, and complete the construction without being too thin or delicate; and use that one.
Another method for treating fractures, dislocations and twisting: recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, migrach (which is derived from wild millet), in total 1000 dragons; of myrrh and aloewood 500 dragons; alochil 2000 dragons; all are ground and sieved and mixed with either alchil water or albumen of egg if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones lightly, and confers strength to men.
Another method for treating fractures and twisting: recipe of migrach and meal of white alum in 100 dragons; myrrh and aloewood in 500 dragons; acacia in 600 dragons; Armenian pitch in 2000 dragons.
All should be ground together in a mortar with crushed grains, wrapped, and mixed with water or egg white, and administered.
Method of splint for joints and bones separated from their places, relieving pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take wool yarn, immerse it in sour wine vinegar and olive oil, and apply it to the location.
This splint is not beneficial for healing, but rather for avoiding abscess formation and relieving pain directly.
Another method of splint that heals fractured bones: take fig leaves and wild opium poppy leaves; combine everything to make a splint from them.
Method of splint for healing a fractured bone and resolution of abscess: obtain a recipe made from white alum, camomile, violet flowers, barley flour, and all the previously mentioned herbs. Number one. They should be immobilized and bound with cloth if the member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, you should cool it with water from a colander or water from that (source).
Another method of applying a plaster with strong resolution when an abscess occurs, in order to restore the member: recipe of garlic juice and its root, balm, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, camomile, of all parts cut and ground; they should be immobilized and bound with water of savory or sweet water or water from that (source), all according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed on a broken member for its restoration except for a wax seal made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it should be neither too thick nor too thin.
However, in Galen's book it is seen that they should be placed on a broken member for its restoration and the causes of which are excessive dryness with little heat such as myrrh, ambergris, and similar to those causes which we have recommended.
Another method of plaster to treat injury and pain: recipe of marigold, of chamomile, of human skin shavings or feathers of a bird, and of garlic, cut and ground; they should be sieved, sifted and made into a plaster.
However, the amount that remains as a wound and which should be loosened, is that you consider if there is pain or swelling or the bone is broken in its place, then you do not dislodge it for several days. And if there is strong pain or swelling or inflammation at the site, then you should cut or dislodge it in that hour and apply a plaster to it.
Take cloth from him and sea sponge soaked with lemon water, and immerse it in boiling water, then wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; and let the member rest for an hour; and place a linen cloth dipped in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for a night until you are sure of the abscess being cauterized, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced and the pain is alleviated.
And apply a gentle and small compression to that narrowing and do not strengthen it with your initial constriction until it is healed. Be gentle with it until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, inflammation, pain, and all the symptoms are healed completely and no longer need plasters or compression, then you loosen it as you did at the beginning of the swelling.
And if there is no cause in the member of those that we mentioned, then you do not dislodge it but let it rest for three or four or five or seven days. and after some weeks all of this is allowed for twenty days according to what appears to you in the dislocation of the member, as we said, until the fracture adheres and the skin comes together over it.
And you adjust the compression more than in your initial compression, and tighten the swelling of the patient's food supply according to what is remembered for him.
However, if you see the location of the fracture already drying out and becoming more swollen than necessary, then you know that nourishment should not reach it; therefore wrap it with boiling water throughout its entirety every day to dry it up; and this should be for three days; and gradually loosen the compression, and by this operation let nourishment reach the member, and it will heal easily.
Those who improperly restore a fractured member after another week when it was not healed initially, according to what is necessary, and heal it improperly by tortuous means, their action is an error and great fear, and if they had followed the Ancients in their books and done this, they would have enlarged the error.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are multiple and the figures of them are various and the causes are different, because some fractures occur from the blow of a weapon, which breaks all the bone into pieces, which is called sciatic; or the weapon cuts off a part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh without passing through the end of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the wound of these two types of fractures is deep or shallow, and the type of fracture that is contractive or adhesive is caused by a blow with a hammer or blunt instrument.
And this type of fracture is penetrating and it approaches the panniculus which is adjacent to the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures can be deep or shallow.
And this type of fracture is weakened in the bone, at the subtlety of the hair tip, and for that reason this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
It is a fracture caused either by falling or by impact of stones, which forces some bone layer to enter the joints from within, occurring in a concave manner similar to how it happens with the balls of a pear when they break and their inner layers come out through the fissures.
It is also made in human bone cores, such as those of infants.
These types of fractures are treated with splints like separated needles. The patient should be kept in complete rest.
We should know all these types of fractures by detection and investigation, and by testing and examination of any corrupted tissue that is over them.
A special type of fracture is known by its appearance on the bone and is abscessed, it becomes limited when probed because the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one should consider the condition of the patient at first, and then if you see signs that indicate fear such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, eyesight problems or redness of those areas, similar to their signs in more severe cases, one should doubt that it will heal.
If you see no abnormal signs, you hope for good health and then you begin the treatment of the problem.
The cause is that if it has been infected from the beginning as in the winter days, you must study the bone tissue for the next 13 days in accordance with all precautions.
If it is in the summer days, you must remove the bone within the seventh day, since the tissue around the bone may be rotten due to the panniculus, and the aforementioned signs should occur.
If the fracture has spread to the panniculus covering the brain and is in small pieces and adhered, you must incise the fractured and adhered area according to my instructions.
You should shave the head of the patient with the infection, and cut into the bone according to your usual practice and ability, following the shape of the wound, and do it gently on the patient.
If it is necessary to detect the bone, find blood flow or an abscess, then you should use what is required and is that you moisten the wound area with infused cloth soaked in wine and olive oil, let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, make sure there is no bleeding; and start by circumnavigating the bone and removing it.
And this is one of two possible surgical methods.
The first method is to incise the bone with a straight incisor and this is its form: Place another incisor next to it, slightly narrower than the previous one; and this is its form:
Use the wider incisor more than the second one.
It is necessary that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them should be shorter than the others and at the end of their sharpness, and they may be made of iron or steel.
Use them with ease when striking the incisors to avoid hurting the head and damaging it.
If the bone is strong and hard, you must pierce its circumference before administering the incisors with retractors, which are called non-penetrating retractors.
They are not called this because they do not reach the end of the bone from the other side, so that at the retractor is rounded extremity or edge on the opposite side to the sharp head of it, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone thickness.
It is appropriate that you take many of these retractors, as many as are suitable for the thickness of each bone, provided that at all times during the operation on the brain, the extremity of which is sharp, the length and width should be according to the thickness of that bone.
This is the form of three types of trepanels: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you press the trepanel onto the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, move the trepanel to another location and press down on what is between all the way through to the thickness of the skull.
Then insert scissors into what is between each hole in the bone, and make a hollow that you can fill with a thin layer on top, as we have said, until you pierce the bone or with your hand, or with another means through certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as tweezers and forceps.
And be careful that the scissors do not touch any nerve.
When you have perforated the bone and it is separated from the nerve if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted it, be careful to smooth and round off the edge of it on both sides with a tool similar to scissors, but be sure that it is thinner and more delicate than other scissors.
And if there remains any small piece of bone and jagged parts, take it with ease with what you must use of the tools; then care for the wound with linseed oil and ointments as we have said.
The other method of operation is easy and far from fear, which is called Gualla and the loosening by great praise; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part of the bone and have pressed down on it gently with a slow and light scissor, the following shape is taken:
And the concave fracture is lion-shaped and does not cut any nerve, and the acute fracture is from one side to two sides in length, as often happens; that the concave fracture should be aligned with the nerve and the sharp fracture on the bone.
Then press down on one part of the scissors with a small hammer until you have cut through all the bone with ease as it is turned, and you should be sure that no accident happens in any way, and if the patient were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
If there remains any cause attached to the bone of the fracture in certain places of the bone, you will cut it out with the concave part of the scissors and deliver it gently, because it is delivered without harm or fear.
If the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the flesh, and what has been cut off or left from the bone is the surface, and remains rough and jagged in places, then you must smooth that roughness and round off those jagged places with fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places according to the most convenient time and the correct way of the razor based on where you lost your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
And you must administer your razor with which you smooth the bone at first using the finest of those razors, and then use it in a gentle manner without stopping until you reach the point of administering the thinnest and finest of all of them.
But in each of the other small hairline fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you lost in correcting it.
And this is not diminished for all those who have studied that art. And rest on what we have written about large fractures.
And if the flesh is rectangular when you cut the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the opening of the wound; and take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first one lightly so as not to harm the nerve; and apply a thin layer of lint, but do not press it except as much as the wound requires.
Leave that with this care for one day or two until you are sure of a clean wound; and then remove it and apply medicines such as lye of linseed and flour of chaff, and powder of cinnamon and allspice, and similar things.
And that you make a powder of these medicines which is pulverized on the wound, as it is dry; and in general, administer all medicine with the property that it cleanses and does not irritate.
And beware that the wound in your care remains clean; and do not use any grease or other oil, nor add virulence to it; because when it is placed on the brain's flesh, it corrodes it and poisons it, and harms the patient with a malignant illness.
And consider whether the nerve of the head is darkened on the surface when the bone is cleaned and especially when the care of it is being given, because this can cause harm to the patient as we have said, so that you know that it is harmful without doubt.
And if it does not happen due to blackness, but rather from the medicine that is applied, and because of that medicine it causes blackness, then you must take one part honey and three parts of red oil. And cover that area with a cloth and place it there to heal; use the appropriate healing spices before it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the repair of the nose when broken.
Know that the nose is not broken, but rather two parts fractured together with one of those being visible, because in it there are two bones, where the break is cartilaginous and not actually broken; instead, it becomes thickened, twisted, and swollen.
If one of the two parts of the nose is actually broken, then you must insert a splint into it, hold the fracture in place with your finger tip inside, and press on it from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for ease, but be careful not to hurt the patient during your treatment.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and the tip is not affected, then it should be set with a splint at the end of the finger where there is a small swelling.
If the break is in both parts, then you must do as follows.
Collect the treatment materials on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then prepare the cauterizing agent for the abscess by the seventh or tenth day.
Place a piece of cloth in the end of the nose if the break is in one part, or two pieces of gauze, if the break is in both parts, and make sure the swelling is as thick as it fills the cavity of the nose.
As the old restorers say, the gauze should be impregnated with wax and kept closed all day, but I have not seen this; nevertheless, the cloth must be soaked in honeycombs mixed with ground powder; and hold it there until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
Sometimes insert cotton in the nose instead of gauze, because it is covered with a piece of lion cloth; and whether the break is severe or not, if the patient is not forbidden from breathing through the nose.
This is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use gauze.
If another abscess occurs, stuff the nose with pitch or a pot filled with vinegar and oil, or alum.
But if no abscess occurs, then you must fill it from the outside with sizam flour and powder of crushed cedar wood mixed with honeycombs; and cover it with a piece of lion cloth, but do not insert anything into the nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you must cut them apart, remove them with instruments suitable for the task; and sew up the opening, heal it with what strengthens and consolidates, and use appropriate plaster.
If there is a wound inside the nose, you must heal it with gauze and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the repair of the lower jaw when broken.
When the lower jaw is broken on one side and the break is not caused by a wound, pay attention to whether the break is only outside and not broken in two and curved towards the inside; in this case, its recognition is easier.
Therefore, if the break is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the break is on the left lower jaw, insert your right index finger; and press firmly on the swelling of the fracture inside with one hand while pulling the broken bone apart from outside with the other hand; and do this carefully.
If the break in the lower jaw has already separated into two, then you must administer extension of both parts according to right angles until it is possible for them to align properly.
If there is a displacement of teeth to dislocation, then you must stabilize those that you hope will remain with gold or silver or cedar wires; and cover the broken jaw with pitch, and cover it again with two layers of cloth and one large piece of felt made properly or a sole-sole cushion of the length of the lower jaw; and hold it in place as needed depending on your ability to tie it up and appropriate application until it is not destroyed.
Tell the patient to rest and remain calm, and stop the salty food from the lion.
If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then you must examine and untie it on the third day; and correct any alterations made to it and fill it with powder of milled grain, honeycombs, or sizam flour, because you will have removed the pitch from it, and cover it again with wool cloth.
And when this plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it alone, because you should not untie it until it is healed and strengthened the fracture; for most often this fracture will be strengthened in three weeks.
And if another abscess arises that requires cautery, then administer what was said previously for its treatment until it heals, and the abscess remains.
If it is a fracture that is an ulcer, consider whether it is a bone separation or a dislocation, be cautious with the tools needed for the removal of those bone fragments from the wound.
If the openings in the ulcer are narrow, enlarge them with a lancet according to your need.
When you have removed those fragments and they do not reabsorb, close the openings of the ulcer if they are large; and if they are not, place a dressing over it and bandage it until it heals.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of a dislocated collarbone.
The broken collarbone is divided by breaking the muscles, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
It is broken, separated or split into two pieces that do not dislocate; and it is easier to restore; or it is such that it splits into pieces, making it difficult to restore; or the fracture occurs with an ulcer.
And the procedure for that, when the fracture has an ulcer, is to have two assistants present, one to hold the broken collarbone and follow its direction, and the other to extend the neck on the side of the fracture.
Then align the fracture with the teeth until its shape is appropriate and it is not in a hollow or concave area.
If more extension is needed, you should have the patient spread their shoulder on a piece of cloth or wool of the appropriate size according to your need; stretch and lift the collarbone and bend the arm with your hand until the fracture is aligned as required.
And if you cannot extend the end of the collarbone to the outer edges because it is blocked by the neck, you should have the patient lie on their back and place a cushion under one side of the shoulder muscles of the appropriate size.
The assistant presses the muscle on the side of the shoulder downwards until the collarbone is raised at the neck and you can correct the fracture and align it with the teeth.
If you feel dislocation of the collarbone and it is painful, you should split it open and remove those fragments with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, you should make an incision in it using one of the instruments you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the knife that serves as a chisel under the collarbone; and it is a rod or iron with this shape:
And its convexity is similar to that of a mortar; and let the width be according to your need for it, depending on the size or depth of the bone.
But the length should be as much as you can manage during the operation; it should have two ends in such a way that one end is wide and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound that you have incised and removed bone fragments is wide, and it is certain that there is an abscess, you should adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
If the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, fill the wound with cloths and powder according to the size of the wound.
If there is an abscess, you should fill it with a cloth dipped in vinegar and rose oil and leave it.
And all this should be done without pain to the bone; and so it is necessary that you observe the patient every day, for when the ligament softens or the stick has healed, you correct this and strengthen the healing.
And have the patient sleep on their side with their head turned slightly to one side; so that the assistants can be at the lower end of the bed, and thus raise the collarbone through lifting the chest muscles; or hold the arm up against the neck.
And do not disturb the ligament unless there is an abscess in that location within twelve days.
And renew the plaster if you see its face with the required ingredients, and adjust it in the tightness and restore it until it is healed and the collarbone fracture is coagulated.
It is to be fastened and comforted according to the month for twenty-eight days, and in some men it is done within the time of that month.
Here I set forth the sixth chapter.
Here I set forth the treatise on the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken at its lateral end, not through it, but along its edges.
Therefore, when the end of it is broken  and if it is indeed broken in the middle  and not known through imaging, then prepare yourself according to the type of fracture and reduce it naturally in all ways that are possible for you according to your skill.
Then place a plaster made of powdered milled alum and beeswax on the site, apply crushed leeches; then apply double-layered cloth; then apply the sharp-tipped steel rod from a fine table according to the size of the shoulder blade or slightly more.
But if the steel rod is concave in any of the parts of the shoulder blade, then you fill that concavity with beeswax and apply the rod evenly.
Then, apply warm human fat on top, and wrap the rod with linens until it is not protruding from its place.
Consider the linens each day and when it is softened, replace it with another one and straighten and align the rod if it has moved from its place.
Keep the patient on their side.
The shoulder blade will be restored in twenty days or thirty.
And when this number is completed, then you remove the linens and ensure that it is certain that the bones from which the injury began are not feared nor their dissolution.
If the bone protrudes from its place and presses on the skin, then you must cut it off, remove it, and proceed as I have said in the treatment for furculum of sacral abscess with caution if an abscess occurs here.
Here begins the seventh chapter.
Treatise on the restoration of a broken bone in the foot.
In some cases, the bone in the foot is broken in the middle and the ends are displaced; but the extremities of it move and grind against each other.
Among the signs of such an injury are that it tends towards the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and chills; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
The restoration is that the patient is placed on their back, a pillow is placed between their shoulders; you must press on the muscles of it and adjust the costal bones to the ribs of two sides, be subtle in the operation and alignment according to all possible means and what is appropriate for this purpose until the figure of the bone returns as necessary.
Then you apply the plaster and beeswax on top of it, and place a fine steel rod from the table made of willow or yew beneath it in elevation, as you wrap that around with cloth; and be subtle in applying that to the broken bone to ensure it is not damaged; and walk along the ridge at the back for several days, then straighten that with proper traction; and always consider the position, and when it is softened, tighten that.
If there is an infection or pain or abscess that occurs at the site, you must cut and remove that and eliminate the plaster and correct any damage caused by that with methods of healing it; and if possible, remove the plaster, and align it with proper traction until it heals.
Here begins the eighth chapter.
Restoration of fractured ribs.
Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur in large areas, but rather near the joints; and it is not contracture that occurs at the ends of the fractured part, but rather due to cartilage. And it is not hidden from the feeling when the investigation of it is with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that it brings the fracture together with the fingers in accordance with the possible method, until it is healed as needed, and apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bones with steel if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the interior, then the patient will have vehement pain and puncture, such as puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason the bones should be covered with gauze; and there will be difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients were ingenious in that matter with many ingenious methods.
And it was said by them: it is necessary to place food for the patient that induces inflammation and wind so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is forced outwards at the joints.
But we should beware of it, lest it cause an easy abscess to form, if not avoided; and if it does occur, then help with it.
Some of them said that it should be avoided above wind and that juice should be applied with force; and this is reasoning, but it is feared that the wind will attract superfluous matter to the area due to weakness.
Some of them said: it is necessary that the area be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil, and powder placed between the ribs until it is filled; it should be applied as a plaster when covering that, following the curvature; and care for the patient with pleurisy treatment and medication.
And if there is vehement constriction of the patient that it cannot bear, and the bones are punctured with the lancet, fear for the patient is warranted, so it is necessary to make an incision over the area, expose the broken rib, and place a purgative instrument over it, as remembered earlier, and cut through the bones with ease, and extract that.
And place the two lips of the wound together if it is large with suturing, and care for it with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should make a puncture and apply powder in rose oil over the area, and care for the patient with whatever is needed for the internal abscess.
And place it on a bed above the planks that it sleeps on until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fracture of the spine and neck.
In some cases fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then it follows its tendency, and similar to the vertebrae of the back. And when it occurs to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider, for if you see its masses already softened and stupefied and dead, and they cannot be healed nor strengthened by any means, and when constriction is applied to them with hands or punctured with a needle and no pain is felt, then you know that it will not heal, and in the month of dispositions it is mortal.
And if there is constriction and pain in them with hands and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bones is saved, and the patient will heal with care.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resemble that and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the weight of it.
If you see that it has already softened, then go to those who have occurred in the masses, and when it lies on its back, there is windiness and excrement without its will, and sometimes it is placed on its back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and do not trouble with the care of it.
But if there is no cause of those, the cause is better and less serious.
The care for it is to perform the suturing of the abscess with a lancet that you apply over the compressed vertebra, oil rose or myrrh mixed with honey; place over it for some days until the abscess is sutured.
And place one of the comforting and existing ointments on it, and strengthen it with linen; and command the patient to use rest and calm and not sleep over the area where pain occurs until it is healed.
And if there is the need for compression of the bone that has sagged or any other cause already known to it, then you must dry over the affected area and break the bone; and place the two lips of the wound together with suturing if it is large; and care for it with some healing ointment from the entrails, until it is healed.
If the tailbone of the bone in the hip is broken at the end of the coccyx, it is necessary that you insert your left hand into the anus and hold the broken bone with the right hand as much as possible according to the second equation; and place a plaster and splint on it if needed, and tighten it.
If a wound appears in the area, cover it and treat the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the Repair of the Anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, the fracture is not only in the ends but also runs along their length and declines into the inner parts; pain occurs in the patient at the location and a cushion becomes stunned when there is a fracture.
The repair of it is to stretch your hand over the location of the fracture which is the shape of its outline.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, you should hold it as much as possible according to the second equation and in a manner similar to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or declines to the inner parts from below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare for the repair of that fracture. And when you have grasped it, place it on a plaster and hold it with a splint of wood or bone, and tighten it firmly without fear of re-fracture or displacement of the splint.
Grasp the concavity with a cushion that fills it up to the point where it takes on the shape of the fracture, and tell the patient to sleep on their side or on their back.
But if an abscess cauterized, you stop the extension and repair of it until the abscess is healed, place it with the cushion that holds it as directed; and then return to the repair of it, and tighten it accordingly.
If there is a fracture in the bones or they are crushed, treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the Repair of the Fracture of the Adductor.
The adductor is what is between the thigh and the shoulder.
If it is broken, the repair of it is done in one of two ways, of which one is to take a wooden stick of medium thickness and shape it like this:
And attach them at both ends with laces, and hang it from a raised location.
Follow the patient on a sled; and make sure their broken arm is hanging off the stick until it reaches the handle of the stick in the middle location where its curve is attached.
Suspend it from some heavy cause or the servant extends it to the inner parts below; and have the doctor and his assistant hold the fracture with their hands until the fracture returns as needed.
The second method is that the patient lies down on their neck and suspends their arm with a rope from the top of it, and have two servants hold one of them above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds the foot below it; each extends to his side.
If you want the extension to be stronger, tighten it with a rope and on both sides of the fracture, and each servant extends their side.
Therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it is necessary to stop the middle part of the rope on the handle and the other side below the fracture towards the thigh.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, it is necessary to stop the rope at that location and on the hip.
Grasp it with ease and convenience, and once grasped as required and properly applied, tighten it if there is no abscess cauterized.
But if there is an abscess cauterized, you should wait for the seventh day and place the wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess heals, and then tighten it.
The method to strengthen it (the fracture) is by placing plaster over the break, and then covering the plaster with new linen fabric; and then adjust the arm on this support, and place your open hand over the muscle.
And cover the linen and strengthen the arm on the support to keep it in place without moving, unless there is a reason for the broken bone not to be held in this way.
Then use splints.
And place a splint on the break that is wider and stronger than the others; and place a finger between each splint, with the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three fingers from all sides.
Then strengthen the splints as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And your bandage on the location of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is longer, the bandage should be less tight.
Therefore, if you find that the position of the splints and bandage is appropriate as mentioned when you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
If you fear an abscess, then leave the bandage and splints in place for seven days as mentioned.
And consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent pus or inflammation; or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive bandaging; and therefore correct everything as mentioned.
But if you are certain that there will be no cause of this, then do not remove the bandage until at least three days or more.
Let the patient's head be on their chest and their hands on their stomach.
Cover the cooked coconut shell filled with wool bandage, and consider at all times of day or night that the figure of the broken member should not be removed or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened; therefore correct everything according to your ability.
Let the patient's food be as ordered before, in such a way that the food is soft at first until it begins to strengthen; and then you must thicken their food.
Because it is customary for the support and the bed of the patient to be strengthened for forty days, you must then remove them and administer baths and medications that will correct it.
If the fracture has been set, do not remove the bandage and splints for days or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones that are called the two forearm bones; one is small and it is called the distal bone, and the other is large and it is called the proximal bone, from the lower side.
If only the large forearm bone is broken, or if both bones are fractured together.
If only the small forearm bone is broken above, the restoration of it is easier and its healing is quicker.
If the large forearm bone is broken below, the fracture is bad, and healing is difficult.
Worse still if both bones are fractured together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the small forearm bone above, it is appropriate for the doctor to perform a small extension incision with ease before setting it.
But if it is the large forearm bone that is fractured, then a more forceful extension incision must be made.
If both forearm bones are fractured, then you should make the excision not too strong.
You must make the shape of the hand, perform the restoration and extension of it on a cushion, with the thumb at the upper part, as previously mentioned, and the wrist below the other digits, and the patient is seated on a low chair.
There should be a cushion in front of him at his height or incline, so that the patient does not exert himself.
And the assistant should extend the arm from below with their hand or bandage, and another assistant should extend it from above in the same manner.
The doctor should set the bone within its correct position.
And if in the fracture of the bone there is a protrusion, you must forcefully reduce everything to its original location with your skill.
And if there is a displaced protrusion of the bone that punctures the skin and you are not hopeful about its restoration, then perform cauterization over it using the method mentioned above.
But if the fracture is with an open wound, we have already treated that in a separate chapter, so take care of it.
And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth with a suture made of rose oil and white wax, neither too thick nor too thin; strengthen the cloth on that with a loose bandage until the abscess subsides; then remove the suture and apply plaster prepared from powdered poppy seed and clay of huou, and place splints; and the splint that is placed over the fracture should be wider and stronger.
You should know that the name of the stars in the arm is found in major configurations, or it may be a fracture in one joint or two at the same time.
Then pause your compression over the location of the fracture firmly and vigorously, and when the compression is at the joints above or below the fracture, pause it slightly moist as required by the beginning of the chapter's reminder.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or harsh, and the one who is strengthened with it should be of a strength suitable between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
Consider the limb and let it rest for several days. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as pressure on the limb, and you find that it must be removed, then you must tie up the limb with water tail until that pressure ceases.
Release the limb before it becomes constricted, and then return the compression.
If the compression has been softened and the bone has healed, and it seems like that, then correct everything with your skill.
Consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to an excess of compression, for then it must be softened slightly and left for some days until the nourishment reaches it, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not have any cause of those mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove it for approximately twenty days or thereabouts.
Place the hand of the patient suspended by its ability for agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty days, or it heals quickly in twenty-eight days, and everything depends on the complexity of the case and the nature of the treatment.
Chapter XIII
On the repair of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that at the knuckle of the thumb and joints of the fingers, fractures occur more often, but do not treat them unless they are observed to move abnormally.
When the hand is fractured or dislocated, it must be necessary for the patient to remain lying down with his arm hanging over the side of the bed, and then compress the hand on that side.
Then, the physician should gently extend the broken bones and align them until they are properly aligned.
Then it is necessary to compress plaster and gauze, unless an abscess occurs; and then place a splint over it according to the size of the area, and you have already covered it with cloth.
If the fracture is in the parts deep within (it), push the belly against the palm, and then make an appearance similar to a ball of fabric, command the patient to press that area with their injured hand; have it held firmly by fabric.
The steel (splint) for the cure with fabric, let there be lifting so that the wound is applied to the palm and press it as much as necessary.
If the fracture is on the outside parts, it is necessary to place a splint over the fractured area and another splint on the opposite side of the palm so that the hand is open and straight; then hold the splint tight as if rotating the hand in a screw-like motion with a ligament.
If the fracture occurs in one of the knuckles (joints) of the fingers, if the wound is deep, it should be sutured as necessary and then held with the palm; and if you wish, a small straight splint may be placed on top to raise the fracture without causing harm.
If the fracture occurs in any of the other fingers (such as middle finger, index finger, thumb or ring finger), it should be sutured and left to heal naturally without further manipulation; or all should be tied together continuously, which is better; or a small splint may be placed on top, as previously mentioned for a deep wound.
And in your treatment, consider the arrangement of cauterized wounds and their opposite - with the usual operation - for any causes of them as the narrative of it (the condition) repeats.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of fracture in the bone of the thigh.
The thighbone, when observed, is broken and becomes obvious by the sensation that transforms into the fracture in front (the anterolateral area) and the superficial abscess.
The restoration of the bone is done by tying a ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, while the patient lies on their stomach and face.
And have the assistant extend all the ligament to the fracture site according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the thighbone is to be shortened, the ligament should be placed on top of the patella at the end of the femur, so that its extension falls in the upper part and another ligament is below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is to be shortened at the lower end (lower leg), it should be tied with a ligament at the knee and the extension should fall towards the other side of the bone.
And the doctor should suture the bone with both hands inside so that it is reduced to its natural shape and the bone is joined well by good suturing; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding if there is no abscess in the member. But if there is an abscess in the member, leave it for several days until the cauterized wound heals, and then return to your treatment.
The binding of the bone should be done in this way: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times and remove excess material; then wrap the limb to reach the ankle and shortening of the thighbone.
Insert a long pin between the thigh and the limb near the lower end of the bone, and let both ends of the pin protrude from the upper part of the fracture on both sides; then rotate the pin around the limb and thigh so that the excess bandage is removed.
Place a cushion on the thigh at the site of the fracture and place a splint over the bone of the limb.
Fill the void between the limb and thigh with thick cloth to coagulate the blood flow.
And start with a strong binding in the middle of the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the ligament at the fracture site, your binding should be less tight, lighter and more moist.
Extend the pin to both ends of the fracture site up to the ankle of the foot, and tie both ends of the splints from the other side so that the ligament is not displaced from its location.
And loosen the binding on that part so as not to cause corrosion, abscess or swelling in the member; and if any of these conditions occur, immediately inform yourself about it, and correct everything properly, as previously mentioned.
But if there is pus in the bone that protrudes, it is necessary to suture it as possible; and if not, let it break and remove it, and treat it with what was previously mentioned until healed.
Some weeks are stronger than this thighbone fracture and should be bound as stated in the assistant and arm sections.
But in the restoration of this bone in such a way, no limp should occur in the patient; and if only one limb is restored, it is necessary that the other limb is also immobilized immediately.
And know that the thigh is immobilized for 40 days or a short time or a few months, depending on the complexity and other circumstances.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the broken collarbone.
Know that the breaking of the collarbone is more common in older people.
If it occurs in the breaking, then it is not but a fracture or tear in its divisions, and that is called a wound or multiple wounds, and over all of this feeling is established.
The restoration of it is such that what is broken from the divisions of it must be brought together to where it should be, adjusted and united as much as possible by means of a device, ease and construction.
Place a plaster and cover over that round stone if necessary; and tighten it above with appropriate binding.
And consider all the measures that were recommended in other fractures, such as applying an ointment and similar to those which confront any accident with what is appropriate to it until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the broken leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is large and is called femur; and the other is slender and is named patella.
It occurs in some of the species of fracture that affects both bones of the arm, and by this is done the restoration of it as the restoration of the arm sewed up, and the operation of it is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its divisions.
If the slender bone is broken, the leg is converted into the divisions in front of it.
If the large bone is broken, separate it from below, and it is of those causes that are not easily healed.
And apply extension, tension and ligamentation as in the sewing up.
But if the fracture of the leg is shallow and has few complications, extend it less and more gently, and relieve with your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you sew up the stones (or studs) and complete the entire operation, then you will take pieces of poplar wood that are placed under the causes that are placed in soles, and they are made exactly from branches of palm; relieve from those with small thickness, and do not be too hard, and the length of them according to the length of the leg, and of the collarbone down to the foot.
And apply a covering over each cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one on the division of the leg from one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the collarbone down to the foot base location of the foot.
And apply the two studs in three locations of each end and at the middle location, for this structure prevents the leg from bending to the right and left sides, and it is for good positioning.
And a brace of wood is applied according to the length of the leg, and it should be placed under it so that it maintains its mobility.
And moreover, you should do this in a fracture, and when that is an actual wound.
Also, every day examine the wound and study it carefully, and keep it from abscesses and inflammations or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary until it heals.
Chapter 17.
Of the ankle fracture and the bones of the foot and the toes.
A fracture of the ankle does not occur every time; but in the bones of the foot it may sometimes occur; and in the toes, a fracture occurs only rarely, and then only in cases of improper positioning.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a fracture and those bones sometimes become elevated above each other, then have the patient rest his foot on the ground in such a way as when walking.
Then place one foot on the elevated bones and walk on them, press them, and hold them in place until they return to their original position.
Then apply a plaster and cover it with a cloth, and place a small table under the abdomen of the foot on which there are two flat ends.
And strengthen that with the foot and its proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other necessary means.
And when three or four days have passed, you will be able to remove the bandages, because you will find the bones fixed, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on those will be as described.
But if any of the toes are broken, then you should restore them and fix them in place as I and recommend to you in the restoration of fingers. Then place the broken digit on a splint in accordance with its length, and let it be slightly wider than the digit itself; and under the foot, place this table that I have recommended to you, and strengthen it with proper structure.
But if the fracture involves two or three or more bones, then you should place a splint on each digit in accordance with its size, wrapped in linen cloth, and strengthen the table under the heel of the foot, and let it stand on one of the table's legs away from the abdomen of the foot to ensure proper retention.
And it is important for you to remember not to ignore all the causes mentioned to you in other fractures and other accidents that I have described; and oppose yourself to any accident as necessary.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the neck of the femur and the pelvic bone and the coccyx in males.
When the neck of the femur is broken, have it lie in a sling hung from a yoke, and incline it slightly to the side, and hold it behind.
And have the midwife pack the neck of the cervix with cotton, and make sure it is packed in such a way that there is no air left inside until it is in front of the cervix and the fractured bone returns to its normal position.
And place pillows under the buttocks and when it is necessary to urinate, have the patient remove the cotton with ease and then return it in the same manner as you placed it initially, and then return the pillows first.
Do this for seven days or more until the fracture has healed.
If you wish, take an ostrich egg and strengthen it with a cannula of cane; and insert the entire egg into the cervix, and inflate the cannula with air until the egg is filled with air inside the cervix, because the fracture returns.
And leave it packed with cotton and keep it for as many days as I have recommended until it heals.
When the pelvic bone is broken in males or females, administer to its restoration and fixation what I have recommended for the iliac bone.
What is right should not be concealed in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, especially to the one who has studied this subject and understands my book; because such a fracture indicates to you in the most important decisions regarding its restoration and fixation, and therefore understand well.
But in the coccyx of males when it is broken, take a cow's bladder, and place the coccyx inside it; then wrap it with cloth and bandage it, and leave it to rest for three days or more until it heals.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of a bone fracture when it is an actual wound.
It is appropriate to treat the person who suffers from a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the thigh bone or elbow bone, or resembles one of them. You should cut and probe it as soon as possible if the conditions for trepanation are present as described earlier.
If the wound discharges blood, then you must take measures to stop it, using powdered chalk or another suitable substance if there is no other reason.
And then begin the process of healing the fracture on that day, and do not delay, unless an abscess occurs.
But if the abscess heals quickly, you should wait to resume healing for up to nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, because you will cause harm.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, you must take measures to reduce and compress it with your hands with ease and as little extension as possible.
But if the extension is not prepared and the situation with your hands, you reduce it using this instrument; the instrument that is made of iron, the length of which is 7 or 8 fingers or as appropriate for the size of the wound, and it is necessary for the doctor to take one or two seconds depending on the amount required in treating each type of fracture.
And be round and as little irregular as possible in order to have clear understanding of the area during the operation.
And have a sharp point at the edges, with a thicker base and a gradual decrease in size towards the divisions.
This is the shape of it:
It is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," which means a small palette.
This means: And that the extremity of it should be raised slightly above the end of the bone protruding.
Apply pressure on it to push the bone back into its place with some form of constraint.
Therefore, exert pressure on the fracture ends and if the fractured part is thin, do not use a tool for good reason, but rather insert the fractured bone end where the instrument has the power to do so.
If you cannot reduce the bone by any means that we have recommended, then cut it with an instrument suitable for cutting bones, or use one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
And smooth out the uneven part and any small roughness remaining in the bone.
When the bone has been reduced and the patient experiences intense pain returning, you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position, then do what will greatly benefit the patient.
When your treatment of the bone is complete, immerse a piece of black mustard-seed cloth in strong vinegar and apply it directly if it is summer, and do not place cotton or any oil on the wound to prevent purulence and corruption from occurring there.
And provide sterilized needles at the time of your completion of bone treatment, leaving the wound uncovered so that you can insert the probe with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done such a thing before, resulting in death or serious illness of their patients, which is sinful. If the ligature is loose, soft, different from other fracture ligatures.
If the wound is large or a bad one, and you fear the possibility of complications as we have warned about, and pain occurs in that place, then do not apply needles, but instead use a bandage of hard cloth in place of needles and tighten it there.
And when the wound begins to heal after a day or two, take off the cloth that you had placed on it with vinegar, and apply warm compresses with medicinal ointments as our custom is, such as four-drug salve and similar ones.
It is your duty to remove the bandage and inspect the wound every day morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and the limb must be prepared in such a way that pus can easily drain from it to the surrounding areas.
If the wound passes more than a few days without consolidating or draining from the arm, then you should know that it is a sign of infection and you must investigate the wound with caution. And in the case of infections that are separated and drained, those that are not separated but swell the limb and cause pain, then you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
If the wound becomes pus-filled or gangrenous, that is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should stop whatever treatment was being used in its preceding chapter.
If it is necessary to break a large bone, such as the thigh or shoulder bones and similar major bones, and you do not attempt to attract or extract it because many times this leads to death; leave it in place for as long as possible because rapid healing can occur without intervention within twenty to thirty days. And heal the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter XX
On the treatment of nodules that occur at the site of some fractures.
Swollen occurrences often happen at the site of healing from a fracture, especially near joints, and this is caused by the shape of the limb; it strongly forbids the limb from its natural operation.
If the swelling is recent, administer medicines that have the property of stopping this, such as aloes, elm, and similar ones; take a few or all of them, and bind them to the affected area with linen, or albumen of egg, or vinegar, and place it on top of the swelling in a poultice, and bind it tightly around it for good constriction.
Leave the poultice in place without removing it for several days; then remove it and apply another one, until the swelling subsides; or strongly hold a plate of lead over it, because lead has the property of holding everything that is inflated in the limbs.
If the swelling has already hardened and is tight, and it becomes necessary to release it frequently, then cut it along the most superior part of the limb, and remove the excess and pus, or pierce it with sharp surgical instruments until it subsides; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of fractures when they have been restored and the limb remains thin, take care not to overlay it against its nature.
When a bone fracture has been restored and the limb remains thin, this is not done except for several reasons: one of which is excessive dissolution of the ligament and improper healing of the broken part; or excess constriction of the ligaments before nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or excessive embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique); or superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or poor blood flow in the patient's chest and weakness.
Treatment of this consists of feeding the patient and making their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in the body; administer baths; and give them rest and joy over it.
Place a plaster on the limb to draw the pus towards it, so that the pus attracts more nutrition; or continue embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique) of the limb with warm water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones that have been restored incorrectly and the operation on them that must be avoided.
When a limb that has already been restored for straightening and the healing of the broken bone with swelling and nodules occurs, and it is deformed in shape due to the fracture, nevertheless, the limb should not be prohibited from its natural operation; however, you must take into account the opinion of someone who knows whether the limb was recently fractured.
But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly condemned as leading to great fear, which is deadly.
If the limpness and swelling are recent, then it must be embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique) with warm water in which soft herbs are placed, such as althea leaves and radishes, mellilot, and similar ones; it should be made into a plaster with a plaster that is well-made; or that a mucilage of althea root is prepared and mixed with glycerin or olive oil, and applied to it; or that figs are mashed with pigeon feathers, and similar ones of the medicines that are called consolidants.
It is sometimes dissolved with frequent light rubbing using the most moist substances, and it is administered movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
If the deformity has already advanced and is severe and hardened, it becomes necessary to cure it with iron, then the pus over the affected area must be cut off and the continuation of the bone must be dissolved; and incise what is excessive of the nodule on the bone using fine surgical instruments, and administer ease to it with solicitude and care.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment for dislocation.
Dislocation is essentially a dislocation of one of the joints, which causes it to be immobilized and distorts the shape of the limb, bringing great pain and injuries upon the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it must be reduced immediately and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes infected and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason it should not be moved nor stretched at the time of the infection, for many times it causes spasms and slow pain.
But when this occurs, it is necessary that you prepare the patient for lancing (the process of draining pus), and let it rest until the infection subsides; and the limb should be embrocaccio (a medieval medical technique) with hot water and oil, and it should be reduced with ease.
And all members must be healed by what will return to its place in its location.
And now and order the chapters on dislocation as it is preceded in fractures; from the most superior part of the body to the most inferior part.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw below.
If both jaws are dislocated, it can happen in one of two ways: either they are pushed back to their places with little movement and become slightly swollen; or they are completely dislocated and the patient is unable to open his mouth, and the tongue is wrapped around its word.
But when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place with minimal effort.
But if the dislocation is complete and serious, it requires gentle reduction, without delay.
The attendant must hold the head of the patient and enter his hand into the mouth to find the dislocation of the jaw, if it is on one side; or he should enter both hands together, if it is on both sides, and tell the others to stay outside with them; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and allow them to go from each side; and the doctor should push the jaw back and cover it until it returns to its place.
If the reduction (of the dislocated jaw) is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer warm water and oil as an emulsion, until the reduction of both becomes easy and do not delay the reduction of both, as we have said.
And when they are returned and closed (the dislocated jaws), and the mouth of the patient is not clamped shut or softened, place on top of those cotton wool pieces covered with wax, make it from wax and rose oil; and let it be applied gently to ease the movement.
The patient should sleep on their back and their head should be between two pillows to prevent it from turning either right or left; do not force the patient to turn towards any side; let their provisions be forbidden until lions (meat), until the pain subsides and the jaws are no longer dislocated, then you may do as you wish.
Let this be administered with ease, and do not labor in opening the mouth; forbide food and drink and speech until the jaw is dislocated and healed.
If the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they are not converted to their original position, then watch closely for fever and sodium intake, and it is strongly advised to purge the stomach of the patient, and vomit pure bile.
When you see this, know that it is a disaster; and watch closely for the death of the patient within ten days.
Chapter XXV
Reduction of dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula should not be dislocated from its joint with the bones; and sometimes it is dislocated outside at the junction, and that is discerned by palpation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then compress the area with your palm using firm pressure, for it will return to its place.
And press firmly on that plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
But the extremity of that bone (furcula) that is connected to it is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and splinted as stated earlier and as you are equipped to do.
And press firmly on that plaster, powder, and splint, and command the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until healed.
And with this method of treatment, the separation of the muscle's extremity from its place is reduced.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Know that a muscle is dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the junction with the tendon or below it.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle (in the chest), but this is rare, and it is not dislocated at the back by the shoulder, nor at the front by the nerves.
Moreover, it is dislocated and protrudes from the junction at the bottom of the tendon, and this occurs more frequently in those with thin muscles; however, in those with thick muscles, it protrudes out with difficulty.
And a strong blow or fall can cause it to occur in some people, and the affected muscle is treated with cautery and excised when it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you must be careful about this and proceed in its treatment.
It is known that dislocation occurs at the junction with the tendon at the bottom of the muscle; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact one, for there are several differences among them. You will find a hollow in the head of the muscle, and at the tendon's junction below it, you should touch the head of the muscle like the curve of a hoe, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the auricle nor move it completely.
If it is dislocated on the foot or ankle, you should touch it directly without hiding it.
From this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
The reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand of it above the junction with the tendon; and then presses down on the tendon below it, raising the junction with force to its place, and the minister raises the hand of it and extends it; and then presses down on it below where it easily returns.
But if it does not return with the method described earlier, and at the beginning of the dislocation, several days later, the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a poultice made of burdock root, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then the patient should be placed on their back and the tendon of it should be held with a moderate amount of pressure, and the physician should place their heel on the shoulder, lift the head of the muscle using force, and pull the patient's hand towards the bottom so that it is not dislocated further. Another servant should hold the patient's head so that it is not dislocated below, for it will easily return to its place.
If you wish to reduce it in this manner: make a person who is taller than the patient present and stand on that side, enter their muscle below the patient's tendon and lift the tendon of the affected limb upwards to the junction above where the patient is suspended in the air. Another servant should pull the patient's hand from below their abdomen. But if the patient is lightweight, it is necessary to hang something heavy, as this will make the dislocation return quickly.
Another method of reduction: fasten a pole with its head round in shape (similar to the end of a mortar pestle) on the ground that is neither thick nor thin. Then place the patient below it, and rest the patient's shoulders on top of the pole. The patient should stand according to the length of the pole, and extend their hand from the other side with force, while extending the opposite limb strongly towards the affected area, as the junction will return to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, use this cure: take a pole with a length of two forearms and a width of four fingers. Reduce its thickness at the end of the tendon in the following manner:
Place the rounded head on top with lions' fur to prevent the pole from hurting the patient.
Approach the patient's thigh gently and extend your hand or arm within it, tie the thigh with support straps, and bind the thigh, arm, and hand to the affected limb.
Place the arm on a ladder at the appropriate height according to the length of the patient's body, extend the other hand towards the affected side, and secure it by suspending it from the other side, as the joint will soon join.
Once the intestine inside is completed in any way possible for you, then you must gently press down on the suspected hernia with linen cloth of appropriate size; and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered molasses and egg whites over the entire muscle, in such a way that it is turned under, and then tighten the hernia with an appropriate bandage; let the wound be wrapped over the plaster, and the patient's hand should be connected to their neck, relaxed, and the hand should not be moved for 7 days.
It is necessary to restrict the patient's food intake until the affected member is comfortable, as it facilitates the healing process.
And approaching food, let it be given more in smaller portions or exercise less activity; therefore, if it is stopped and not softened, then it has been healed.
However, if the joint is dislocated due to excessive moisture that happens there or for another reason, then in that case, it is necessary to administer cauterization with three cuts, as was previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and the bandage is removed after 7 days and the joint remains unhealed, and the plaster and bandage are reduced slightly but it still does not heal and the arm cannot be raised above the side, then you know that the nerves of the affected area, which are at the end of the muscle, have been severed or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never fit properly in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done, you should press and squeeze the feet and the breasts or the sides, the reduction is done with pressure and extension until it returns.
And another bandage should be applied to that area, and heal it until it is healed.
If there is gravity or delay in the healing of the member and difficulty with its movement, then you should use baths multiple times until the gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and it returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, especially in front of the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it is displaced either to the left or to the right according to some figure, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder joint correctly, this is clearly declared to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor can it touch the muscle with it.
And you must catch it, and reduce the dislocation immediately when it comes out as an abscess cauterized, for if it comes out as a cauterized abscess, the reduction is difficult, and it heals poorly; and especially when it is on the back side, for all other types of dislocations are worse in that regard, and it causes more pain, and multiple days can lead to death.
And the restoration of it, when possible, is to extend the hand on both sides, expand the arm, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with the tips of his fingers or with the flat part of his palm until it returns to its place.
However, if the dislocation is on the front side, then it should return in such a way that the hand bends with its palm, until it strikes the shoulder with the flat part of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then you administer violent extension and strong movement.
It is that two ministers extend the arm, and they should have another two ministers to prevent the extension from being too strong.
And then turn the arm all around, as it is wrapped with long cloth folded over the hand or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that it is those causes that aid in lubricating the joint and facilitating movement; then push the joint vigorously until it returns.
And in the reduction of it, it is necessary to rest on that plaster with adhesive and elastic properties made with egg whites, and tighten it with an appropriate bandage; then the arm should be suspended from the neck and relaxed for several days.
And if it is possible to dislocate it, then you should remove the bandage and let it be in its place.
If you see that the joint does not become stronger, then you should apply more plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it becomes tighter; then dislocate it.
However, if there is gravity in the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer humidity in baths and subtle friction, and observe until it improves; or place a lubricant on the joint, such as oil; and tie it up, and leave it on the bones for a day and a night. And then remove that, and place it in water; and when it has softened, you shall heat the joint with a quick friction, and then apply it to the affected area three times, once, and again, and the third time, Corruption has reached the anus, internally until it is limited.
If you want to, place it over the wet and scalded cowhide wound, and hold it there for some time, because that is moist and helps reduce it to its proper condition.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder joint is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation from the hand is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints, however, it is necessary to have speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, before the location becomes abscessed or a cauterization is applied.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and provide an extension of their arm, and place your hand or palm over the edge of the joint, and push it back into its place until it returns to its position.
However, it must be considered whether the palm has already been left in the patient's abdomen, in that case, the extension and reduction of the hand should be performed, and if the dislocation is preceded by this, the position of the patient's hand should be brought inside the table, so that the doctor's hand can rest on the edge of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; if not, then you should apply a compress to it, allowing the abscess to come out, and do not repeat it, because otherwise, it will not endure or suffer more than a few days with the reduction of it.
However, the joint may remain twisted; and do not inquire of the patient about any cause, but rather that their hand is softened and cannot withstand any pressure; in this case, you should know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and you should not intervene except to compress it with a hot iron cauterizer to prevent any further damage.
Once the shoulder joint has returned, you should apply a compress to it which we have recommended, and leave it for ten days to heal and strengthen; then it should be released, left open, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
But if the movement of it is stopped and there occurs any gravity in it, then you should apply warm water and gentle friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes fingers are dislocated all over.
When one of those fingers is dislocated at the base or in the palm, you should squeeze the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then hold the finger at its base and suspend the part where it is dislocated for two days.
Then suspend that and extend it until it becomes straight on the same day.
When it is night, follow the advice given earlier, and do not stop unbinding it during the day or exercising its movement, and bind it at night, and do this for several days until it becomes strong.
If the wrist is dislocated, do the same as above, and bind it to that location and perform the first operation on it until it heals.
Similarly, do the same as above when it is dislocated in other locations.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the spine.
When a complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the spine or neck occurs, and it is not possible to move any of the nearby vertebrae, in that case, there is no cure for it because death comes to the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's digestion is outside their control and they cannot retain it; and many times muscles or two hips or two arms, or one of them, are softened or a vertebra is moved from its location, which many times is moved and many times its removal is performed in four places.
Therefore, it has already drained into the crevices behind and is known as gangrene.
But the cure of it is that you should consider whether gangrene occurs from purity, for in that case there is neither cure nor healing of it all.
But in those where it occurs by chance or by injury or something similar to them, the ancients said the methods of cure with a long discourse, from which the most returns; but I have abbreviated it from that one of which the few excuses for the abundance of it, closer to the true intention, which I have expanded and formed from instruments diverse of that one, with which I will show it and explain it.
And of those, there is cured only that one which occurs directly on both sides, with what I will recommend.
And the patient should be extended on his back near a wall, and it should be supported underneath him to keep his feet from being hit.
And place a straight staff there, fixed in the ground at the foot end around his head, and another staff at the other end of the foot to raise it.
The minister should hold the staff, and not be locked in a ditch; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
Cover the head of the patient with a cloth and firmly hold his hair with a leather strap; extend the end of the leather strap to the staff, which should be at the head of it, and tie it there; and strongly tighten the other leather strap around his buttocks, at the waist, and over his chest; and adjust all the straps and tie them to the other staff that is at the feet.
And the minister should extend his strap to the divide of the staff, and neither should the two staffs and their straps at their locations where they are fixed be drained, but rather not as I have said.
And the doctor should place his hands on the spinal column with strength until it returns, or he may place it on a table, and close to that, adjust his feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose latitude or length is above three spans, and carve in the wall near the patient a hole in which the end of the table fits. And place the weight of the table on the spinal column, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pulls it tightly until the spinal column is dislocated and returns to its place.
And if you want, turn the roll that is turned with your hand; it is that you put yourself on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of two staffs, whose length should be one span each, and you should also have the head of him in the end of two staffs in the same way; and the distance between each staff should be one palm, and already it is made in each staff with a hole through which it can pass, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not slip.
And it is a round staff where the hole is, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two staffs.
And at the end of it is a hole in which the staff is formed, whose length is one palm that rotates; and in the other two staffs there is something similar to it.
And strongly tighten the straps that you have tied around the feet of the patient in the hole that is at his head, and the straps that you have tied around his chest in the ring that is at his feet.
And you should place each roll and have a minister who turns the roll with his hand, and the doctor will adjust the spinal column as we said.
And when the spinal column is returned and closed, you must apply a plaster made with dry powder and albumen of eggs, and stopper; and place a plank of wood on it whose width should be three fingers or around that, and the length that takes the location of the gangrene, and above the division of the spinal column.
And apply a dietary strap that we said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed.
And if there remains any obstruction in the location at the end of healing, you must administer medicines that soften and clean it with the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already the lead sheet has been applied in that place.
Sometimes it happens that an obstruction occurs in the rear of the two spinal columns, and it is caused by dislocation; and it is that bone which already protrudes due to which you should not make any attempt on it with this medicine, for strong heat will cause your death.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not move but only dislocation, and it does not happen to them what happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
The joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inside the socket, outside the socket, in front, or behind.
It is also dislocated at the socket-side, but rarely in front or behind.
The sign of the hip dislocation at the socket-side is that when you align the healthy leg with the diseased one, the healthy thigh appears longer and the diseased one more prominent, and the diseased leg cannot bend as it should be straightened, and it's the area that swelling should appear, which can be cauterized with a cautery to stop the swelling.
The sign of hip dislocation at the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to this accident.
The sign of hip dislocation at the front is that the thigh expands according to the complaint, but it does not bend without pain in the groin, and if it is forced to move forward and cannot be moved at the front; and the urine is retained, and the swelling is cauterized, and you should walk on the heel.
The sign of hip dislocation at the back is that it does not expand the groin, nor can the front thigh bend when bending the swelling, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the head of the hernia is to be found there.
But reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider if the dislocation is old and long-standing, which has already become chronic, then you must administer reduction of it and leave it in its position, but this is not a complete cure; therefore, it does not necessarily mean that there should be hope for recovery.
But in the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must try to restore the joint and extend it on both sides, inside and outside, left and right, for it easily returns and does not need any other treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare strong medicine and stretch the thigh of the lower part, or around the hernia, or with a bandage that is tied over the thigh; and another person should extend their hand above the hernia so that they place their hands deeper inside it; and hold a strong cord around the neck of the hernia, and have another person tighten the end of the cord.
The extension should be of the thigh or of the socket-side to the groin at the neck of the bone, or of the back to the area of the backbone.
The extension should be done in one go so that the patient is raised off the ground and remains suspended.
This type of extension is common to all four types.
And if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; but if not, then it is necessary for all types of dislocation to do what I have said about self-treatment.
In self-reduction of the dislocation, when it is at the socket-side, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side; and place the bands over the neck of the hernia in the area between the head of the hernia and the lower groin; and extend the band above the area of the groin to the upper part of the bone.
And have another strong person grasp the patient's arms, and firmly hold the large part of the diseased hernia and extend it outward by forceful extension, for it will return to its place.
This type of treatment is easier to cure than other treatments for this limb.
But if it is excused for you and not allowed to enter with this type of treatment for the entire limb, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong and light bandage around both ankles and groins.
The length of each should be four fingers, and the diseased thigh should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
The patient should be suspended over the head of the bed and raised as high as possible; and the length of the suspension should be two arms' lengths from the ground.
Command a strong young man to press the head of the hernia, and he should be suspended with another young man, and the other young man should press down on the hernia with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in self-reduction, when the dislocation is at the outside, it is necessary that the patient rest on a bench according to what has been recommended previously; and tighten the bandage strongly around the diseased thigh and feet of it.
And two beds should be placed, one under the feet and the other under the head; and two more beds should be adjusted to meet in the middle of the beam on which damp cloths are wrapped around it, so that the patient is not injured by the bed being between his legs, thus ensuring that the extension at the lower part is not impeded.
And each person should extend to their side, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is at the hip joint, it should be extended slightly, and according to this account in the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected leg, and with the other hand he presses that one together, and with that compression holds the extended hip away from the opposite hip.
And if the dislocation is at the hip joint behind, it should not be extended away from the hips and raised off the ground; instead, it should be pressed down on a hard surface, as it would also be done if an ankle were dislocated outside the foot, according to what was said about its treatment on two feet; and it should be on its back with the limbs extended, as we said, this has no benefit.
And compression must be applied to the joint using a table.
Therefore, the reduction is difficult as you know, and the sign of the reduction will not be hidden from you. You extend two pillows for the patient, when you see that entrapments appear and the patient extends their leg and expands the area with excuses, then you will know which member needs to be returned. Then, adjust two cushions and apply a plaster or bandage in such a way that the ankle is not injured in any of the joints; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and plaster, and compare the swollen limb with the other.
If you see that the swelling has subsided, then you will know that the dislocation has been fixed, and leave the patient to walk.
And if you see any signs of swelling or inflammation, then return and plaster that area and compress it according to the first method, and leave it for three days.
Then unbind that limb and make it walk slowly for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of hip dislocation.
The hip can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outside, inside, more commonly behind, but not in front.
The sign of hip dislocation is to command the patient to apply their leg to the side, and then you will know that the hip is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways (of hip dislocation) is to put the patient in the correct position, so that they extend their leg as much as possible. Then, hold their body with your hands, support their foot between yours, and make them hold their hip with their hands while you hold it from behind with strength, and another person extends their leg until the hip returns to its original position.
The thigh of the patient must remain attached to the pelvis without it dislocating.
Place and fix the thigh in its place against the pelvis, bind it with bandages for three or four days, then unbind it.
Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of it is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with liniments which are used in the treatment of hernia.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cure of a dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated due to some injury, and the dislocation of it may occur either on the inner or outer side.
The sign of dislocation is that the ankle becomes swollen on the side to which it is dislocated.
But the cure for reduction is gentle reduction, and it should be extended with ease and then bandaged until it returns to its normal position.
But in the case of dislocation due to some injury, care should be taken that the patient does not move and has a strong and powerful assistant on the side behind his back in the correct position for it.
You stand to the right of the patient's head and your left hand on the lower part of his thigh at the level of the hip.
You hold the foot with your right hand and your left hand for two movements, pull on it, extend it, and push the leg of the foot against the thigh without laboring.
Do this movement as you have counted.
And push the leg of the foot against the thigh on the third movement and remain at the hip.
Therefore, if it returns in one movement or two according to this method, and if the foot is bandaged, that is good; otherwise, repeat the operation as it will return.
But if the reduction of it is forbidden by what has been recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, spread out a small mat in a firm place, and have them lay on it with their legs apart, and you should already have wrapped them up in cloth so that they do not feel discomfort.
And the assistant should hold the patient's legs and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or with a splint that it lies on the neck of the foot; and each assistant should extend one side against the extension of his own part, and the mat should be placed between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being forced at the sides opposite its extension.
And the doctor bandages the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy side at the opposite side, because the dislocation will return easily.
And so when the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you, stop plastering and strongly extend it with liniments, and bandage the foot to the thigh.
And you should be cautious or careful of the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the liniment on it is not violent and does not hurt it too much.
Leave it like that for two or three days; and if the liniment softens, extend it.
Remove it on the third or fourth day and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. But if it is necessary to go in front of that space, it should not be done with the certainty that the dislocation has not been dissolved and destroyed, nor should any treatment be given for it.
And if an abscess forms cauterized, you should administer the treatment described in the previous paragraph on another occasion for healing and dressing it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of fingers on the feet.
It should be bandaged with little extension without difficulty, and if not difficult, advance is easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the joints of the foot, you should make the patient lie on a flat surface such as the ground or table and remain as if they were walking.
And you stand on one foot, and place your other foot on the joints that have been injured, and press on it with your foot with force until it returns, and observe it to see if it is bandaged and does not appear in the prominent area.
And you place the foot of it on a table that takes up the whole foot, which has two ends, and press it with structure suitable and firm for three days; then unbind it and make it rest without walking for several days until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation caused by a blow, fracture or any other cause.
When any of these causes occur and you try to treat it and restore it, many times death occurs.
And so it is not necessary to presume on the cure of it, but one who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, slow, neither rash nor presumptuous; and one who uses medicines that produce abscesses cauterized only in the beginning, leaves the patient in the judgment of God, not to the one to whom salvation from destruction is hoped, but to the one whom hope for healing appears with some hope. Then immediately make an effort for reduction at the start of the cause, before it becomes an abscess by cautery.
If the limb returns as we desire, then administer the treatment that will cause the abscess to subside by cautery and heal the wound with what is suitable for dry ulcers.
If dislocation occurs together with a fracture and the bone is separated, then you must perform the treatment on them, and do as was said in simple diseases that are preceded in their locations.
Be careful and avoid that the instrument enters into the paths of fear, according to your discretion; for what is better for you, you should serve your Creator, and it is more permanent for your glory, and more healthy for your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Albucasim, blessed be God. Amen. This phrase was added as a conclusion to religious texts or prayers during the medieval period. It signifies agreement, assent, or confirmation and serves as a closing statement for many written works.
