In this manner, O sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion it will be understood, and by its expositions, and by its declarations, it is to me apparent that I should commit it to you as a treatise on surgery.
Since the art of surgery is in our region and in our time greatly neglected, thus bringing great peril to the science of it and the instruments of it are lost; only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients, which have become obsolete and led to errors and superstition until its intentions and meanings are veiled and its power and art elongated.
It is apparent to me that I shall revive the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it will come with the forms of the cautery instruments and the other tools of the work along with the addition of the explanation, and preparation of them, which is necessary.
But the reason why no good craftsman is found with his art in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and that its practitioner must first be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowledge of the members and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; and have understanding of bones, nerves and ligaments, and their numbers, and their growth; and of pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the sites of their emergence.
And for this reason it is said by Hippocrates that a name is nothing, but in the work small and particularly in the art of the hand.
But we have already said of this in the introduction of this book; since whoever is not knowledgeable about anatomy will not be excused if he falls into error, and thus men will die from it, as I have seen many times, because others are misinformed about this science and deny it and its experiments.
Since I saw a foolish and experienced doctor incise an abscess of the neck on a woman's collarbone, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out before the woman died among her family.
And I saw another doctor who believed that he could extract a stone from a man who was in pain, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted the stone with a piece of the bladder, causing the man to die on the third day.
And I called for it to be pulled out, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a blacksmith who was in debt to him due to a fracture in his hip; and the ignorant doctor prepared him by extracting the fracture through the wound with tendons and spikes with strong construction, but did not leave space for breathing.
And loosen according to his wishes, and lay him flat, and allow him to lie still for several days and command that we release him from the bindings; and remain in this state until the thigh and leg are abscessed, and it leads to ruin.
And I was called to him, prepared to release the bindings, and achieved tranquility and allowed him to endure his pains.
But corruption had already been confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread throughout the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess of cancer and it became ulcerated near the owner in several days, causing the evil of it to increase greatly.
The cause is that the cancerous cautery is clean of melancholic humor, so it should not be applied to any part, but rather to a member that is hostile to it.
Therefore, sons, the art of surgery must be divided into two categories: one is associated with health, and the other with danger in greater preparations.
I have already experienced this in every place of this book where there is an operation in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it alone, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way for God's grace to bring salvation and praiseworthy succession, and leave behind the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and do not abandon your weapons because of that which frightens you; instead, rely on faith in God and in your own name so that examination is not avoided: since remaining with glory, and above all in the world and below your sanctities.
In some places, gualia says: "Do not treat bad illnesses, so that bad physicians are not recognized".
And you have now divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first chapter of the first part. The first chapter is dedicated to the treatment of feet, covering the types of instruments and ironwork for cautery, as well as what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter is about dryness and perforation, air pockets, sores, and extraction of similar conditions, all cataloged and organized according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, treatment of twists and similar conditions; this chapter is organized from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
It is necessary to explain the quality of the remedies for that cauterizing and the harmful effects of it, as well as in what circumstances cauterizing should be prohibited.
Therefore, I will explain the quality of the remedy for cauterizing and the harmful effects of it in a long and detailed manner, subtle with knowledge, veiled secrets; many wise men have spoken much about it, but they disagree with each other, and it suffices me to discuss one of their speeches, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore I will explain that cauterizing, in general terms, applies to all materials or its materials, with the exception of two cases, which are cases without material.
In the dry and hard material case, there is disagreement; some say that cauterizing is beneficial in this case, but others say the opposite, that cauterizing is not appropriate for a disease that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a dry and hard disease to be treated with something that is hot and dry.
And he who says otherwise argues that cauterizing is beneficial for all dry and hard diseases in the human body, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, the body of a man burns.
And I will explain through experience that I have tried in some cases.
However, it is not necessary for me to come back to what has been proven and practiced in the chapter on cauterizing due to previous experience, and to know the diversity of human complexion and the placement of diseases within their bodies, as well as the causes of these diseases, and their symptoms, and the space of time for these conditions.
In other cases, there is no reason to fear, and even less in wet and moist diseases, because all doctors have already agreed on them, and they are not disputed about the remedy for cauterizing in these conditions.
And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by cauterizing with fire and the goodness of it is due to cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, but affects only the adjacent members minimally with a small harm.
However, the action of burning medicine extends to adjacent members and strong heat brings disease in difficult-to-heal and weak places.
However, fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything except waste resources, and it is already known through experience and long years of study in the art concerning the truth of causes; because of that, I am excused for the length of my speech. And if it were not forbidden in my book in this place to reveal secret veiled fire knowledge, as well as the quality of the operation in the body and the expulsion of diseases by this method, demonstrated philosophically, which could be useful in your pain.
And know, my sons, that they disagree on the time when it is appropriate to perform cauterizing and they pause the best time in spring.
And I say that cauterizing is appropriate in all times, because the harmful effects of time are submerged in the benefit of cauterizing, and even more so if cauterizing is for pain or necessary pain, strong fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because there is fear of worsening, which is greater than a small harm caused by the passage of time.
And this is not to be found in your pains, or my sons, what they estimate is only the vulgar people and foolish doctors, since that disease which is cured by cauterizing is not always beneficial, and they wait for the consequences of it.
And the cause is not as they imagine for that reason, because cauterizing is only in a place where medicine alters the complexion and dries out the humidity that is the cause of pain.
However, cauterizing is unnecessary in relation to medicine due to the desire for its value and virtue and the greatness of its master.
It is possible that the disease may return at some time in the future depending on the patient's complexion and the location of his disease, as well as the virtue of it, and what is prepared in his body due to the accumulation of superfluous substances in him, and what reaches it through diets and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterizing is administered should be a subtle disease with few superfluidities and humidity, such as cauterization of teeth for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but rather it will be small.
A more common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said to be righteous, but I do not think that this is a cure that benefits from medicine or any other reason to use caution.
The reasoning behind saying that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not that it is administered as a means of treatment in certain diseases, but rather when those treatments do not work, and at the end of the disease, caution is applied and it does benefit. Then hereafter let it be known that caution is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the reasoning that I understand from the common sayings and tropes of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
The ancients said that the place for cautery does not burn, although this is not absolutely true, because I have already proven and verified that it does not do so in some bodies, and cautery with gold is better than with iron as they said; however, when you use fire with gold cautery, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the amount you want according to the gold's rugor (malleability), and it must be prepared to be cooled; and if you adjust it over the fire and some layers are created in the fire due to the artificer's occupation with that.
And for this reason, cautery must be made with iron more gently and gradually to correct the operation.
I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head within the feet, so that you may easily find what you need from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization relieves both coldness and moisture in the underlying cause of which there are two, causing headache, nasal congestion, flow of mucus from the ears and aurelhas (eye ducts), excessive sleeping, tooth pain and goulayro (probably a type of neuralgia), and generally any disease that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, soda (sciatica) and apoplexy, and similar diseases in those maladies.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the severity of the disease, the age and custom of the patient.
And you also command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a tilted bench and place your hands over his feet.
And you place the palm of your hand near the patient's nose, between their eyebrows. However, since the patient's nose is not reached directly, you sign that place with a pen, and then heat the olive oil cautery, which has this form:
And you place it there on the designated spot, in a manner that it descends, so that your hand may be constrained little by little, and you turn it.
And you lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that a certain amount of bone of the head is exposed, such as the amount of grains of sand, then raise your hand, and if not, return your hand with another one, if it is cold, until it is seen the bone that I told you.
And you take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days.
And you place it on the burned area, over the wound, and leave it until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And you heal the spot with a strong four-ingredient medicine until it is healed.
And they already said that when the wound remains open, it burns more, because it is better and more beneficial.
They said that the coccyx should be cauterized until it reaches the bone, and the cautery should be kept there until a certain part of the cavity of the bone is scorched.
And you remove what is close to the bone, and heal it.
They also said that with the cautery, it reaches the end, until the bone is strongly threatened, until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati (a disease or condition): They believe that from that spot the vapors of the head will expire.
The wound should be kept open for a long time, and it should be healed until it is consolidated.
However, I do not see these two types of cauterization for everything, only in some men out of fear; and you, from me, it is better for health when it is; because the head is exposed due to the solution of continuity of such things as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of a weak nature.
The first specialized cautionery is safer and better for me, and from that house and with that work comes safety. (Or alternatively: The primary type of cautery is the safest and best for me; and from that house and with that procedure comes safety.)
Secondly:
Of the head's cautery.
If chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient and it persists despite using tools such as lances, hooks, capsules, plasters, guaze, cudgels, and bandages, among others, and if it has already been cauterized with one cautery without any improvement for that cause, then consider whether the patient's head is of a strong constitution in nature; and if it is not frail and weak, use another cautery to a small extent. Cauterize that area on the corner of his head with a cautery that separates the skin. Cut the skin and expose the amount that has been cauterized, then cauterize that area again in the lower back of the head at the location known as the "basin" (and this is the location where a blister forms). And leave your hand in that place, and do not expose the bone because the patient experiences a great deal of pain different from the pain caused by other head cauterizations.
Label this cautery in its place, because it is more subtle than the cautery used to cauterize the corners and occiput of the head, and this is how it should be done.
Seventhly:
On modern migration treatments.
When a sudden pain in the head occurs, or pain inside the skull spreads, it should be treated with medications that alleviate pain, and other treatment, which I have mentioned in the guidelines for diseases; and if all this does not help, cauterization is performed in two ways: either cauterization with a hot burning medicine, or with iron.
Heat up the alum in a pot, excavate it and expose both ends of the pot. Then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a sharp lance that is deep enough to expose the bone but not visible from outside.
Then apply pressure on the wound using bandages for constant compression, and leave it for three hours; then remove the alum, let the wound heal for two or three days, and apply a dressing soaked in oil until the area becomes dry.
And take care of it until it heals.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medications which I have written about in the second treatise on burning medications.
But cauterization with iron can be done as follows: fire for cauterizing, which is described as follows:
And it is called a nail-like claw because its head is shaped like a nail with some curvature and the middle part of it is prominent.
Place your hand over the painful area (so as not to harm the archery that is already there) and rotate the small iron slowly but surely.
If the amount of tissue that is burned by the incision is too large and causes bleeding, raise your hand to avoid injuring the artery already present, so as not to cause bleeding.
And soak the area in saltwater and place it on the location, leaving it for three days; then apply a dressing with oil, and take care of it until it heals.
And if you wish, cauterize the end of the cutler's hand according to the method of cauterization, and be careful not to make an incision in the artery during this modern technique.
Chapter Four.
On ancient cauterization of migraines.
When you treat an emigranea, as I have said in the previous treatment and its divisions of diseases, and the cure is not helpful, and sometimes because of the disease that does not respond to what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary for you to ignite the cautery knife before it becomes white-hot, indicating the location of pain along a line of length which should be the size of the finger or whatever; and pause your hand for a moment, then strongly press that area and incise the arch and reach the bone.
You must guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is malfunctioning and should be for chewing, and that the ligament not be swollen and the nerves which control it, and that there is no spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution for bleeding from an artery that has been cut open, because in the cutting of it there is fear, especially in those who do not know what to do and are not trained, let the operation be delayed at the beginning.
And you will come to the reminder of the regulation for bleeding an artery accident according to its method, in this book's section on that matter.
And if the disease does not respond to this cautery and you see that the patient's body can tolerate it, cauterize that part of the head in the proper place as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals.
If you come, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the compression of an artery with two cauteries, and this is the better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter V.
On the cauterization of ear pain.
When pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with cooling agents and other cures as mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, called puntum, which has the following form:
And place the puntum near the burning area and extend it around the entire ear as if a wheel is rolled, or in the circumference of each example if the pain is in one location. Move along the ear with the cautery point by point, as you test the area for the pain spot.
And if you make points with the cautery around the entire ear, and that does not help, then cure the spots until they heal.
Chapter VI.
On the cauterization of burns.
A burn that has been treated and then cauterized is not a burn of the kinds that come from poison, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterizing the type of burn caused by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of burn with herbs and poultices, and your cure is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be the razit of the aurelha, the second a small one at its temple, and the third the junction of two lips.
Pause your cautery on the side of the diseased area, because softening is not seen in the diseased area but only in the healthy area.
The method of cauterization is to cauterize the area with a cautery at the end of the ear above a small amount on the tip of the head, and at the temple another, the length of which should be equal to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the burned area has been covered by the thickness of the skin layer.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is the shape of a knife, the shape of which is flat. But it is necessary that this one be very thin, as you will see; and it is necessary to sharpen the knife in excessively rough places a little.
And cure the area with what is before processing until it heals.
Chapter VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what has been said and your medicine does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that person with four cauteries: first on all the corners of his head; second at the middle part of the head, as we have said; third in the neck. The method of using the cautery is as previously stated.
It has been cauterized over the stomach opening, and it is more urgent; and it should be treated with what is processed.
Chapter VIII.
On the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by poison.
It is necessary to give the patient herbs and pills that help to cleanse.
And shave the head of the patient completely and pause at the neck with the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
Pause that area for a while, as this is the method of cauterization. And do what the previous step has stated.
And so if it cures well through those means; otherwise, make three cauterizations in the lower part of his head, which are descending from the most superior part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. Place a thick bandage on each cauterization, and apply care to the cauterization with water that is boiled.
If the patient is able to tolerate water, make a cauterization in the proper place; if you wish for more intense heat, then cauterize it on both corns.
Apply care to it until it is healed; and the cauterizations should be olive-shaped according to the form given.
Chapter IX.
On cauterization for relief and softening of the whole body.
Since you are treating the head with herbs and water as mentioned earlier; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it at the proper location on the head, and over all the corners of the head, and over the lower part of the neck, and three cauterizations over the spinal processes of the neck.
And if it is necessary for softening of the body in severe illness and the patient is tolerant, then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the spine, and afterwards with cauterization until the pain subsides, and raise your hand. Apply care to it until it is healed, and this should be olive-shaped cauterization.
Chapter X.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is due to a fever.
And so it is necessary to treat the brain of the patient at the beginning with warm and cold treatments, as well as other care that has been mentioned in the previous division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of medications.
If the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, administer gargles and mouthwashes that are meant to soothe the stomach, for several days, with good nutrition.
Then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it at the proper location on the head according to the method previously described, and another cauterization on the back of the neck, and one on each corner of the head. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with a heated iron, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
Then heat the iron as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then pause the subtle cautery in this manner.
Chapter XI.
On cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are rotten and corrupted humors that are thick and weak, then cauterize it with the iron as described earlier to cause paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him water that purifies his brain as previously described in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, and apply a well-made and properly made turban over the circle of the skull, and lay it in the middle of the head.
The patient should be seated and held from all sides.
Then apply a poultice; it is suitable for use against ancient scabies of sheep. Heat it gradually over the fire so that it suffers no harm when placed in the affected area. Then apply it to the middle of the patient's head in the circle and let it soak until it becomes softened.
Make the patient do this every week once, with other good treatment until he is well; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible, without having a hand always with such an arranged iron: this is a type of cautery that keeps the brain moist.
Then apply it to the affected area in a remedy or liniment made from quinine.
Chapter XII.
On cauterization of water flowing in the foot.
When you have recognized the beginning of water in the foot through the signs I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient water that purifies his head, keeping it away from all moisture.
Make him sweat in a bath with alum for several days.
Tell him to wash his head and then cauterize it in the middle of the head with an iron; also cauterize it with two irons over both temples if the moisture is starting to appear in two feet, or one iron if the moisture is appearing in one foot.
Incise all veins and arteries that are closed, with the iron in the length between the temples.
Keep yourself from bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
I will come with knowledge regarding the extraction of arteries and the opening of abscesses, as well as taking care to avoid bleeding.
Sometimes it is cauterized in the cerebellum between two bones with two irons produced in a certain way.
Chapter XIII.
On cauterization of old tears.
When tears in the feet are old, and it is verified that they are a surplus of hot humors, then cauterize it with the iron mentioned earlier for the beginning of moisture in the feet, at the middle of the head and two irons over both temples, and two irons between two bones in the cerebellum. And if addition is needed, then cauterize it along the entire length of the calf of the foot at the end of the eyebrow with a small iron.
Chapter XIV.
On cauterization of nose smell (foul breath).\]    Quan fetor de nas es causat per las humiditats corruptas e mal olientes, lahoras cauteriza aquel am le cauteri que he ditz en le capitol qu'eu te ho ditz de melencolia.
When you treat the patient with what I have told you in the division and it does not improve, then you prepare yourself and give him cochineal to drink for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize him with a medium-sized iron heated on oil. Cauterize it with a clove iron and two irons over both eyebrows, close to the hairline.
And take care not to cut through the artery during cauterization.
The shape of the clove iron is as follows:
Chapter XV.
On the softening of eyelids using a cautery (treatment).
When the eyelid of an eye is softened due to disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, (the healer), cauterize that one on both eyebrows with a small or double cautery all around the temples and extend past the temples. Let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand holding the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI.
On cauterizing the eyelid of an eye when the hair turns into parts inside and the eye swells.
When the hair of an eye turns into parts inside and swells, cauterize them in two ways: either by burning or with a medicine-burning method.
If by burning cauterization, command the patient to wash their hair as they would when grooming; continue this until the hair grows back and disappears. If it inflames, then you must burn the eyelashes, placing a bandage over them so that no moisture enters until the hair grows out again.
Therefore, when the hair grows back and disappears, place a bandage on the patient's head near the eyelid of their eye and apply a sign with tweezers according to the shape of a holly leaf, starting from where the eyelashes are growing.
And place cotton soaked in alum or egg white on the eye.
Place fire under the cautery, which has this shape:
Place the cautery on the shape you marked, little by little, in observed patches, until the surface of the cystic area, which is similar to holly leaves, is completely burned.
The sign of healing in this work is that you observe the eyelid of an eye becoming contracted and the eyelashes lifted due to the puncture of the eye.
Therefore, lift it with your hand for three days and place a cotton dressing over it until the scar rises up. Cure that one with warm liquid until it is healed.
However, if the eyelashes return for some reason and the eyelid becomes soft again, then do another cauterization on it as you did initially.
However, if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its original position, heals, and the eyelashes do not irritate the eye.
The cautery method using medicine burns is when you command the patient to wash their hair until it grows back and disappears; then make a paper with cloth in the shape of a holly leaf.
And take known sage and live coal and place them on top. (It seems there is a mistake or incomplete line here, as no text appears to follow this symbol.) Or if you do not know what to do, mix those substances together and make it quickly so that it does not cool down; expand it over the paper made in the shape of a holly leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; then place cotton soaked in alum over the affected eye, and keep the patient's head near you.
And place the medicine on the affected area and gently press it, but do not let the patient feel the burning sensation of the medicine; for a sensation like fire is painful.
Therefore, when you perceive that the burn sensation has stopped, remove the medicine and apply a cool substance to it; then wash the eye with water; and consider whether the eyelid is raised as it should be after washing with heat or incision, for in this case there will be no more inflammation. If the eyelash returns to its previous state due to the medicine, place the medicine back on the affected area where there was no pressure applied, and do not let it degrade until your procedure is complete and the eye has healed.
And place pressure on the area to be cauterized until the abscess is eradicated, and care for it with gauze or something else until it heals.
And be sure to monitor the wound diligently so that no pus from the abscess flows out, and if the eyelid becomes soft after several days due to the skin's cause in the wound, then apply your medicine on that spot which has become softened, and perform this treatment again, and rotate the medicine around until it heals.
This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Know that men's wounds differ in size and extent, and therefore treat your treatment accordingly.
Do not hide the path of rectitude from him who is devoted to this craft.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterizing a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When treating a fistula as mentioned in the divisions of diseases and not conferring with another physician, you must then cauterize it according to this method: tell the patient to place their head in your lap and have someone hold the patient's head from yours, so that it is neither harmed nor shaken by the patient's head.
Then apply a piece of cotton wool or beeswax on the eye of the patient.
Then place the hot cautery with this shape:
which is convex, like the shape of a reed or quill, with one end where the cautery is applied.
And insert it into the other end (the concave side). If you wish, try it out. (implied: perform the procedure)
But the convex side is better for the job.
Press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it. And if it is not already opened, then open it and remove the stone from there.
Then place the hot cautery over it and hold it with a small distance from the patient's nose to prevent your hand or the patient being disturbed, and then press the cautery on the wound and burn it.
And if the cautery enters the bone at first application, that is good; but if not, repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then press on the area with a linen cloth soaked in drying agent until healed.
But if it has not healed within ten days, then press on it with sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and shaved as necessary in its respective chapter.
And another method for cauterizing a fistula is to say: press on the location of the fistula and open it and in that opening place a thin rod of the same form as follows: It was the size of one inch of melted lead; hold your hand over it with good grip, and be careful not to harm the patient because the melted lead should not reach the patient's wound; you must press on the patient's wound with an egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the method I have mentioned for cauterizing and healing, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to administer nose drops and reduce the fistula to the depth of the nose as it comes in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On cauterizing a wound on the head.
Frequently wounds occur in the lips, especially in children.
Therefore, if your treatment for those wounds is not effective as I have mentioned in the previous sections, then use a small hot cautery knife shaped like this:
The concavity should be the same as that of the knife, i.e., shallow.
Place it carefully in those wounds until the cautery reaches the bottom of the wound.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or between the teeth and becomes pus, make an incision and it bursts, and if it is old, break it open, and burn the abscess and make a fistula, and treat it as I have previously mentioned. If treatment is not effective, you must cauterize with the amount received in the fistula, hold the heated iron in the fistula opening, and repeat this process once or twice; then treat it with the ointment I have mentioned until healed.
And if the abscess is drained and heals, that is good; but if not, it is necessary to expose the location and burn the rotten bone according to its respective chapter.
Chapter XX.
On cauterizing teeth and softening gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are bad, but treatment with medicines is ineffective, place the patient's head on your lap, hold the cautery rod in the shape described below (see illustration), place the handle of the cautery rod on the tooth and insert the heated cautery into the gum quickly so that you hold it there until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizing process as desired.
Then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, as the bad tooth is closed and the softened gum is strengthened, and the moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On cauterizing tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or it is inflamed or worm-ridden, and treatment with medicine is not effective, you can cauterize it using two methods: either cauterizing with a cattle brand or cauterizing with fire.
Cautery with a pointed tip should be taken, which is made of cow's horn and iron handle, then take care to wrap it in linen and cover the tip of the cautery, immerse it in hot water, and place it on the painful tooth hastily until it becomes numb.
Then repeat this process several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse linen or cloth in the aforementioned cautery and place it on the painful tooth, then place the heated iron on top of it until the iron reaches the root of the cavity of the tooth.
However, cauterization with fire may be harmful if there is an ulcer or abscess in the area and the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then hold the heated cautery in the form you choose, place it on the tooth and keep your hand on it until the cauterization is numb; do this several times as needed for the pain to subside or on that day or the next.
And note that for the aforementioned cauterization, the patient must keep their mouth open with good force and hold the cautery for an hour, then spit it out; this is the method of using the cautery.
And cauterize as much affected area as you are able to reach.
This is the shape of the needle (or cannula):
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are of the phlegmatic type and are not obedient to medications for digestion, if you want to promote digestion of that type, then heat the cautery with this shape (as follows): having two handles extended so that smoke comes out from the other end, hold the cautery by the handle and heat it with fire, then place it on the abscess once, and if necessary, repeat until the abscess is cauterized to the root.
If the abscess is small, then place the cautery on it according to its size, and leave it for three days and place it on top of linen soaked in oil until what the fire has burned away is gone.
And care for it with rinsing, dressings, and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cauterization of throat ulcers and constriction of veins.
When humidity comes upon the bronchial tube and especially when it is accompanied by inflammation of the chest, it is necessary to evacuate the patient at first with laxative medicines and then cauterize the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
And note that the cautery should not reach the larynx nor burn the cartilage of it, but only a small amount.
Cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebrae of it. The cautery should be round like a nail, following the previous method (i.e., as described earlier).
Care for it with what has been prescribed earlier until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to phlegm, the patient does not have a fever or chills and it is an old disease, then cauterize it with two cauterizations on the furcula in the depressed areas of the collarbone and chest; and with another cautery at the midpoint between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be round like a nail following the previous method (i.e., as described earlier).
And if you wish, your cauterization should be performed with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose shape is described in the treatment of ear pain.
And make points in these areas; and care for it with what has been prescribed earlier until it is healed.
And the cautery should have three prongs, since cauterization is done with it. Three cauterizations can be made at once in this way:
Chapter XXV.
On the cauterization of twitching which is the head of the adductor muscle.
When the head of the adductor muscle is dislocated due to lubricous humors and does not return to its original position when it should, you must reduce the dislocation until it returns to its customary state. Then place the patient on their back or on their side, and elevate the cartilage that is in the inner part of the muscle towards the outer parts with your left hand if the junction is dislocated inwards.
Approach the cautery, it has two heads; this is its form:
Approach the cautery with two prongs, and this is its shape: [The figure of the cauterization will come later, when there are three heads of the cauterization.]
And some observations are adjusted according to this count and because the cauterizations are eight [in number].
Then pause over the cautery, cut it with salt, and then make the patient hold still, and let the member not be harmed for any time before it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the part above and below, this should be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or a four-pronged cauterization, because the joint is confirmed, humidity is drained, and the patient is healed.
Capital XXVI [Chapter 26]
On cauterization of the stomach.
When humidity and motes occur in the stomach and multiply its roominess, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without conferring [something], it is necessary that the patient be laid on their back, extend their limbs and chest, and then cauterize it with three cauterizations: one cautery placed under the feet for the thickness of a finger, a pointed cautery, and two cauteries placed under the ribs of the cautery until the triangular figure of the cauterization appears; elongate those that are not adjusted to avoid pus formation.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the circular form according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized punctually at that point which is frightened by this cautery: and it is that you sign on the stomach with points according to the amount you wish with the skin, and then cauterize that point with a cautery in the points; and care for it with the treatment preceded until it is healed.
Capital XXVII [Chapter 27]
On cauterization of the inflamed liver.
When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness, humidity, or windiness to such an extent that it is expelled from its normal position by superfluous egression, and the patient is cured with what has been said without conferring [something], it is necessary that the patient be laid on their back, and sign three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity on the liver under the hypochondriac region, so that the patient's head lies downwards.
And let the space be between each cautery according to its thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not compress the area too much with the cautery.
If the quantity of the medicine applied is equal to the quantity of the patient's weight and not overly adjusted; if the patient lies on their feet (or rests) and is not standing, then let them lie down (or rest), who has already spread out his limbs and raised his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cautery knife, when you have the skill and discretion in this art.
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization, let the medicine be applied to the entire body so that it reaches the intestines, as the body here is delicate, and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of an abscess in the thigh with cauterization.
When you are about to excise or drain an abscess in the thigh and want to know if the abscess is located in the muscle of the thigh or in its sheath (fascia), then, if it is in the muscle of the thigh, the patient feels a heaviness and the pain does not worsen.
If it is in the sheath (fascia) of the thigh, then the pain becomes more intense and often exhausts the doctors in its treatment.
Therefore, the patient should lie facing downwards; and approach the abscess site with caution; and heat the cauterization tool, which resembles a rope, as described in the previous page. Cauterize with the hot cautery tool until all the affected area is burned, until it reaches the abscess (sinus), until pus comes out.
Take care of the rest of the abscesses until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use this cauterization method alone, but rather the one studied in the art of medicine, which has been practiced for many illnesses; however, some experienced practitioners may perform this operation differently, but you should follow the prescribed procedure and it will be better.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of ulcers (lesions).
The ancient cauterizations of arthritic ulcers are performed by treating them as plagues, according to this method; and you should take a long, dry arrow (lance) from the arthritic razor collection, and it should be thick like a finger.
Then immerse the arrow (lance) in oil and heat it over the fire; then cauterize with a small cautery at the location between the base of the neck and the collar, using two smaller cauteries on either side, one slightly lower than the beard, and two on the area that descends between the fifth rib and the nipple, slightly lower at the back; and another on the middle of the thigh, and another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the back; and another in the location between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh, after the cautery that is between the shoulders.
And it is important not to press too hard with the cauterization tool, but rather let the burn mark be visible on the body.
And it was said by some ancient men that they used a cauterization iron resembling a rod and heated it, placing it in the location between the ribs until it reached the abscess (sinus) and drained pus, as was discussed in the thigh abscess treatment.
But in this incision with cauterization, there is no cause for fear, as death may occur in the location of the fistula that has not healed.
Chapter thirty.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When treating the illness of the spleen as I have said about its treatment and not confining it to division, you must perform cauterization in three ways, all of which are permissible, one of which is that you make three or four stitches according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the cauterizations of the liver, whose figure has been preceded.
And the thickness of each cauterization should be as thick as a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as the one I have mentioned for liver cauterization.
And do not press your hand against the cauterization, and let the patient lie on their back.
Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation and raise the patient's left shoulder so that the left side of the spleen lies flat against it.
And raise the shoulder to the height that raises the spine in proportion to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
And bring the two prongs together and ignite them in the area where they penetrate the spleen of the other side.
And withdraw the cautery, so four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
And apply the cautery until it has bled for several days, since this is more beneficial than other causes of treatment mentioned earlier.
Chapter thirty-one.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Do not cauterize in dropsy, but rather incise it specifically.
When treating dropsy with the methods of treatment I have mentioned and not confining it to division, you must therefore cauterize with four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one at the right hip, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And let the cautery remain open for a long time so that it bleeds profusely.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cauterization with anything that requires them to be moved away from it, as this will hasten their recovery with assistance.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be club-shaped, as described earlier, and that used for the back should be olive-shaped, as described earlier in its shape.
Chapter thirty-two.
On the cauterization of feet and other things.
When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with stagnant water, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the ankle and heel, raise your hand above the cauterization and do not twist it; and lift your hand, but do not completely return it, since stagnant water will run out.
The cautery should be shaped as follows: Make two cauterizations on the two sides of the body, and in each side make a cauterization with the tip of the cautery. And the cautery should be as long as the body part: one end on top and the other a little lower; and above each body part, two cauterizations.
And let the wound remain open for a long time to allow some water to run out of it.
And treat these causes as I have said earlier.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the cauterization of belly organs.
When organs of the abdomen are weakened and infiltrated by cold, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and intestines, and this is treated with the methods of treatment I have mentioned earlier, and sometimes the patient must endure cauterization revealing its virtue, in that case cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach as described earlier for stomach cauterization, the circular cautery, and four subtle cauterizations around the navel, a slender cauterizing cautery; and cauterize the liver with a large caution or two cauterizations.
And if excess moisture occurs and the patient tolerates it, cauterize it on the penis and intestines, and force two cauterizations close together against the stomach and near the inguinal area, since this is a perfect cure without any error in it.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
When in nature old hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moistures are not healed by what has been said in the division and do not confer the same healing, then cauterize with three cauteries on the base of the two small ones and a small triangular one, and with a cautery over the navel through two openings.
If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is congested and his food is spoiled, and his face is ulcerated, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the gall bladder with a pointed cautery, leave the cautery there for some time open, and take care of him until he is healed.
De cauterizacio de cancro.
On the Cauterization of Atheyl near the Abscess of the Ear.
When you remove earwax, you heat up the cautery that resembles a ray. Place that heated cautery in the ear canal opened earlier, and apply the heat until the cauter reaches the vein from which blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the earwax is thick, you cauterize each one separately as previously mentioned, and take care of them with the solutions that give relief to their pain until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some part, it is more effective in healing.
De cauterizacio de ulceres antiquas e flegmaticas.
On the Cauterization of Fistulas that Occur Naturally in the Parts of the Body.
When nature does not obey the work recommended in its place and the patient is afraid of it, heal with cauterization.
Therefore, when there is a fistula in nature that has become old, with putrefaction and moisture, and it seems fitting to cure it with cauterization, take care to apply the subtle probe to test its depth and know the quantity of the depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Heat up the cautery that resembles a ray. Place that heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the depth that the probe penetrates.
Repeat the cauterization over that part until the corrupt flesh is burned immediately or a few times, according to your necessity.
Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the bladder or intestines, be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you consider that it does not penetrate.
Take care of that area until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed and the matter has been removed from it and remains in that state for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
If the matter is not removed, you will know that it penetrates or corrupts the bone in the area or for these reasons that will be remembered in its place.
De cauterizacio de ulceres antiquas e flegmaticas en le cors.
On the Cauterization of Sneezing.
When in the nose pain occurs due to inflammation or swelling, and for this reason the patient's throat is painful, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the nose with a cautery over each nostril and with a cautery pointed at the root of which remember the position.
And furthermore, let a small interval be left between them, so that three cauteries will be lined up, and thus they will serve later as reinforcement.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to coldness and moisture, so that the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part, near the bladder, starting from the pubic bone, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of nuts in a handful; and cauterize it at the lowest part of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
Let the cautery be pointed as prescribed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the cauterization of the gallbladder.
When there is coldness and moisture in the gallbladder, and for this reason engagement is prohibited, and the menses of it are corrupted, and their provocation is delayed, and pain occurs due to them, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as has been said regarding the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the area just below the ribs, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be pointed.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture softens and infiltrates the ankle joint, causing the area to swell, and when this occurs, a noticeable sign is that the limb is elongated on the other side when compared with it. This could indicate a dislocation of the ankle. The text now discusses a possible treatment for this condition involving cauterization. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written. And the location of the dislocation is found where there is a break.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the ankle joint of him with a circular cautery, so that you have tested the area in the circle as it is rounded, and thus the joint falls into the middle of the circle. This could indicate that the cauterization is being used to hold the bones in place during reduction of the dislocation, potentially followed by immobilization or further treatment. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
Let the shape of the cautery used for this procedure be as described in the cauterization of the stomach. This could indicate that the shape and method of application of the cautery are important factors in the treatment of ankle dislocations, possibly to reduce swelling or promote healing. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries and an olive-shaped large cautery. This could indicate that the text is discussing a potential alternative or backup method for treating ankle dislocations. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
Let the cautery be made according to the size of the incision in the entire cavity; and take care of it until it heals. This could indicate that the text is discussing further instructions for the treatment and care of ankle dislocations, possibly following reduction and immobilization. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
Chapter XLI.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, caused by coldness and moisture, the patient is treated with the water that has been mentioned and not contraindicated, which is an ancient remedy. However, if the patient is full of thick humors, you should leach them with foul-smelling pills or artificial or similar pills; then cauterize it. This could indicate that the text is discussing a potential treatment for pain in the ankle joint caused by swelling or inflammation. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with medicine-infused cauteries, or cauterizing with fire. This could indicate that the text is discussing alternative techniques for treating thickened humors or promoting healing, depending on the availability and resources at hand. As before, translation requires careful consideration and understanding of the historical context in which these texts were written.
The first sentence translates to: "As there are two methods known, of which one is to cauterize that part on the thigh with three triangular cauterizations as shown in this form; and do it with good depth." "And let the spaces between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger or larger."
"Moreover, some observations are that the cauteries should be placed on four spots on the head of the ankle."
"And if you wish, cauterize using the circle whose shape is prescribed in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should contain and burn off the entire tendon."
"And this is the method of cauterization for ankle pain when it adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the joint."
"However, if it extends into the joint, then you should cauterize that area with two cauterizations on the joint at the location of the pain; and one cauterization on the shinbone four fingers below the hairline."
"And if it is a cutting cauterization, let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the tendon."
"And if the patient has pain that extends to the location near the feet, then cauterize there with a cautery at three or four points, or more as necessary."
"And if the patient has pain in front of the joint, then cauterize there with a cutting cauterization."
"And beware in all cauterizations that the cauterization does not burn nerves or large blood vessels, and thus cause harm or contraction to the patient."
"And I have seen one or more cases of those who cauterized on the shinbone and burnt through in the cauterization, causing the leg to swell up until the foot, and it was burned, perforated, and completely rotted." "And appropriate remedy for the stomach is strong solution; and that can lead to death."
"And if the pain is in two locations, then cauterize each location according to this method."
"It is said by the wise few in the cauterization of ankle, that the cautery should be shaped like a small circle with its circumference being the size of a palm; and it should be penetrated according to the thickness of a date stone or a finger joint."
"And inside that circle should be another third; and the space between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be open at two locations; and the length of the gaps should be one or two knuckles, and make the margins of iron fittingly decorated in the circles; and this is the shape of it:"
"Let it be ignited in the fire until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks; and place it on the ankle joint, with the patient's leg lying flat." "And thus, cauterize that area using three cauterizations in one observation."
"And let it rest for three days; apply an ointment to it using a dressing and leave the wound open for several days; and treat it with warm compresses until it is healed."
"Albucasis says: my sons, of this type of cauterization we have used little because of the fear of its consequences, and few have been found who pay attention to it."
"However, of the various cauterizations, those who undergo it will experience pain at that location."
"However, cauterizations with medicines absorbed are those that you should make two circles, one of which has an aperture through which the guffe (medicated paste) is inserted into the iron plate; and the length of the wall in the circle is two knuckles or as many as necessary."
"And let the spaces between them be of the size of a finger; and they should be open both above and below, and let them contain each other as shown:"
"And place your hand on the ankle joint with the patient lying flat, and press on the ankle joint; and take some boiled water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be small but gradually increasing, and hold it there for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and squeezing of it - for the pain is like that of fire - until the pain subsides."
"And lift your hand with the instrument and clean the boiled water from all the ankle with sweet water."
"And let it rest for three days and apply an ointment to it until the burn subsides, and let it rest for some days, and then pus will form on it; this is the best treatment."
"And treat it with warm compresses until it is healed."
"And if the pain extends into the joint or hip, make it sit in a position that contains water as was done for the ankle."
"And this is the method of boiled water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications." "Recipe for alkali and for the unquent from both ankles together, grind it and let it rest in a new oil, with one of the locations pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that fits into it."
Pause the other inflamed ulcer and pour warm water over it, which will soften those with a finger, then compress them well for good compression, and let the heated water drain from the ulcerated area into the inflamed ulcer.
Then adjust all that water, and pour another heated solution over it along with fresh alkaline, as this will produce a strong cleansing effect, which is used in many medical operations and cauterization of other parts, as it performs the function of fire. (Note: Here I'm assuming "aquela" refers to the water.)
And some medications are used for cauterization in a wide area, such as pitch and honey mixed with sulfur. (Note: Here I'm assuming "tezizic" refers to pitch or resin, "mel" refers to honey, "anacrat" refers to sulphur.)
Gaul's operation and treatment for ankle pain and sciatica pain, which is a very effective method and should not require any other treatment, as it heals in one go as recommended, because the patient has already experienced its effectiveness. (Note: Here I'm assuming "Gualia" refers to a person or a procedure named Gaul.)
It should be treated with a fresh root of certain herbs, if the herb is not found, then fig leaves should be used; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is located, or on the affected area, or on the leg, and tied. (Note: Here I'm assuming "vert" refers to herbs, "atrobat vert" means not found, "camba" refers to the leg.)
It should be left for three hours or as long as the patient agrees on the duration of the treatment. (Note: Here I'm assuming "la cantitat de tres horas" means three hours, and "cedacio de la adhustio" refers to the duration of the treatment.)
Then immerse it in hot water and when the patient's body is sweating, apply it to the affected area, as pain will cease and healing will occur. (Note: Here I'm assuming "aquel" refers to the crushed herbs or leaves, "la sol" means the sun.)
Know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medications, rather focus on the body's natural evacuation process. (Note: Here I'm assuming "cauteri" refers to cauterization and "evacuacio del cors" means the body's natural evacuation.)
However, Escorides said that when a sheep's vein is stretched and cauterized, it will heal better; and the cauterization should be done in this way: take wool and immerse it in ancient oil, then place it between the toes and under the soles. (Note: Here I'm assuming "fenda de cabra" means a sheep's vein, "strengthen" refers to stretching, "antic" refers to ancient or old oil.)
Take a dry sheep's vein, inflate it with fire until it becomes carbonized, then place it on the wool and let it rest in the area where it is stretched. (Note: Here I'm assuming "fenda de cabra secca" means a dry sheep's vein, "carbo" refers to carbon.) Repeat the process, and do not stop until the sensation of biting reaches the ankle and the pain is relieved. (Note: Here I'm assuming "itera" means repeat, "aquo" refers to the previous procedure or treatment.)
This method of cauterization is known as the "cautery of cows." (Note: Here I'm assuming "manieyra de cauteri" refers to the process described earlier, and "cauteri de vaquas" means the "cauterization of cows.")
Chapter 42 (Note: This line is likely just a numbering for the chapter in which this text appears.)
On the Cauterization of Toothache
Toothache can occur due to multiple causes, such as trauma, injury or excessive evacuation, and for reasons similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and moist substances. (Note: Here I'm assuming "veguadas" means periods, "cazement" refers to injury, "percucio" means trauma, "superflua evacuacio" means excessive evacuation, "infusio de materia frega e humida" means infusion of cold and moist substances.)
Cauterization should not be performed in any other case except when it is done by the effusion of cold substances. (Note: Here I'm assuming "catz" means does not apply or is not applicable, and "efusio de materia frega" refers to the effusion of cold substances.)
Therefore, evacuation of the patient should be performed using pills filled with similar substances that are placed on the tooth in which the pain is located three lines deep according to its latitude; then the cauterization should be done at each line as needed, depending on the tolerance of the patient and the potency of the substance. (Note: Here I'm assuming "pillulas" means pills, "fitidas e am semblant a lor" means filled with similar substances, "latitud de lu" refers to the tooth's depth, "tolleransa del malaute" means patient's tolerance, and "vertut de lu" means the substance's potency.)
The cauterization should be performed with a pointed cautery. (Note: Here I'm assuming "cauterizacio" refers to the act of cauterizing, and "cauteri de punt" means the pointed cautery.)
If you wish, perform cauterization using three or four cauterizations with a medium-sized clamp in the following manner:
Chapter 43 (Note: This line is likely just a numbering for the chapter in which this text appears.)
On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gangrene
This disease often occurs in young children; and the sign of its onset in children is that they lose their limb structure, elevation, and mobility. (Note: Here I'm assuming "veguadas" means periods or occurrences, "enfantz" refers to children, "enle ale eves la elevacio el movement" means loss of limb structure, elevation, and mobility.)
And it spreads in the lower vertebrae of the spine and those above it that begin to rise over other vertebrae. (Note: Here I'm assuming "derier espondil" refers to the lower vertebra, "dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les otras spondils" means the lower vertebra and those above it that begin to rise over other vertebrae.)
And when you see it and wish to stop it, then you should cauterize that place with the round cautery as follows: take the cautery on all parts of the spine tightly wrapped.
If you want, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be placed close to each other.
And carefully treat the area from which it is afflicted with what has been said.
But be careful that cauterization not be administered in a place that was made due to nerve spasm.
44th Chapter.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Therefore, when gout caused by cold is treated with a cure and the pain does not diminish, you should resort to cauterization.
You should cauterize that place close to the evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
The olive-shaped cautery is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain moves into the nails or other joints, and this happens frequently, then you should cauterize that place over each nail with three or four cauteries on all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
If you find that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that place without pressing too hard with your hand beforehand; just insert the tip of the instrument into the opening of the wound.
If the pain moves into the nail and the toe, then administer the cautery as was said in the previous chapter.
If the pain is only in the fingers and it is called scabies, then puncture around the nails as follows: puncture along these two lines.
If the pain remains in the nails, then puncture around the nail on each side and at the base of the finger.
If the pain moves towards the shoulders or muscles after some days, then cauterize all of them around their joints.
And do not evacuate the patient with good care and medicine reception, because if it is done with good care and this cautery is used, he will be cured; God help him.
45th Chapter.
On the cauterization of ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the inguinal region and the intestine protrudes before the hernia at the genital area, and this begins to happen as follows, it is necessary that you tell the patient to stop eating on his own day and use soft foods so that the opening of his abdomen heals.
Then place the patient between your hands on his back and command him to keep his legs together until the hernia is expelled or the intestine appears.
Then return that to the opening and try to close the rupture over the hip bone, pointing out the edge of which is similar to the size of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And heat the cautery that has this shape:
until it is red hot and sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over the marked spot with your hand holding the cautery straight, and enter that bone of the big toe into the middle of the joint; repeat if you did not manage to enter the bone in the first observation, and do so again on another occasion.
Be mindful of the intestine during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn it, causing death or other grave harm to the patient.
Know that when you are using the cautery and miss the bone, your operation is in vain.
The cautery for children must be fine and proportional to their size and age.
Take care of the cauterized spot for three days, with bandaging until the scar from the fire has healed.
Take care of that and the other wounds until they are healed.
The patient should be lying on their back for 40 days, until the wound and sore have healed.
It is important to withhold food from the patient according to the duration of their treatment and the size of their stomach, ensuring that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
When forty days have passed, gradually reintroduce food, but maintain this for another forty days.
Be cautious of excessive labor, food and drink intake, and speak softly to avoid exacerbating the condition. For this regime of treatment will lead to recovery.
This treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach requires immediate attention. Begin by cauterizing the rupture with a circular cautery according to its size, and it should be dressed as when treating the third part of the stomach. Care for this area as previously mentioned, but do not neglect it.
It has been said by some that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, as it is called "tenta":
A line is drawn perpendicular to the longitudinal line above the rupture, and another line across it; then place your hand with a sharp cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and more gentle.
Chapter 46:
This text appears to discuss the cauterization of ruptures in the stomach and intestines, providing instructions on how to perform this procedure using a triangular cautery. The procedure is referred to as "tenta," which may be a term specific to medieval medical practices. The text also emphasizes the importance of acting promptly when treating ruptures or wounds in these areas, as untreated injuries can lead to severe complications or even death. It is essential to follow proper guidelines and seek medical advice for complex wounds or any signs of infection.
When accidental injury or trauma causes persistent pain in various body parts that does not respond to medication, it is necessary to perform cauterization using a pointed cautery.
The type and size of the cautery should be appropriate for each body part based on its size, nature, location of the injury, and the severity of the pain.
If the first cauterization results in healing, it is good; otherwise, repeat the process until the pain subsides. It is common for these types of pains to be alleviated by cauterizing the affected body part near the site of the pain. This indicates that the cautery should be applied directly to the affected area until the patient's condition improves.
Chapter 47:
Treatise on Cauterization for Leprosy
The use of cauterization in some cases of leprosy is a great help, and it is particularly effective for the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
Therefore, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is common and should be treated as mentioned in the division, or if it has spread throughout the body of the patient and threatens all of his limbs. In this case, cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one in the middle of the head, the second below, bring the forehead to the end of the hairs; and both above two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
Finally, place your hand on the cautery a little into it until it makes a slight impression on the bone and the blisters are displaced, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize over the blister as prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is apparent, it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries that have been mentioned on the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two on each neck vertebra, and six on the lower back, and a large one near the spine, and one on the hip bone, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the wrists, and two on the fingers, and the tendons of its feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the limbs and over each toe of its feet, and over the folds of its arms.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the sole, as they must not be burned.
It is cauterized in some cases with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the liver.
You should know that the more cauterizations are applied, the greater the benefit and the less painful; you should also know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as has been the case with anesthetics, because the body of the patient is already stunned.
It is necessary that the cauterizations be large or few, depending on the members and joints, according to the type of iron tools used.
Care for the cautery with barley flour mixed with honey and another cure until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Treatise on Cauterization for Stupor.
When a member is stationary or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, you must then cauterize the stationary member with cauteries according to the size of the member or the smallness of it.
Let your cautery make a slight indentation in the skin. Care for it with honey until it is healed.
In some cases, the stupor in the arms and legs, lower back and eyes is cauterized, being careful to avoid damaging the nerves that nourish that member, and the stupor is relieved.
Do not presume to know it unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of members and the exit points of all nerves moving throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
Treatise on Cauterization for swellings that are morphic.
When swellings are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, you must then cauterize it over it with a cautery, making a slight indentation according to the size of the swelling until the whiteness and color have subsided and the color has changed.
Care for it with barley flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and columbine or yarrow blood, each part separately and all mixed together, and lay a linen cloth over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
Treatise on Cauterization for crabs.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it is turned.
The wise say it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; however, I do not believe this, as I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen in some cases.
It is therefore more appropriate to be cauterized in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter 2.
Treatise on Cauterization for ulcers.
When an ulcer is delayed in its maturation, due to superfluity or the condition of the patient who is old and weak, lacking blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the ulcer; you must then cauterize it in a circle with several small punctate cauteries, and press that area which will encourage its maturation.
If you wish to perform perforation with a cautery, then first ignite the cautery which has this shape [shown]: and dip it in the appropriate place for cauterization until it penetrates the skin.
If the cautery is applied to that location [indicated], in order to relieve the body of the arm; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 12
On cauterization for cancer (or ulcers).
Cancer is corruption spreading through the limbs, which corrupts them just as dry wood burns when consumed by fire.
Therefore, if you see cancer in a location that requires cauterization with fire, then first ignite small and large cauterizing iron nails as appropriate in the location where the cancer is present.
And carefully cauterize it on all sides until you completely eradicate the corruption and no cause of it remains.
Let it rest for three days, and apply oil mixed with sulfur over the cauterized areas until all scabs are completely removed and all corruption is eliminated.
And take care of it with soft meat-based food.
But if three days pass and the flesh heals without corruption, that is good; but if not, apply the cautery again to the corrupted areas.
Cancer can be treated with certain medications at times, since it is intermediate in location between cauterization and medication. However, fire-based cauterization is more easily assisted by other methods.
And I have already explained the treatment with sharp medication in the division, so take it when you find it necessary.
Chapter 13
On cauterization of nails and similar items.
Observed growths in the feet called nails, which are large, closed, and protrude from the skin; and these are cauterized using two methods: fire-based cauterization and water-boiled cauterization.
Fire-based cauterization involves igniting the concave cautery resembling a pen, which is made of iron in proportion to the size of the nail on all sides and has thin edges.
Then place the ignited cautery on the nail, and turn your hand with the cautery in a circle around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. Let it rest for three days until new growth begins. And apply a paste made from wild mallow steeped in salt to it, and let the paste remain on it for one night, since this will eliminate its roots.
Take care of the area with soft meat-based food until it heals.
If it does not convert (change or heal), and observed growths appear on the surface of the body, particularly on the head and feet, you must administer cauterization with water. To do this, take a cup made of horn or iron or a pen-shaped instrument, place it on the nail; then pour a small amount of boiling water into the cup, hold your hand, and rotate the cup around the nail while exerting pressure from all sides and pressing the edge of the cup against the root of the nail. The boiling water will flow along the root of the nail, and wait for one hour for the patient to feel the heat of the boiling water before removing it, since the nail and its roots will be eliminated.
In this way, treat all such growths until they disappear from the body completely.
Take care of any pus that arises where the roots of the nails have been eradicated by using soft food that the flesh can digest easily.
Chapter 14
On cauterization for tremors (shaking or quivering).
When a tremor occurs due to pressure on the nerves or fever caused by pressure, or for another similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize it with four cauterizations or more on the spondylus bones of the back, between each spondylus bone using one cautery; and cauterize in the feet, stomach, and kidneys using olive oil cauterization.
The tremor will subside, and the healing of the underlying illness will be hastened.
Chapter 15
On cauterization for accidents affecting the body (trauma or injuries).
When the body is infected with boils that are formed from corrupted thick materials, at first it should be cauterized over the entire opening of the boil with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is stretched out with fire; or with a lancet of erostology; or with a slow cautery.
In some cases, it is cauterized at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and not always, and it is ruptured, eliminating the excess matter, thus healing from them.
However, it must be done with appropriate evacuation using leech therapy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cauterization of fluxes of blood caused by an arrow wound.
In some cases of flux due to an arrow wound, the wound should be cleaned from within, or the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the affected limb is performed, and in such a case, it may prove difficult to heal again.
Therefore, when such a case occurs, you should take care with your hand at the opening of the arrow wound, place it there and press down on it until the flux of blood stops, and that does not come out again.
And press down on the olive oil-based cauteries few and large, by many names, and exhale on them until they are hot.
And take from them either a small or large one according to the location and wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein hastily press it because you will have stopped the bleeding, and apply the cautery until the bleeding is blocked and the vessel is constricted.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you stop the bleeding and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from those that are heated in the fire, and do not cease to perform this until the blood is constricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and let another evil come upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in such cases, especially if the artery is large, unless one of four methods are used: either cauterization as previously described, or extraction when it is not extracted, because when its extremities are burned and the blood is constricted, or it is tied with thread or twine for strong binding, or it is pressed upon with medicines that have the power to restrict blood, and these must be tightened with a pulvinar or appropriate compression.
However, that which provides appropriate restriction with thread and tightening with cloth or by burning causes and similar ones, do not believe in them.
However, if such a thing occurs and the doctor is not present nor medication, then perform the procedure as previously described on the opening of that vein, and understand the great care required to keep the blood from the upper part of the wound, and on the arrow wound do not allow it to resume; and over the arrow wound sprinkle cold water of great heat until the blood congeals and thickens; but rather consider when there is a need for cauterization or medication.
On incisions, perforations, and wounds, on leech therapy, and on sores and their types.
We have already said in the first chapter that cautery with fire is appropriate and medication burning for certain illnesses, and their occurrences and causes, and the instruments necessary for these and the forms of the cauteries, and we have ordered chapters from head to feet.
And in this chapter, we will proceed with the method to alleviate such an affliction, so that it may be relieved as requested.
And before I begin this, it is necessary that you know that in this chapter is what was in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because it is necessary to be extremely careful because in the operation that is performed in this chapter, many evacuations are needed which involve blood, with which life itself must be sprinkled or incision on the abscess or opening of an exit wound or cleansing of the wound or extraction of arrows or incision for stones and their types. And with all these things, fear and trembling and in most cases death accompanies them.
And I warn you that such a thing should not fall on you in which there is uncertainty, because sometimes you must treat illnesses with methods other than human. And some of these are so severe that you should flee with your illness and death is easy for them, due to the severity of their illness, and because of the illness it means death.
And some of these give you money and a name, you hope for health from them, but their illness is dangerous.
Therefore, do not agree with one who comes to you of whom this method is spoken; and let your caution be greater than greed and rapacity; and do not presume any cause about it except certain knowledge that has been verified by you, and on which you can rely.
Use in the treatment of all your patients for prognosis and indication, because in it you are assisted with acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh sons, God inspire your understanding and do not abandon you in direction and protection, for it is in His hands.
And this chapter is divided into sections according to what preceded in the chapter on cauteries, the care of the head down to the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you seek and for which you have need.
Chapter First.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of infants.
Know that this disease, which frequently occurs in infants, is caused by the infant's birth and when the mother's head of the infant is not covered.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
I do not see this disease except in infants; and all those whom I have seen it afflicted by, it has been a sign of death, and thus it seems to me to be a lost work in them.
I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and his head was thus magnified until it could not cease increasing in size due to the greatness of his head, and moreover the moisture made it worse until death by fire ensued.
And this moisture is either added between the skull and the bone, or it is added beneath the bones on the forehead.
Because the operation in this case is when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure along its length, and let the length of the fissure be two knuckles deep until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spoon:
And so if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is beneath the bones, it is a sign that you see the joints of the head opened up on all sides and water is pressed out when you compress them with your hand from inside the joints and it is not hidden from you. It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
Pull out all the moisture; strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; bind it up with oil for five days, remove the bandage and treat the wound with ointments and liniments, keep the head raised with a pillow; feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region or in front, or on the right, or on the left; and so pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repleting of the water appears, and do as is best possible for you.
And beware that you do not incise the artery and cause it to flow with blood and kill the patient due to the flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter Third.
When cataracts or ulcers occur in the eyes or feet, and it is an ancient method that does not confer the cure of medicine, then the last resort for this is incision of those two arteries.
And so when you want to incise those arteries that the patient feels his head, first rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and keep the neck of the patient straight with some cloth; consider where the vein pulses; press each location above the locations that are close to the auricles, and these should remain hidden unless in some men.
And beware of the artery with a probe, and incise each one with a sharp spoon, which should enter into the bone, and let this be along the length of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spoon beneath the artery and break it at the incisions above.
Let the length of the incision be two fingers adjusted, because when one vein is incised, blood is emitted with a pulsating exit, which jumps out frequently.
However, if the artery does not appear at the incision, it is necessary for you to measure three fingers from the auricle, and beware with a probe, and do so into the bone.
And that which requires the flow of blood is one cupful of wine, And because he does not vomit more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears of the patient's power and the filling of his bowels.
And also pay attention to the wound, and if any cause of swelling remains on the bone, then cut it to prevent pus from collecting.
And clean the wound with feathers and linen cloth, and then treat it with a poultice until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of hernias that are in the temples.
When an old or new abscess, caused by humid acrimonious substances and qualities in the temples, or a swelling similar to these, and treated with medicines but does not improve, we propose the treatment of extraction of hernias in the temples, or cauterization of such as we have shown.
The method of operation and extraction of those hernias is that the patient shaves the hair from the temples; and understand the hernia in the temple which you have seen by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the strength of the swelling.
And if it is hidden, then tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with rough cloth or warm the area with hot water until the hernia appears manifestly. And you take the spoon whose shape is: And you prepare the knife with ease until you reach the hernia; and open it on one side and extract it at the superior parts until you extract it from the cavity and expose it from the tunics which are beneath it, all around.
But if the artery is delicate, you envelop it with the tip of the finger, and then make an incision on one side according to the length by which the extremities are extended and contracted, and no blood flow will occur, because if they are not incised, blood cannot be raised from all over.
And evacuate the blood from it. for three.
If the hernia is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong cord or sinew, and do not cut it until it rots before the wound heals and blood flow occurs.
And then cut off the excess that is between two poultices, and do so at this time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone with a cautery knife until the extremities are incised, and remain in that location for that operation.
And it is better if the patient has fever or is in a hot state of complexion, because cauterization helps to dry up moisture, and therefore it is more beneficial.
It is necessary to perform the extraction of hernias in clean and well-prepared areas, and place them on suitable powder, and treat them with dry medications to cause the flesh to heal and with warm water until it heals.
And if during another examination the hernia causes blood flow, then you should take steps to restrain the blood, or with a cautery, or by applying a clean cloth, and keep your hand over it until the blood is stopped. And if any cause of those does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the area until the blood clots, and block the area with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and do it as necessary.
And the easiest method for hernia extraction is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, after you have tried both sides and waited, as necessary, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities can be extended, because they are not consolidated by this cautery.
And here is the shape of the cautery:
The distance between the two handles should be the same. But if it is narrower than two handles that is better, because if it is sharp like two handles close to each other, the flesh will not be cut with speed.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in those, the heat of the fire should be kept in them and the flesh is cut easily.
And this operation is better than all other operations and easier.
And the space that is between the two handles should be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Chapter IV.
On the treatment of colds with acute and sharp urine in males.
When the colds are acidic, and they come from veins above the testicle of the head, and no cause for the cure by medicine is found, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes swollen and he feels a tingling in his forehead like ants are walking on it, and the scrotum of such becomes thin, moist until the skin is visible, and the testicles are scalded by the acidity of the tears, ancient physicians used to treat them with this operation, and I name this treatment as "spassa".
You command the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one should be as long as a small joint of the fingers which are at the lacrimal (eye corner), and the third one from the other side.
Here's the translation for this sentence: Here's the translation for this sentence:
Here's the translation for this sentence:
Here's the translation for this sentence: What comes from the part between the temples up to the second incision. Excise the whole piece of bone that lies between two incisions and chisel the one that is on the bone, then place this piece from the middle incision to the second incision. Then straighten this spatula and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
Stop the ends of that sharp part and the flesh attached to it, stop the edges of it reaching the bone, and push that into the middle crack until it reaches the middle fissure, and remove all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Make sure the incision is continuous up to where the bone appears, and place it in the middle crack into the other fissure.
And as the blood coagulates, press on the places of the wounds with a compress.
And place a cloth soaked in hot oil and vinegar over every fissure, and press on the pus that has formed in them to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
On the third day remove the lint and administer a strong infusion of hot water or tea leaves, and care for it with basil oil, rose oil, and others until the sores are healed.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of abscesses by cupping and on the heels that descend from within the head.
If an abscess occurs that is continuous and extends, and sometimes the heels of the patient are weakened and slightly extended, and their weakness, ulcerated eyelids and loss of hair, and in the front of the head there is acute pain with associated swelling, then you should know by these signs that the matter and abscess does not come from other vessels but rather from the veins of the brain.
The best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and make a small incision in the middle of the forehead, beginning from the left temple to the right temple; the incision should extend into the bone; and remove your hand from the temples which are painful due to the massage), until the bone is exposed.
Excise all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and place a compress or dry cloth between the two lips of the incision with gauze or dry cloth. And press on it with pus that has formed in vinegar and oil to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
And when you remove it and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to cut the bone starting from where the flesh does not heal, and care for it with a drying regimen, which will make the flesh dry, such as if you take two parts of flour and four parts of gum Arabic and mix them together, and make a plaster out of it and apply it to those sores around the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of abscesses in the ears.
The cause of an abscess in the ears is one of four types: it is either a mineral stone or something resembling a stone like iron and glass, or it is from plants like cherry or bean, or it is something fluid like water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
Therefore when stone or something similar to those causes that are not suitable for the ear is present and the ear is stopped up, and sometimes the stone can be seen, then distill some volatile oil such as oil of violet or camphor in it, and administer the extraction, and cause the nose to sneeze, and open the nostrils so that the nasal discharge occurs. And place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear and stretch the ear apart at the top, as these things are often forgotten with these causes.
And if it is not forgotten, administer the extraction with the instrument called the epi-ciliary speculum, which has the following form:
And if the epi-ciliary speculum is forgotten, it's okay; and if not, administer the extraction with a very thin hook with minimal duplication.
Therefore if it is not forgotten, make a cannula of metal and insert the tip of the cannula into the hole of the ear and close the end of the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it is not too tight but only the cannula. Approach carefully extract the intestine with strong attraction, for many have previously observed this.
If not forgotten in this manner, then take alum or vinegar and attach a small amount of it to the bird's leg, and pause it at the end of the ray, and cover that area properly with a bandage. Approach the area under the nail with ease, and then carefully cut the nail from moisture.
And so, if all the causes previously observed are not forgotten, then you cut that area to provoke abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting that area is that you first lance the patient's saphenous vein and extract the blood according to its nature, then place the cork between your fingers and turn the nail towards the cuticle, making a small crack in the edge of the nail where the germs are located in the most appropriate place. The crack should be of a lunar shape leading to the stone, and, when the stone is drawn out, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and sew up the crack at that time with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If the cause of the nail problem is one of the growths that has inflated, then administer the cure and its removal; but if you are not careful, then take thin spittle in this way: and apply to that area the abscess of the growth that has arisen in the nail.
Do not do this when you think that it is already damp from the nail steam, and pause it with many cushions, and carefully remove it from those places with scissors or delicate gestures, or by abscess as previously mentioned, because the removal of it is relieved.
But in the water that enters the nail, it is necessary for the patient to perform sneezing at the beginning, and fill their nail with an appropriate old substance, and massage over the nail where the water is located, and if this is forgotten, good; otherwise, take many thin pebbles and lemons according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a short time, and let the patient insert one of those into the hole in their nail and jump on the other foot from that side and strike another pebble on the pebble that is under the nail. Therefore, do not stop this with a pebble until all the water is forgotten.
Therefore, do not stop this with a pebble until all the water is forgotten. And the water will be forgotten in such a way that you take paper or cloth, And place one end of it in the nail and extend the other end towards the fire until the pebble is burned at its base.
And place another cloth and do this many times until all the water is forgotten, and strain it with a tube as previously mentioned of the stone remover.
But in the removal of animal matter that enters the nail, if it is small, do this more carefully and similarly, treat it as previously mentioned in the division; but if it is large and causes swelling at the root of the toe, administer its removal with gestures and scissors, and the cause of it is easier than all other causes that occur in the nail.
But in the removal of worms born in the nail, when you treat it as previously mentioned and do not confirm your cure, you must look at the nail on the sun.
And so, if any cause of the worms appears, remove it with gestures or delicate scissors, but if no cause appears, take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in this way: Insert the narrow end of the tube into the nail according to the amount that the patient can bear; and cover it with a suction pump strongly, and do this many times until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you are not careful, then plug and seal the circuit of the tube with wax as previously mentioned; administer distillations that have been tried by the ancients in the treatment of worms, and keep this in the treatment of distillations.
Your effusion that you pour the medicinal oils into the nail with this instrument, whose shape is as follows: Make a silver or bronze cup, close it, inside which there should be a small hole, and flat on top.
And it shall be as they push for the cavity of the catheter to be in the concavity here where it will be necessary. If you wish, take the rod and wrap it in the proper part of it, and apply oil in the concavity of the sore, or juice from some herb, or any medicine of your choice into the catheter - it is in the ear - and press the rod with the proper part and squeeze with your hand to compress it temporarily inside until the oil is expelled in the concavity of the sore and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever is stuffed into the ear should be heated slightly with fire. Be careful that the substance you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for medicines of the ear cannot withstand water.
Capital VII.
On the cure of ear blockages.
Sometimes children are born without perforated ventricles from their mothers, and this condition occurs in some men, blockage in the tissue of the ear due to inflammation or non-healing flesh; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal which does not drain, and sometimes it occurs in the outer parts.
That which happens at the front of it (the body part), which is not understood by the patient, is in the greatest dispositions for difficult healing.
In that which you understand by the patient's explanation, it is necessary that you cover the patient's ear to the ground and look at it (the affected area). And if there is an obvious distention, open that with a thin spatula, which is its form.
If the extremity of it (the body part) is small in width, and one side is sharp while the other is not; and the spatula should be of two lion's lengths long to avoid injuring the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to flesh growing in the ear or the meat of it (the body part), you should remove it with a sharp and pointed tool, and cut it off quickly before all the flesh has been removed.
And if the obstruction is in the front of the ear, you should take a thin wire that has been heated slightly with fire and place it in the flesh of the ear.
And if the patient feels obvious obstruction with difficulty breathing, you should try to relieve the obstruction gently without causing harm to the nerves of the ear.
Then cover the ear with cloth of the appropriate size, wrapping it with the Egyptian ointment that you have applied; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound or take some other medication and immerse it in water, then crush it into powder and use it according to the instructions; and if the ear is already suppurating, you must remove the pus and replace it with another medicine that you have wrapped in a cotton soaked in rose oil until the suppuration subsides; and care for it until it is healed.
If there is bleeding from the ear, immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment to stop the bleeding, which is called "distillation" in the medical treatise.
Kapitel VIII. (Kapitel means chapter)
Vom Behandeln von Augenathese, die sich zu den Augen erstrecken. (Endeveno means to extend towards)
Augenathese, die sich zu den Augen erstrecken und manchmal feucht sind, sind bei einigen Personen trocken. (Endeveno means to extend towards)
Deshalb muss man die Augenathese mit der Hand oder mit einem Instrument, das zum Zerteilen geeignet ist, entfernen und auf den verletzten Stellen eine Pulvermischung anwenden.
Wenn es Schmerzen mit Blutfluss gibt, sollten Sie diese mit einer kleinen glhenden Nadel behandeln.
Die beste Behandlung ist die Entfernung der Schwellungen und trockenen Verletzungen, wenn es noch eine Ursache fr die Entstehung ist; und wenn sie mit dem Feuer behandelt werden, verbrennen diese Verletzungen und kehren nicht zurck.
Kapitel IX. (Kapitel means chapter)
Behandlung von groen Augenkrankheiten, die sich zu den Augen erstrecken.
Beim Auftreten von Tumoren in den Augen gibt es eine Ursache, die hnlich einer groen Krankheit ist und wegen ihrer Gre und Hrte auch als solche bezeichnet wird.
Es handelt sich um eine Ansammlung von groer Feuchtigkeit in der Augenlidunter- und -oberseite.
Deshalb untersucht man, ob die Gre der Tumoren durch etwas hervorgerufen wird, das aus dem Auge kommt und berall verbreitet ist; und die Ursache dieses Vorgangs ist unauffllig.
Es sei denn, frechte die Tumoren durch eine Aussparung in der Lnge und entfernt sie mit Mitteln zur Entfernung oder Abschneiden.
If the wound is large, then adjust it with stitches, and take care of it until it heals.
If it is small, you will not suffer harm by allowing the anguent (?) to restore and heal it.
If the swelling is spreading towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should remove the surface of the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a hook, one that you require for incision, and press it all around, and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, you will not notice anything in any case.
Clean the wound with salt water, and treat the area with something that heals it until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of inflammation in the eyelid above the wound.
Inflammation of the eyelid above the wound is grayish in color and is most often found in children, aggravating their wounds and causing their catarrhs to worsen; and they cannot look at the sun due to the tearing of tears at it.
And they often lie on their faces all the time and sleep on their faces; and when their eyelids are wet from below the eyebrows, which have already been covered by inflammation, it appears imminent that infection will occur in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you will feel the infection inside.
One method of operation is when the patient lowers their head into your lap, and you place a cloth over them and apply warm water to it in a circle corresponding to the size of the inflammation, and place that over the inflammation and press with your fingers all around to aggravate infection in the middle of the circle. Then make an opening in the middle of the inflammation with a lancet, making sure that the incision is not larger than the incision made during lancing (lymphotomy).
But in the preparation (of the treatment), it is necessary that you cut open the scrotum entirely until you reach the infection, since in the most favorable cases, the infection may be treated by incision in the form of white pus-like substance.
Then extract it with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers and turn it with your right and left hands until it is discharged.
And be careful not to adjust the incision so that with the pus you do not reach the eye and damage it.
But if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you should adjust the incision slightly to facilitate the release of the pus; and then extract it as described earlier; and immerse cloths in warm water and wring them out and place them on the area and press them with sand or something similar.
And let those who have salt and powder it in the hollow of the incision to absorb that remaining moisture.
And take care of it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized spot, you should take care of it with ointments made from castor oil until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods for touching the wound.
When ulcers on the eyelids are caused by natural hairs and are chronic, you should press the eye with your fingers and make efforts to find ways to alleviate the pain, such as frequent tearing and softening of the eyelid, which is known as touching the wound. Treatment can be done in four ways: either by cauterizing with fire; or with acute medicine as described in the section on cauterization; or by touching through incision and suturing; or by using tubes as I will explain later.
And therefore you should lay the patient's head in your lap; turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand, and if it is turned, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where the hairs are closest to the underside of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the eyelid, and it should be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are located; pull the needle out towards the upper part of the eyelid with your right hand, and turn the eyelid away from the eye.
Then make an opening in the underside of the eyelid near the hairs that are closest to the upper part of the eyelid, and insert a lancet into the lacrimal duct from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one; and extract the needle and place small pieces of sand or cloth under the eyelid, and then apply pressure on the eyelid with tweezers in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is important that the shape should correspond to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, since this has been diversified among men, for those who require a large incision in the eyelid according to the degree by which the eyelid is softened.
Then make an incision along the two lines that you have marked, and start from the greater lacrimal to the lesser lacrimal. And if your fissure is next to the natural hairs as the thickness of a coin.
Here is the translation: And place the coin in one of the two angles of the incision, and excise that entire area, and adjust the two labias (lips) with a fine thread or woolen yarn, cleanse the blood, and adhere any superfluous hairs over the eyebrows with certain adhesive substances if you want to do this, but do not bother if you don't.
Here is the translation: And let the suture of the hairs remain for three to four days and take care of it.
Here is the translation: And if you wish, leave the wound unsutured, and care for it with something that dries and constricts, since the eyelid recovers quickly from the sealing of the wound and its adhesion; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients used this method more often.
Here is the translation: However, it should only be sought when the patient requires it, and it is a good action, and there is no reason to fear it.
Here is the translation: And another method of treatment is to draw the figure of myrtle leaf on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three separate and connected incisions as follows:
Here is the translation: But if this method cannot be performed, then hold the incisions, and ensure that it is not sutured. Then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle next to the greater lacrimal, and the third needle next to the lesser lacrimal, adjusting them equally between the incisions. Lift your hand with the same elevation as the incision on the area marked as described earlier.
Here is the translation: And adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures and care for it until it heals.
Here is the translation: But if an abscess occurs at your incision or fissure, remove it with a lancet and similar instruments, and wash it with warm water.
Here is the translation: Sometimes hairs grow into the eyelid, and then you should use what has been described for incision; but suturing is more artificial in such cases.
The method of cauterization with reed is as follows: Here is the translation: And you convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as described before; and carefully make two thin reeds or twigs, whose length should be equal to the length of the eyelid, and the width of their ends should be slightly smaller than the width of the spatula. Here is the translation: And you have already made an incision at the ends of each partition where the threads are located.
Here is the translation: Apply each part with fine substances under what is superfluous of the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the reeds of each partition with strong compression, and leave it for several days, since the wound will dry up and die and eventually fall out.
Here is the translation: But if it takes too long, break the thread and care for the wound until it heals.
When the eyelid has been treated, it rises and the hairs do not pierce through.
This is the way to make two reeds as follows: And have the length and width neither more nor less.
Title XII.
On removing hairs that pierce the eye with an awl when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and piercing the eyes, you should perform the operation by taking a sharp awl, placing it on a soft and supple needle, and ensuring that the ends of the tool are adjusted carefully without any subtle movement. The length of the hairs should be as long as one hand span.
You should make another thin needle near it in short order, and cut the ends of that one if you want to do so.
Place the patient's head in your lap and position it facing you so that your work is visible, since this operation is delicate and requires precision.
Approach the needle into the incision of the skin carefully adjusted that requires suturing, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before drawing it out through the skin naturally.
Then pull the hair up and insert the thread into it (or them), and ensure that there are one or two or three but not more.
Then tie your hand around it where the hair has been pulled out, inserting the thread into the eyelid and pulling it through naturally.
If the stitching is not done and the hair has not been pulled out, you should insert the thread at the sides of the wound that you have made and tied with the same thread, until it emerges through the skin above the wound.
And wait for the wound to heal, because when you have inserted and tied the stitching, you should press on the swelling and clamp it with forceps, leaving them in place for two or three days until the hair adheres to its location and grows over it well.
If the hair is too short, then you should take a longer natural hair and tie it to the one that has been pulled out, lifting it up or letting it grow until it reaches an appropriate space, and continue lifting it upwards.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of echydris that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When an echydris (sty) appears in the eyelid and is caused by contraction of the eyelid when it is pulled to one side due to poor healing from a wound or burn, it is called leprosy, and this type of echydris can be either natural or accidental, caused by poor healing from a wound or burn, or resembling them in appearance.
The method of operation is to make an incision in the consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place a piece of linen cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
It is necessary to treat the cause of the echydris that causes it to recur, since if you do not do so, the echydris will return even worse than before.
Use remedies that soften the cause, such as fenugreek, and wrap it in water in which it has been boiled with its seeds, or gum tragacanth, which should be liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in it and treat with it.
The secret to your treatment is to perform all procedures without causing any further consolidation according to the original form.
This operation that we have described is not only a correction of echydris but also serves to restore the original shape of the affected area.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of echydris that occurs in the lower eyelid.
The echydris that occurs in the lower eyelid is called true echydris; it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental echydris is caused by a wound, burn, or other similar factors.
The method of operation for this is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the skin, making it pass from the tear duct on the left side to the tear duct on the right side until the thread reaches both ends of the skin.
Then stretch the skin to the sides with the needle and sew it up with the needle, making an incision with a large scalpel. And if the eye shape returns as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the split figure, then turn the eyelid and make two openings on the sides of the eyelid from its hinge.
The extremities of the two fissures should be made at two angles of the incision, which you have already made up to where they converge, and the angle should be made such that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove the flesh to the extent of the acute angle's width, ensuring that it is sufficient for the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with cotton thread, and take care of them with the medicine for softening and blisters until they are healed.
And if you are incising through a fissure or suture or cauterization, then you must open it with a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. Then separate the blister between the two lips as previously mentioned.
In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of incision, whether above or below, it runs in operation according to its preparation, and that shape is in the form of various motes.
And the skilled craftsman always prepares an instrument in every way that is possible for him to return the figure to its natural shape or as close as possible, and the patient according to what is necessary for the operation and tools in the best arrangement.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid adhered to the cornea or conjunctiva, and it is solidified above the lid and the albumen of the white, prohibiting the ease of movement and its natural functions, therefore you must go under the edge of the ray from below the eyelid and lift it upwards, or stretch it with oil.
Then you must incise the adhesion with a thin spatula that is not as sharp as an incision, having a blunt tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the white with its point.
And your incision should be such that it separates the adhesion with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then put salt water on the white, with which you wash it; or distill in its place a solution of rosewater diluted in water.
Then separate the eyelid and conjunctiva with blistering fluid, and place cotton wool soaked in albumen of egg white on the conjunctiva, and apply the third day causes for consolidation until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
When it comes to the incision of a nail and the removal of skin from the tear ducts, follow these steps:
Know that the nail can be in two ways: either it is nerve-like and similar to hard, thin cartilage; or it is not-nerve like, similar to white, congealed moisture. When you touch it with an iron, if it is filled, it will break off and the iron will not be inserted into it.
And in both cases, they do not start except from the larger tear duct and gradually cover the sight and block the light and movement of the white.
The way of working in the incision is that the patient holds his head in your lap, opens his eyes wide, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, then collects the nail with an iron probe and extends it to the sides above. Approach a needle and insert it into the big toe of a horse or bull or cow, or similar, or strong hide, double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate with the needle through the nail, and tie the skin to the nail; and then stretch it to the sides, remove the hide piece from the nail root which contains the pupil. Following this, you continue with the skin into the back of it.
Then you also incise the remaining skin at the root of the nose with a sharp blade or small scissors, and cut through the natural cartilage of the nose so that the incision does not cause continuous tears of tears.
At times the nail with the sole extended or thickened, as has been said, and then it should be excised with a lion's tooth, which is the shape of it:
Be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the scalpel and to cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the incision at the heel with a little salt solution or vinegar made of cinnamon, let it enter for a day, and care for it with whatever is needed until it is healed.
If the nail is not nerve-like and you cannot insert the needle, or if it is embedded in the onyx, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and healed in such a way as I have said and recommended in the division.
If you want to incise it, then you open the heel of the patient and take a sharp blade in the form of a lion's tooth with full sharpness: with sharpness. And if it is narrowed and congested and you insert in that incision, then distill your oil made of cinnamon or cinnamon oil or salted water into the heel for a day and apply it to the heel daily.
Then repeat the operation over it until everything that is of it has passed, unless the opposite abscess begins in the heel, then you remove that, and treat the abscess at first until it is healed.
Then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
The discharge of the nasal tissue, if it is noticeable in the heel with great harm, should be suspended by the nail; and incise that from one side, and do not deepen the incision so as not to cause continuous tears of tears.
And apply cinnamon oil to the nasal cavity daily until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of gangrene and that which is born from tight skin on the heel.
Sometimes in the heels of elbows, red skin is born, and it is overpressed before covering the pupil, or near or protruding on the eyelids and strongly compress the eyelids at the sides outside and resembles a rose bush.
But the operation is that the patient places his head on your lap; and you open the heels of it and collect all that skin with the appropriate nails, using a forceps or a bandage; and then incise the skin from the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to cut the heel as you perform your operation.
And your incision should be with the one you incise that or with the scalpel that we have recommended in the nail incision, or with small scissors with which you can cut according to the shape of it as this chapter will explain further.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that skin has been removed, fill the heel with salt water, or distill in it red powder like the corrosive medicines, and wait on the heel covered with hog's fat until the abscess is assured.
If there is still any cause of gangrene and the wound is infected with pus, and you fear an abscess, then remove the heel and treat that abscess with what cures it, and repeat over it with the operation until it is healed, and do the same with the tight skin that appears on the heels of this type.
But you must make sure to remove all cure of the heel naturally or accidentally by iron and not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the heels.
Pus is red and swollen on the heel and prevents the clothing from operating, and you uncover the heel for days.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you examine whether the person has a strong pulse and if there is no other disease present, then you collect that pulse (or information).
And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and support those veins with an inch or two, depending on your discretion; that inch should be made of a double fold according to this formula:
or two inches gradually folded together in one place according to this formula:
Then those veins should be collected with delicate force, and the blood withdrawn gently, until you see those veins become engorged with blood and swell.
And be careful not to injure the pulse at the extremity of the wound; and if your operation is to take place during the day, and you are firm in your action that you do not accidentally puncture anything but those veins.
And when you have completed (the procedure), then you distill in the pulse head, whether white or red, with such acidity that it will dissolve what has been engorged from the pulse.
But if that is not possible for you (to complete the procedure in one go), then collect everything at that time, and plug it all with what alleviates the pain from there, and let it lie for several days until the pain has subsided and the wound is assured to be cauterized.
Then repeat (the procedure) as needed, until it is healed.
And this is the method of the leeches:
Chapter .19.
On the reduction of an arrowhead into the nose.
When you treat an arrowhead with cauterization or acute medicine as described in the preceding narrative and it is not healed, then do not probe in that area but rather make a small incision over the abscess when it has matured, extract all the moisture present within it, and reveal the bone.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape it with an instrument that has this form:
It is called a sharp point and should be made of iron. The head should be round, similar to the shape of a needle that has been pierced through with a burr or file for fine pointing, such as shown below:
Place that over the corrupt area of the bone and gently rotate it between your fingers while pressing lightly until you feel that the corruption is scraped away.
Allow some time for healing and restore the area with drying and stopping agents.
If the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown over it, and the wound is separated from the surrounding tissue for forty days without renewal or abscess formation, and there is no accident at that place, then you know that it is healed.
If not, do not probe further but reduce the wound to the shape of the nose, following this method: Take three pieces of bone or medicine sharpener and make a small hole in the bone as follows:
The instrument should have a triangular blade and the handle should be extended to the tip as much as possible.
Place that over the bone (the lacrimal bone in this case), and hold it with a little pressure on the wound. Then rotate your hand around the instrument until it penetrates completely through the bone, feeling the patient's resistance as you do so.
Therefore, restore the area with drying and stopping agents such as those you have been instructed to use.
When the flesh and area have hardened, the material that flows out from the wound returns to the nose, so be careful not to burden the patient with it.
Chapter .20.
Reduction of the hernia swelling
When the hernia swells completely and there is no harmful consequence or reduction, then you must first make the patient lie down, place them on their back with pillows under their head, and place cold compresses on the neck without cutting it; and then apply a liniment over the hernia that has been made from castor oil, aloe, honey, and sarcocolla, and firmly press the plaster onto the hernia with lots of powder.
The method of powders is to take cloth made from lion's wool, and each piece should be folded into four layers; make powder from those pieces.
Then apply the powder one on top of the other according to the quantity needed for the hernia. Then press hard with a thick, strong cloth and tight binding, and repeat the compresses without cutting; remove the dressings, loosen the hernia and allow it to rest during the day and night.
But if in the meantime, the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made tighter.
And remove the dressing during the day and night as I said earlier.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, then that is good; otherwise, apply the plaster with powders and tight binding and compresses until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the protruding uveal tunica (eye sac).
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes out of the eyelid like a grain of sand, and you want to incise it, then perform the operation as follows: enter the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and place another double threaded needle in the tear duct; make that one penetrate and leave the first needle as it is placed; then incise the location of the double needle and lift the uvea edge around the needle, and press that area firmly.
Then remove the needle and wait until the woolen thread soaked in egg white dissolves, until the thread comes out with the grape (the protruding part of the eye).
Then care for the wound with something that supports what's inside so that the injury heals.
At intervals, gather together all around the wound a circle of fabric around it, adjusting it so that it covers the entire wound area, and then pierce it with a thin needle near the edge of the wound, let humidity run through the linen, and draw down the wound and enter immediately.
Then apply strength until it heals.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This ulcer which is called an ulcer is not simply watery discharge from the wound, but it is something else.
The method of working on it is to make the patient sit over a prepared and straight seat, and then take hold of his head with both hands and push him down so that you can see the discharge coming out from the wound, and let it dry and do not let it descend, and keep the light on, and let the patient see the cause in this way as he used to.
And if it does not go down (the discharge), then you know that it is water.
However, if the discharge is not prepared with what we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and press it on the conjunctiva at the junction of the cornea in the cornea (at the appropriate location), until the discharge is removed.
Therefore, when the discharge is removed, you distill water from the wound in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
And let it be treated with other causes until it heals.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of the water flowing from the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which should be pierced with the medicine declaring it, then that one according to its health.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and hold his wound tight.
And place your left hand close to the eyelid of his right eye if the wound in which there is water is on the right side; or with your right hand, if the wound is on the left side.
Then take almadra with your right hand if it is on the left side; or with your left hand if it is on the right side.
Then grasp the end of almadra close to the crown because of the thickness of the bone in the area of the little tear duct and move it with the force and rotate your hand around it.
Then press the eyelid and feel that almadra has been brought out due to your action.
And mark the measurement of the channel of almadra to the point where it ends, and this is from the pupil to the end of the black part, and this is the corona of the eye; for you will see that pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea tissue.
Then grasp almadra within the place where there is water and throw it down once or twice, and if the water comes out quickly, then the patient will see over what they are looking immediately, and almadra in their eye.
And let it rest for a little while; so if the water has come out, then you pause another moment before letting go of almadra.
And when it is dry and the water does not come out, then you extract almadra gently and rotate your hand around it little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt gemma in the water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then stop the eye with cotton or a pad soaked in rose oil and warm water and ligament with water.
But those of us from our time bind the swollen area with warm water.
And if you cannot insert almadra into the eye due to its hardness -- for some men have a hard eye --, then it is necessary that you take the spatula called alberid, which has this form:
And therefore pierce that conjunctiva with it (alberid), and do not damage your nail in the process, and do not go too deep to the location of almadra.
Then insert almadra as previously described.
You must complete your work, prepare the patient a comfortable bed made in a dark room where they sleep on their back, and forbid all movements.
Let the patient rest in nature for their condition to stabilize and do not move their head to the left or right side at all.
Keep the ligament as it was placed for the next three days.
And then release that in the dark room and open the eyelid, show the patient some causes, and return the ligament on the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the hours of healing or immediately before the injection. It is necessary that you avoid doing this because water can easily leak due to its great and violent movement.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must release the eye within seven days and treat it with what causes the abscess to subside.
Then clean the eye and rest the patient's face on a warm surface for some days so that the swelling subsides in a dark room.
And give them mild food and talk to them about their causes.
Know that in all cases the disciple is not excused from vision for several days, and therefore you must be courageous about the operation.
And we have learned from one of those who is called Arteghe, and another said that they made fire in the Ayrac chamber with a hot iron to pierce it and expel water.
But in our land, we have not seen anyone who has performed this, nor is it written in any of the old books; and it may be new.
These are the forms of the species of madness for those who do not know them:
They can be made of earth or iron specifically and they have protrusions with this subtle triangular shape, the tip being sharp like that shown in the figure.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of skin growths in the nose.
When in the nose are born diverse skins associated with some cause that resembles the scorpion movement of legs, or polyps feet; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that foot represented. It is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and it is not a lion's flesh that is dark in color.
Therefore, in those skins that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient lie down with their face exposed to the sun and open their nostrils, and pick your finger in those skins. And remove that part outside the nostril, and make an incision with a sharp spatula on the side where you know that all the skin has been removed; if it remains due to some cause for which abscess is possible, then you must cut it with one of the subtle instruments with ease until it no longer remains. If the lady has pus or an abscessed boil, then you pause it; if it is a malicious boil, then you cut and cauterize that inside, which should be separated from the pus, and all the cavities are left open.
Then apply a mustard plaster near the incision with wine or water. If the nose is open and you introduce moisture inside the palate, then you know that it has healed.
If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that there is no flesh or bone under the pus sores in the nose which has not been purified by abscess.
Therefore, insert a thin needle into it, if there is any swelling, and moisten the needle, and pause between each prick the quantity of the finger or thumb, and lead the patient to rinse their nose with water, and insert the tip of the needle in the nose with the ray or another suitable method.
And once this has been done, draw the patient's smell towards it and lead it to the nasal canals, and let it emerge from their forehead, because prolonged observation seems similar to this action to children in school, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do so.
Then pause the two extremities of the needle, one end that extends towards the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a suture to the flesh with the needles that are in the needle, and do this until you know that the flesh is among the needle holes.
Then remove the needle, pause in the nose near the drainage of pus with a cloth, and do this for three days or more until the wound is healed from the surrounding flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
But if the cure dries out, use it.
And this is the form of the instrument for the nose purger with which essential oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or iron, similar to a small uncovered lantern, like a small cone, and the handle similar.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the cannula of the nose purger instrument should be flat and open; to which you will hold when you are sucking oil or any juice or substances that you want out.
Chapter XXV.
On teeth that emerge from the nose.
Prolonged observation shows that teeth are born from the nose, and it is magnified and emphasized in some days before the rule of law takes effect.
Therefore, you should incise that at the beginning of its appearance and cut out everything. Then pause over the area or burn it with cautionery or medicine that is in place there.
If its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is hard, dark colored, and has little sensation; do not touch it with iron, as it is a cancerous abscess; for prolonged observation shows that he who cuts into this abscess does great harm to him.
If the abscess is soft and not dark colored, and incision is possible everywhere, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and cure the area with anything that dries it and keep it closed until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
The dissolution of continuity (suture) in the nose, lips, and auricle due to ulceration or similar conditions.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, it does not confer treatment except in some men.
Therefore, if it is for some reason that you encounter one of these conditions, consider whether it is fresh ulcer with its own blood flow, and then adjust the two lips of the ulcer with suture, and take care of the wound to be healed.
And if the lips of the dissolution of continuity are already separated and each is made healthy, then you must carefully cut each part of its border until it bleeds. Then adjust the two lips with suture and tighten them, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood over them and let it dry for three days, then remove the plaster and replace it with another consolidating plaster, and leave it until the pus is expelled, and care for it with a mouthwash until it is healed.
However, the method of suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as it has been recommended in abdominal surgery, or that you fill the dissolution of continuity with pus as I have told you before.
Captulo 27.
Extraccin de causas que surgen en ambas labias en las divisiones internas.
Mujeres observadas que presentan absces duraderos en las divisiones internas de sus labias similares a grasa mal alimentada y algunas ms pequeas y otras ms grandes.
Therefore, you must cauterize and close the labias and fissures of each one of those hardnesses on all sides, and fill the abscess with powdered sage until the blood is restricted, then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with astringent water until it is healed.
Captulo 28.
Incisin de la piel adjunta a las encas.
Trabajo observado sobre la piel ajustada a una enca en el que los viejos llamaban albulus; entonces debes suspenderla con cordones o apretarla con clavijas y cortar su base antes de que se inflame, y permitir que corra le sangre.
Y asegura el lugar con polvo de algodn, polvo estpico o polvo cauterizante.
Si el tejido vuelve a aparecer, entonces debes cortarlo una segunda vez y cauterizarlo porque si cauteriza no volver a regresar.
Captulo 29.
Extraccin de dientes con clavijas.
Cuando en la superficie de los dientes en las divisiones internas y externas, entre las encas se encuentran cscaras duraderas, a menudo amarillas o verdes, que causan corrupcin en la enca, entonces los dientes afectados por esta condicin son removidos.
Therefore it is necessary that you seize the patient between your hands and hold their head in your lap, pull out the teeth from which the sores and causes similar to sand appear before any cause remains, and do this with the blackness and citrinitat (possibly a misspelling of "citrinitas", meaning something related to citrus or yellowish) and other things until they are purified.
If the reason for this treatment has already begun at the start of the reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you should reiterate the reasoning on another day and on the second and third day until it reaches its final stage in whatever you desire.
And know that the teeth require various types of resorbers (possibly a term for substances used to dissolve or remove) in different shapes depending on how your operation is prepared. Therefore since the resorber for a tooth from within the gums is different from the resorber used between the teeth according to other shapes, you must prepare these types of resorbers that you will see shortly.
This line appears to be a capital letter (the Roman numeral "XXX" or "30") rather than a separate sentence, possibly indicating the beginning of a new section in the treatise. It is common for medical texts from the Middle Ages and Renaissance to have titles or sections numbered in this manner. The translation provided does not attempt to interpret this line as text since it appears to be simply a number.
Eradication of Teeth.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with every means and take great care in the entire eradication of it, because there is no need for further observation when it is eradicated, because it is a superfluous substance during the eradication of it.
However, when the patient is ready to have that tooth removed, you must certainly be certain which tooth is causing the pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe that a healthy tooth is causing it, and you remove that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have seen in barber surgeries.
Therefore since you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain and know this well, you should then make an incision around the tooth with spittle containing some virtue, until it has dissolved the tooth from the gums on all sides, and then apply a hot iron (perhaps a branding iron) or thin forceps gently to loosen it bit by bit until it is extracted.
Then apply alcohol (possibly a strong spirit) with forceps to hold it firmly and place the patient's head between your hands so that you can hold it securely, and extract the tooth carefully in a straight motion without breaking it or causing further pain to the patient.
And therefore if this is not forgotten, you should then take one of those instruments and place it under the tooth with ease and exert force to remove it in the same way as was described at the beginning.
However, if the tooth is fractured or decayed, you must then wrap it in cloth and tighten it with a thin wire at the root to prevent it from being broken during your constriction on it with forceps.
And you must work carefully around the incision in the gums and be aware of your strength so as not to break it and leave a piece behind, and return to the patient for any pain that is greater than the initial pain from the procedure.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their reckless and hasty dental extractions, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times this results in large infections that are difficult to treat, and all the roots remain, or some of them remain, or you extract it with some bones from the jaw as has been testified by many.
And for the removal of it (the affected area), wash the mouth with vinegar or salt water.
If there are flows of blood from this place, proceed as with a wound cauterized, then take some vinegar and sprinkle it on the affected area, if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The form of the forceps and tweezers with which you begin to extract the tooth should be long, short and thick so that they are not bent when you have to use them.
And as with large hands that go deep within but are not bent, they should be short.
They should be made of Indian steel and properly made straight shafts, and in the shafts there should be teeth that interlock with each other and tighten by forcefully constricting, and sometimes the shafts should have the shape of an heron's beak (ciconia), which is called a claw, and they should be strong.
Chapter 31.
Removal of Teeth and Extraction of Fractured Jaw Bones.
When the removal of a tooth that is fractured for some reason is necessary, you should first stop bleeding at the site and wait one or two days for it to become soft; then apply the heron's beak-shaped tweezers or pliers (ciconia or guanta) with the form of forceps.
The shafts of these tweezers or pliers should be made inside like a file or file.
And if you do not obey the above-mentioned forceps or pliers, you should carefully observe the root and cut all the flesh and insert an instrument called ataly (a small lever with this shape):
It should be short in length but thick, and not sharp so that it is not fractured.
If the root is forgotten in this way, it is good; otherwise, use other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is a triangle with some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be a triangle and very thin at its tip.
And this instrument, having two ramps, its shape is as follows: and other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; for this reason it is also used with the instrument similar to an ox-goad (uncia grande), whose shape is as follows:
with a twisted or short triangular tip, which should have some thickness and not be sharp so that it is not fractured.
And you should know that the tools for the removal of dead teeth are similar to other instruments.
Wise and skilled artificers will recognize this by themselves according to what it signifies for them in terms of the operation and various diseases; since there were diseases that the ancients did not know or care about, but had different shapes in different species (of instruments).
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured or dislocated, you should apply warm compresses to it with the appropriate instruments and forceps mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help it using an instrument whose shape is as follows:
It should be of any thickness, gradually becoming smaller, and tightly held in the mouth to prevent it from escaping or running out before the entire bone is removed; and finally, restore the area with appropriate medications.
But if there is a small cavity in the bone, you should remove that cavity and its blackness and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of protruding teeth above others.
When teeth protrude unnaturally from their shape, it is considered a law, especially when it concerns women and the very venerable, so consider this: if a tooth is not adjacent to another and cannot be sutured or treated with liniment, then pull that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose shape is like that of a pig's tusk, and made from Indian agate steel.
Then make your incision with the instrument to cut off that tooth in several days due to its hardness, and ensure it does not affect any other teeth.
If the tooth is protruding unnaturally due to grinding, then grind it off with an Indian steel file whose shape is:
Let it be entirely of Indian steel and the grinding wheel should be smooth; it should be of small pointed points like a file with which needles are made. Grind the tooth bit by bit in several days with ease to ensure that it does not affect any other teeth or cause damage. Then straighten the remaining part of the tooth and root it out with tweezers.
If part of the tooth is cracked and touches the tongue, then you must grind the tooth until the sharp edge of that fracture is smoothened, filled and covered to prevent the tongue from being injured or words from being distorted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with a gold or silver filling.
When teeth are damaged due to trauma and removal by percussion or hunting, and the patient is unable to chew food, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for prevention of decay in those that are firmly attached with gold filling, not silver, because silver turns green and can corrode in a few days, but gold never changes.
The filling should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and place double its amount between two healthy teeth, and allow it to grow between two damaged teeth or one or more, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side. Ensure the sealing extends to the damaged area and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is healed.
Your pressure should be firm enough to hold the filling in place without causing discomfort or injury to the teeth.
Cut off any excess filling with forceps or scissors, place it in various locations, and fold it back and hide it between the healthy and damaged tooth to avoid injury to the tongue. Wrap that area tightly like a Roman.
But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it with another filling at all times.
This is the shape of teeth and the arrangement of two healthy and two damaged teeth, sometimes interlaced in this manner:
When a tooth or teeth are extracted and return to their respective sockets and grow back as recommended, they should remain healthy and strong.
Only skilled and wise craftsmen should do this.
Sometimes the bones of a cow are suitable for certain dental issues and can be shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth has failed, strengthened as mentioned before, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Incision of the ligament that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament which appears sometimes on the tongue, either naturally or it is a common one that humans have, or an accidental one that occurs due to injury which has already been consolidated.
The operation is to open the mouth of the patient, holding his head; raise his tongue and approach to incise that ligament nerve according to its thickness to the extent that the tongue is freed from its root.
But if there is any hardness or thickening, and it is caused by injury consolidation, then you pour oil and divide that ligament according to its thickness to the extent that the ligament is incised and the hardening is removed.
Make sure that not a wound is made in the bone, and that you divide only the arch and let blood flow out.
Then wash the remnants of incision with water or vinegar, or water rinse; and place a clean linen over the tongue to keep it moistened in every night to prevent consolidation again.
But if bleeding occurs, place over the area a piece of linen soaked in vinegar; but if bleeding stops, cauterize the area with a light cautery that is suitable for that purpose. Then take care of it using other treatments until healed.
Chapter 35.
Extraction of the salivary gland from under the tongue.
Sometimes under the tongue an aposteme similar to a small tumor arises, preventing its normal operation; and often it becomes inflamed until it fills the mouth.
The operation is to open the patient's mouth with a spatula and examine the tumor.
And if you see that it is dark or black, hard and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, do not touch it as it is cancerous.
If it appears white with humidity, then you pour oil on it and incise it gently with a thin spatula, incising it all around; and if bleeding occurs during your operation, place over it this linen soaked in vinegar to stop the bleeding.
And then return to your work until you have treated it thoroughly, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; take care of it using other treatments until healed.
Chapter 36.
Extraction of the two-eared tumor and tumors that are located in the groin area, and other tumors.
When a swelling appears in the groin, it is glands that resemble pus, which occur outside and are called two-eared tumors; if you treat them as described in the division and they are not healed, then consider if the tumor is hard, dark, with little sensation, do not touch it with an iron.
And if it is reddish in color and the root is thick, do not touch it with an iron because of bleeding; leave it to mature, and then either cut it out or let it burst by itself.
And if it is white, round and the root of it is fine, it should be incised.
The operation is to first determine whether the tumor has rested for a while with caution or if it has diminished with some reduction; then you place the patient before the sun, holding his head and opening his mouth with a spatula, and the servant holds the tongue of the patient from below using a noble instrument with this shape:
It should be made of silver or iron, and thin like a knife.
Thus, as you press the tongue and the tumor is revealed, catch it with your instrument and put oil in its opening, then pull it out to the sides as far as you can. Or another cause of the tumor is the tunic, and then incise it with an instrument with this shape:
Or another cause of the tumor is the tunic, and then incise it with an instrument with this shape: And it is similar to forceps, but its extremities are curved, so that the opening of each one is opposite, very sharp, made of iron and tempered.
But if this instrument is not available, incise it with a spatula with this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And since you have incised one tumor, incise the other following this method of incision, and then cover the incision with water rinse.
But if bleeding occurs, apply decoccted coriander or myrtle leaf water or similar to stop the bleeding, and take care of it until healed.
And sometimes in the groin area other tumors appear besides these two-eared tumors, and incise them as described in the incision of two tumors together.
I have treated a woman with a tumor that was located in her groin area, which appeared dark, with little sensation; she had already closed the groin area, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had already stopped eating and drinking water, and was approaching death if she had stayed another day or two.
The abscess had grown so much that it had four openings through which it drained.
You should make an incision in one of the openings and pull out that part, and then take hold of a large piece from it, and then pierce the other opening, and press the hole closed, compress its tongue, and place an opening in the abscess at the point where you took hold of the other opening, and press it closed.
Then take out a large portion of it, and let only a little blood run from it. Therefore, close the wound of that woman, and let her start drinking water immediately, and provide food, so you don't continue to incise the abscess many times for a long time, and a new abscess forms in its place, which you should incise before it becomes prolonged.
Then seal and cauterize the wound, so that it does not get infected; and walk around without knowing what God has in mind for that area.
Chapter 37.
On incision of the hernia when it is abscessed.
When the hernia is catarrhal and abscessed and long, it is called a perpendicular hernia; and if it is in the large, rounded portion, it is called a bubo.
However, when it is healed as we have said in the division, and it does not conform to your treatment, and sometimes an abscess that has already cauterized remains subcutaneous, then you must incise the rounded one; and if it is along its length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not centered, then you must be careful in incising it, because there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it according to the method that I have said regarding its whiteness and length, that you make the patient lie down and press his tongue with an instrument used to shape it, and place the opening in the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of the abscess.
And you should not incise it unless it is attached to the natural boundary without addition, because if you incise more of it, you will damage his speech.
And during the incision, use what we recommended in the incision of the abscess, and heal it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cautery is nothing more than with sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the water that we have said, and apply it to the live tissue, and let it not be thick or thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is as follows:
The external part of the concavity in which the medicine is placed should be like the concavity of a mortar with a handle, and place the instrument with the medicine on the urethra, and the patient coughs on his own side so that saliva or nasal discharge from the mouth of that person flows into the internal medicine through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any damage to the wound of that area.
And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the uvula for as long as an hour until you see it become blackened and numb due to the bitterness of the medicine.
If you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray into a cannula beyond where the cotton adheres to the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary to achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
And if you need to reapply the medicine, reapply it, and cauterize the area around the uvula with cotton dipped in turpentine, clean it with what is in the circuit of the medicine, wash it with warm water, cure it outside with ointment, and guard it with guargarismes until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and prolonged fear.
Sometimes the uvula is healed with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured by subfumigation in this way: take calmly, hyssop, origan, rue, scicadus arabicus, camomile, crushed, and similar herbs, and mix all those causes or some of them in an oil, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; the oil should be well strained and in the middle of the oil there should be a hole, over which is placed an instrument with a concave handle according to this method; it should be made of silver or iron.
And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth up to where the steam can reach the uvula over the canal, until the uvula is well obscured.
Approach the spot observed to be swollen until it becomes dry, and ensure that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of an abscess's appearance, as it would overtreat the abscess, and it is not necessary that you do this, but instead, you should make the abscess's declaration from the cautery.
If you are not present with this instrument, then take a cane and make a hole in its end to form a hollow, so that the patient's mouth is narrowed, as the cane's hole prevents the steam from burning the patient's mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the extraction of thorns and things that stick in the throat, and other causes.
Swollen spots stick to the throat or a thorn or something else.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what appears from those, observing on it, as you press the tongue with an instrument in front, to make clear to you what is in the throat.
And what is not visible and hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, as the associated cause will be forgotten by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of soap or rag of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and press it strongly against it, making the patient swallow it, as when it reaches the place where the thorns are hidden, they will be expelled. And furthermore, take an eel and swallow it bound, and let it be digested inside for a while, then extract it; or take a pot and put it on the stomach and press on it to draw out the contents.
If those causes are not forgotten as I mentioned earlier, then use a lead instrument in the following way:
It should be as large as a small finger and hollow on one end so that it can easily enter the throat.
Lift the patient's head upwards and ensure that the instrument touches only the bone of the throat, to ensure that it strikes only the bone or thorn, or the doctor handles it with his hand.
However, if the patient swallows the instrument, it is better that they do so, as their knowledge of the location of the associated cause allows them to press it downwards and pull their hand with the instrument upwards, according to the amount prepared before it becomes forgotten.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the extraction of pus adhering to the throat.
When the pus is treated with what has been said in the division of the cure and medicines without effect, consider looking inside the throat of the patient at the appropriate time, as you have prepared the tongue with the instrument that you recommend.
Therefore, if you see pus, extract it gently and carefully using small or subtle movements.
If it is not possible to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, then place fire in the concavity of the cannula and perform this several times (until the pus dies and comes out of the throat) and keep the patient from drinking water for the entire day.
Then take a sponge filled with water and open the mouth of the patient in that place, rinse their mouth with it; do not let anything pass through that place and mix the water every hour with your hand, as the pus is soon detected by the water.
If the recommended method is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument that has been recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and it will fall.
Another method of operation in fumigation of that place is to take an oil pot filled with burning charcoal and cover it halfway with a lid so that there is a hole in the middle, and position the end of the instrument in the hole; then hold the fumigation above the patient; and have the patient keep their mouth closed on the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten before you know that the fumigation has reached the pus, as the pus will soon fall out.
If the cat does not come out, you should repeat the subfumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, cause them to eat salty and alkaline foods, and not drink water, and it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
This is the form of the tool with which arterial bleeding from the ulcer is treated when it is visible; and it resembles forceps in some ways, but it has a certain curve. The tool should be placed in the ulcer, and its end is similar to a stork's beak, which is covered, sharpened with a file, so that it can compress anything that may obstruct it.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the opening of ulcers and their section.
Ulcers are special kinds of wounds in various ways, as memory of them recalls, of each one in this book.
They are diverse in the method of their opening and section by two ways, one of which is by the nature of ulcers themselves; and because they obstruct fluids.
The second method is specifically for the places where accidents of the body occur, because an ulcer that occurs in the head is different from an ulcer that occurs in the buttocks; and an ulcer in a fleshy place is different from an ulcer in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
Moreover, some ulcers require that they not be opened except when the wound is matured or completed in them.
Other ulcers that require opening when they are ripe and not before their completion, such as ulcers near joints, because an ulcer near a joint takes longer to heal until the pus that surrounds it is purged, and it weakens or corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or an ulcer on a main part, if you delay opening it until it is matured, it can harm the main part; or one in the buttocks, which should not be opened before it matures; and it is not necessary to open a wound that is not ripe except for a wound in the buttocks, because you cannot insert your finger into it and it can elongate towards the parts inside the buttocks, and a fistula is formed or one is made at the edge of it that does not heal. Moreover, you must know when to open the ulcer, and this is when it is ripe.
And you should know that it is ripe when the pain subsides and fever stops, and the decrease in swelling and pulse, and the sharpening of the ulcer head, and other signs.
And because you must know that opening should be done in the place most distant from the ulcer and where pus is coming from healing of the edge.
Opening is sometimes done along the flesh or the body if ulcers are in the groin or feet, and areas of ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and in particular, in all places that do not reflect; because in those that reflect, use opening according to the member.
When the ulcer is in a fleshy place, it is better to allow confirmation of the digestion of it according to its completion, as we have said; because if you open it beforehand, the wound deepens and becomes more inflamed, and the edges of it are hardened and the depth increased.
Some ulcers are opened according to the thickness of the flesh or body as necessary, or according to what the member needs.
And it is necessary to administer a small opening, and in large ulcers a large and wide or deep cuts according to the diversity of the size of the ulcers.
Other ulcers are those in which it is necessary for the edges to be concave and cut when they are opened in such a way that a pouch or abscess has already formed, like an ulcer that occurs in double areas and boils.
And of those that are incised with a section having three corners; and of those is one that is incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, like ulcers in joints.
And of them is one that round and crescent-shaped section are administered, and similar to those.
However, one that is not like them, such as superficial ulcers of lions, you should open it with a superficial or flat incision only.
And when the ulcer is large and has collected a lot of pus, you should open it and not try to remove all the pus at that time; after removing part of it, leave the ulcer open for another day, and after removing a larger part, make several observations according to gradation until it is forgotten.
Furthermore, if the patient is a green-eyed man or woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because animal spirits are weakened by the release of pus many times, and the patient dies, you should not operate on them.
Take great care with this chapter, and make sure your puncture is accurate where you pierce these abscesses, as you must avoid wounding the surrounding area and consider whether the abscess wound is small or flat, in which case you can use a lancet or an ancient method; but if the abscess is large and the fissures of the puncture are many, you must stop every now and then to allow them all to heal simultaneously.
If part of the abscess is detached from the skin or if you have concaved it in its circumference, you must compress it with an old cloth or thread made from linen, as when bread or razors are sterilized, without moisture; and keep it inside for three days; and apply pressure on it and treat it with what is necessary to prevent infection until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs during your operation, you provide cold water and wine vinegar in which a linen cloth is soaked, and place it over the location of the multiple bleeding spots observed.
If the bleeding continues, you must administer treatment and medication as recommended in various locations of this book and division.
If it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, you must apply powder in wine and oil of caution, and place it over the affected areas.
If it is summer and the affected areas are fleshy, you must place powders moistened in water or oil or wine and apply them frequently until the third day, as mentioned earlier, and you should then remove the abscess and prevent it from becoming infected while providing it with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
This is what is required for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already mentioned for each type of abscess and the specific methods of their cure in separate chapters.
Chapter 41.
On incision of abscesses that appear on the skin of the head.
On small abscesses on the skin of the head, and those that contain special types of nodes with tunics made for them; and the various types of their locations.
And some have pimples, and among those are those that contain moisture similar to pus. And some have moisture resembling flour and similar to them, and among those are those that are hard and lapidary (stony).
In the section of all, and in the extraction of those [things], there is no fear, for the extraction of those things does not hinder archery.
The operation in the section of those things is that you use an instrument of the shape which approaches closely to them, called entromes, until you know what it contains.
But if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it with a section according to its length by means of a shallow incision in the following manner:
And begin at the section of line B up to line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you should excise that part which contains the moisture, and be careful not to leave any cause for it whatsoever, because too much observation returns if there remains some cause.
And immerse the wound in Egyptian clay if it is present, or, if not, in water and salt; fill the wound with that mixture and leave it until another day, because with this you corrode everything that remains of the skin.
And repeat the treatment with Egyptian clay several times if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause for the skin; then take care of the wound with Egyptian clay until it is healed.
And if an abscess contains greasy nodes, you should incise it in this manner: The incision should have the shape of a cross, and cut it between two lips of the incision and pull it out from all sides, exerting your strength in the extraction of the sac containing it.
However, if your archery is hindered by this, do what I told you earlier.
And treat an abscess with lancing and care according to what I earlier told you; lancing an abscess is easier because it has less blood and less moisture.
And sometimes these abscesses are in the head of some men who have none of it (humidity); this cause is because I lanced an abscess on an old woman's head like hard, rough, white stone, which could not be pierced, and if anyone struck it, they would be injured.
However, in other abscesses occurring in the head, this is not the subject of this chapter, such as abscesses that occur on the heads of children and which you should lance the auricles, but the incision for these shall be a shallow incision.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part so that the body will be relieved at the lower incisions.
And take care of them with what is appropriate for their treatment.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these abscesses deeply enter the neck and the armpits and the groin, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are divided into two: those that originate from within it and all scrofulas of these are distinguished by their own sac, as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we earlier recommended.
And the types of these scrofulas are either hard or soft, those that contain moisture being soft, and those that are malignant should not be treated with care.
Therefore, in the one that you see well-positioned in the Touching, of which the color of what is apparent is similar to that of kelp and is bad throughout, and is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is movable, it is necessary that you incise it with a shallow incision from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along the line of G to B, and scrape it from all sides, and cut two lips of the kelp with scissors or with a knife if necessary, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is more caution not to incise the vein or nerve.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, which may adjust your hand to the incision or upset the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or artery and forbid yourself from continuing the operation, you should pause in the wound treated with quicklime or other powders that cause bleeding, clean the wound, and leave it until the acidity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and porous. When the blood is separated (or drained)
Then return to your operation before it was completed.
And find out if there are any other small scrofula (abscesses), so that you may incise them and clean them up.
And if the large vein is involved in the abscess, cover it so that you do not incise the abscess at its base. Bind it well with a strong bandage and let it heal within itself without any harm.
And fill the wound with old lard (or ointment) that you have already applied, and take care of it.
And if you incise the entire abscess, then ensure that you close the two edges of the wound and suture it as soon as possible to prevent any excess leakage.
But if you see that there is an excess leakage due to the large size of the abscess, then understand to incise the base of it, drain it, and provide stitching and treatment for it.
And for abscesses containing moisture (pus), make a superficial perforation where the abscess is about to mature and pause the perforation of the pus that rises from the body's base, as we said earlier.
And apply perforation (or lancing), using lard or similar substances to corrode the infected material. When you see that the wound is clean, care for it with fresh meat-based ointment until it heals.
Chapter XLIII. (43)
On the incision of a gangrenous appendix in the gallbladder (or abscess).
The ancients performed this incision on the appendix, and I have never seen it done in our land.
And this is the inscription of their (ancient) discourse.
But in men with obstruction (of the gallbladder), the removal of the appendix should be avoided, as it does not benefit the patient because all the veins and major vessels are nearby.
But in those who have appendixes infected with abscess or gallbladder or double earlobe (gallstones), when the illness is not in the bladder, it is necessary to perform the incision of the appendix to avoid death caused by strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to incise the appendix, we should make the incision three circles from the gallbladder's circles or four with a smaller section along the length between two circles according to size, ensuring that the incision is in the cephac (the body of the gallbladder) and not the cartilage. This location is suitable for incision as it lacks muscle and the veins supplying blood are nearby.
And if the surgeon is inexperienced, extend the cord of the gallbladder by an inch and make a split in the cord up to the channel, but avoid veins supplying blood if possible.
And make a split in the cipallus (gallbladder) as recommended; this refers to the incision of the channel through the flap that is at its exit and where there is damage or abscess of the bladder.
Leave the wound open for some time.
So that the fear of perforation is removed, sew together two edges of the cord of the wound and only stitch it without the cartilage.
And apply medicines that make the flesh heal.
Albucasis says that the essence of the recommended discourse is to open the gallbladder of those who have appendixes infected with abscess and the patient has already died, and the intestines are cut, and someone goes to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound for some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
Therefore, I command that the wound be left open until the malice of the illness is consumed, which takes three days; and once this is done, I command to sew up the wound and care for it until it heals.
And what I have seen personally is that a woman took a knife and put it in her own gallbladder and incised one part of the lung, and I was called to treat her, and I found the wound infected like the breath of the dying, and I exposed the wound and found that blood was leaking from the small wound.
Therefore, I was confessed that she had not incised a vein or ligature, and the wind came from the wound, and I treated it until it healed.
And the woman did not recur in the bladder if there was no improvement in her condition, and another few days were allowed for her recovery.
And now I say that in the incision of the appendix, there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV (44)
On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the gallbladder outside, which is called a hernia of the gallbladder.
The abscess called hernia of the gallbladder is a large abscess according to the color of the body and it occurs in women.
It is according to two methods, whether it is natural or accidental.
In the natural case, it is not necessary to treat.
The accidental case is according to two methods of which the first is similar to fatty nodes, and the second method is similar to an abscess that is made by the constriction of an artery, and in this case there is fear. It is not necessary to make a presumption of the patient unless it is small. You should investigate that and observe it with the said method, and if you find something similar to fatty nodes, and not suspended from any vein, then you cut it in a way like nodes, and remove it along with the part that contains the skin and bursa; otherwise, you search for its entire existence and take care of the area with something that is needed for healing until it heals.
Chapter forty-fifth.
On the cutting of types of nodes.
Of the many types of nodes, I have already said all their species in the division.
It is necessary that I explain the difference between a node and an abscess when there is doubt.
Therefore, I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pain until the ebullition of excess is stopped; and it is a putrid completion which now stops the fever, pain and heat.
But a node does not contain heat, nor fever nor pain; it contains that cyst lion which is at the head.
And according to the color of the body, it begins like a pimple and is made in the same way as cheese, whether large or small, and they are of two species, whether fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, you expose it and investigate it at its beginning with an instrument called intromes, according to its form that will come in the chapter that is close to this one.
The method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place most moist that you find in the abscess, and you turn your said instrument slowly into it until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin.
Then you hold your hand as close to the end as the size of the abscess allows, and then remove the instrument and examine what has come out from it.
If the flowing moisture, whatever its color, is forgotten, you cut it with a superficial incision as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the instrument's probe, you know that it is fatty.
Dry it over the incision using a cross-shaped form like this: As you have learned, suspend it on one side and cut the skin all around it with ease, and keep the skin or bag if possible over it and remove the pus from it along with the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove the healthy one, and you watch carefully for it to fill up with pus, and then you remove it in pieces until there remains no cause.
For if something remains from it, either a little or too much, the node returns according to its nature.
And if you see that something small remains from it, you fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and stop it over the abscess cauterized area, and heal the other with another healing until it heals.
And if it is a large node, you sew together its two lips and heal it with what embroiders it.
But if there is pulsating vein at the opposite side, or not pulsating, you take and fill the place with a three-stranded silk that is vitriol and let it rest for two or three days until the wound heals and stops the bleeding of blood; then return to cut what has been broken from the node.
Chapter forty-sixth.
On the forms of instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
Of these are the forms of probes, and there are three species, one is large, the middle one is smaller, and the other is small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
They should be made of iron, of lead, or tipped with sharp tips, in order to make the probe enter well into abscesses.
These are the forms of tips, and they are called alberd, and one of them is called berid.
And of three spices, for it is great, mild, and scarce.
The form of a very large spice, the form [of this substance] is:
The form of a mild substance, [the form] of this is:
The form of a scarce substance, [the form] of this is:
It should be noted that these are from abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and boils that may originate from bones or other causes.
And make small, large, or lion-shaped drains with these, similar to large needles that are sewn together, and made of copper, iron, silver, or gold. The best ones are those made of copper.
These drains are made from black plums, which are known to cause the abscesses in their cavities to burst and reflect back on themselves.
And of three spices, for some are long-lasting, others mild, and others short-lived, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture [narrowness].
The form of a large lead spice [or treatment]:
The form of a mild lead spice [or treatment]:
The form of a small lead spice [or treatment]:
The forms of scissors are made from different substances, some of which are simple with only a curve and others made from three types: large, scarce, and mild.
And some are sharp scissors and others have three types [of blades].
Some scissors have two curves, and others have three types [of blades].
Some scissors have three curves, and others have three types [of blades].
All of these are necessary in their place [for performing various medical procedures].
Shape of a small simple medicine container, shape of it:
Shape of a large medicine container having two curves: Shape of a small medicine container having two curves: Shape of a very small medicine container having two curves:
Shape of a large medicine container having three curves:
Shape of a small medicine container having three curves:
These are the shapes of scalpels and those which are sharpened and curved for cutting nodes and abscesses, and there are three types, as one is large, another small, and another very small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The incisions made where there is cutting are sharp, and the other incisions are not sharpened but are performed cautiously so as to avoid injury to a vein or nerve during the excision of nodes (lumps) or abscesses (pus-filled sacs), and for those the patient is healed, and peace of mind is achieved somewhat through the cauterization that is required after the excision of an abscess.
These are the forms of gout, and there are three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of iron and resemble a ray with which alcohol is made.
It is outside the affected area that should be pricked with a pointed instrument and covered with ointment on both sides, when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatisms, which are hidden among the wounds and require the drainage of abscesses without the patient's perception, and there are three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of the following:
The forms of abscesses in which the flow of blood is cut off, and there are three types; large, medium, and small. The forms of these are:
They are forms of lemon juice, round with some length, and they are subtle.
It is necessary that these types of abscesses (small, medium, and large) be drained of blood flow with speed when needed, and at first, there should not be any medication.
However, do not use them to drain blood in any part of the body, only in fleshy areas, such as the armpits and thighs, and the armpits, breasts, abdomen, groin, and similar fleshy areas of the body, and use humidified cotton for this purpose.
Some times are the forms of these instruments which are small and resemble fish scalers in this way; with which blood is drained when it is done by venipuncture or arterial puncture.
And some times are the forms round in this way:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which resemble women's. (Guessing that 'mamillas' means 'breasts', and assuming that the text is discussing medical procedures on male breasts that look like female ones)
Sometimes the breasts of certain men become swollen, you should treat it with rest, like starting to be covered in fur, and if the breasts are swollen and resemble those of women, we will cut them off, leaving them. (Guessing that 'compliment' means 'treatment', 'apostemosas' means 'cut off' and assuming that the text is discussing removal of overly swollen male breasts)
And for the person who has this, it is necessary to make an incision in that breast with a semi-circular shape according to this form from line B to line G, and then remove all the lump, fill the wound with carnation medicine, sew up the edges of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals. (Guessing that 'inscidisca' means 'make an incision', 'excorja' means 'remove', 'plagua' means 'wound', and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat overly swollen male breasts)
However, if the breast goes towards the armpit and is softened by its size like in women, then it should be cut into two pieces along with your upper parts, with two semi-circular incisions, one contained within the other according to this form from line B to line G. And remove the connective tissue that is between the edges of the wound, and remove the excess fat, and administer what was previously mentioned for suturing and the powders necessary for the healing process until it heals. (Guessing that 'declina' means 'goes towards', 'mollificada' means 'softened', 'figura lunar' means 'semicircular shape', 'codena' means 'connective tissue' and assuming that the text is providing further instructions on how to treat overly swollen male breasts)
And if you do not complete the incision that is necessary to make due to the patient's distress and bleeding, then you must fill the wound with clean water and let it soak in corrosive ointment until the rotten part is removed by the corrosion, and then care for it until it heals. (Guessing that 'huemplas' means 'fill', 'enguent' means 'clean water', 'corrosiu' means 'corrosive', assuming that the text is discussing what to do when an incision on a breast wound is not completed due to the patient's distress or bleeding)
Chapter 48. (Assuming that 'Capitol' is a chapter number, and moving on to the next sentence for translation)
On the perforation of abscesses that come from the armpits. (Assuming that 'perforacio' means 'perforation', guessing that 'apostemas' means 'abscesses', and assuming that the text is discussing a medical procedure related to armpit-originated abscesses)
These abscesses that come from the armpits belong to the species of scrofulas, hard ones that contain a pus sac. (Assuming that 'specias' means 'species', guessing that 'scrophulas' refers to a type of disease or growth, and assuming that the text is classifying certain types of armpit-originated abscesses)
And some of these contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a semi-circular shape according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus has been evacuated from the abscess, then you should fill it with clean linen and leave it for another day. (Assuming that 'humiditatz' means 'moisture', guessing that 'seccio lunar' refers to a semi-circular shape again, and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat certain types of armpit-originated abscesses that contain moisture)
And leave the wound open and let it heal with suitable clean water until it heals. (Assuming that 'coto' means 'wound', guessing that 'enguent' means 'clean water', and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat an abscess after its pus has been evacuated)
And if the abscess is of the species of lymph nodes or scrofulas, then you should cut into it as was previously mentioned in the section on scrofulas. (Assuming that 'nodes' means 'lymph nodes', guessing that 'species' means 'type', and assuming that the text is repeating instructions for treating certain types of abscesses)
And if the wound is extended to the extent that it exudes pus, then administer it with hot iron as was previously mentioned. (Assuming that 'plagua' means 'wound', guessing that 'yesca' means 'exudes', and assuming that the text is providing instructions on how to treat a wound that has become infected and is producing pus)
Chapter 49. (Assuming that this is a chapter number, and moving on to the next sentence for translation)
On incision of abscesses that occur due to archery or veins. (Assuming that 'seccio' means 'incision', guessing that 'arceria' refers to archery, and assuming that the text is discussing a medical procedure related to abscesses caused by injuries sustained during archery)
When the archery is broken and the bandage that covers it becomes consolidated, then swellings occur and an abscess appears. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein are: for when the abscess is due to the archery, it extends along the front of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a grating sound.
And that which is due to the vein is rounded at the chest.
If the incision on this abscess is erroneous, and particularly in those where the bladder is present, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in various parts of the body; and if it is large, therefore its healing should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
When it is due to inflammation of the opening of the archery, make a long incision in the bandage; and cut open the incision with scissors and approach the archery, and free it from the layers up to where it is exposed.
And place the needle on top of that and make it penetrate into the other side, and firmly press the archery in two places - which causes you to extract two archeries that are in the temples.
And press on the area between two ligaments with a lancet and introduce sponge into it until the blood comes out, which will resolve the abscess.
And administer healing when there is pus between the ligaments; and treat that with appropriate healing until it heals.
If the abscess is due to section of a vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and the bandage, and introduce the needle into the area where your hand is, making it penetrate; and double thread through that until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a good ligament as I told you in the grape-shaped ligament of two parts with two ends of the thread.
If you fear extracting the thread, then introduce the needle into the entire abscess before making the incision of the first needle, and firmly press your fingers in four places.
Cut the abscess in the middle of it until that which is inside comes out, then you incise the excess of the bandage, and leave what remains attached to it.
And place your hand on the pulp that you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer healing which is made with warm and appropriate substances until it heals.
Chapter on the abscess which occurs by twisting of nerves.
Similarly, an abscess occurs in the archery and vein, and similarly it occurs in the nerves when it occurs by striking or excessive work, and so on.
The most common place for this is in the joints of the fingers or the ankle, or any place where there are bad joints.
The abscess is severe and is similar to the color of another body, and it is in the larger ones that are placed close together and when it is tight with pain, the patient feels as if he is in a stupor.
This abscess is not extended along the front of the body, and therefore the bandage is left open, and it is bad in every direction and does not go to the front or back.
Therefore, that which is in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, because it will cause contraction.
But that which is in the head or forehead is bandaged with sponge. If it is a small abscess, then take care of it with lancets and incise it from the root.
If it is large, then you hang it with a hook and extract it, and place it in oil; and sew the wound with suture, and treat that until it heals.
Chapter 11.
On the incision of an abscess that occurs in the stomach.
After opening the abdomens of some men and various parts of the bodies of those whose illness is called fungus because it is similar to that with mushrooms; the root is subtle but its head is large; and the lips of these are turned inward, and it is small and very large.
I have already seen one, and in his abdomen there were two that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them in color, of small root.
The lips of those [things] were turned inwards and splitting, and moisture was flowing out from it all the time. (My apologies for any potential inaccuracies due to my non-native speaker status.)
Then, insert your fingers eighteen inches deep into it. (I am guessing "it" refers to the affected area.) And the other one (finger) five inches. (It seems like they are asking for two fingers to be inserted for different depths.)
And the procedure for inserting them (fingers) is that you consider whether the patient is moist and the color of their sore is white, moist, and of a subtle quality; in such a case, you should insert spatula made of lead, and there should be cautionery in your presence in the fire because many observed views show that the expulsion of pus is often blood, and if there is bleeding, cauterize it. (I am assuming "it" refers to the affected sore.)
If the patient is weak and fearful, beware of inserting iron (instruments); instead, take a fresh lead file and press it against the sore, using the method mentioned earlier, and leave it for two days. (My apologies if this translation has any errors due to my non-native speaker status.)
Then adjust the thin lead string (suture) at the constriction of the sore; therefore, you should not press hard on the thick part of the lead, until it is cut off and falls out by itself.
But if the sore is of large size and there is cause for fear and dread when inserting it, especially in the abdomen,
However, it is possible that you may cut through the thickness of it (the sore), and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the wound heals.
Be careful not to insert your fingers into a sore that is dark in color, has little sensation, and has no regular flow of pus, as it is cancerous. (This sentence seems to warn against probing cancerous lesions.)
And you will remember that this concerns the matter of cancer. (I am assuming that "this" refers to the previous warning about cancerous lesions.)
Chapter 11. (I'm assuming that "Capitol" is a reference to the chapter number, which appears to be in Latin numerals rather than Arabic numerals.)
On the treatment of umbilical protrusion. (It seems like the text discusses various medical procedures and their applications, and this sentence indicates a new topic about umbilical hernia.)
Umbilical protrusion is caused by many factors; either due to fissures of the navel that are above the abdomen and the intestine or hernia comes out from it as in other ruptures, or due to pus flowing from a vein or artery (as previously mentioned), or due to compressed ventilation in it. (I'm assuming "it" refers to the umbilicus.)
But if it is due to a fissure of the navel and the hernia protrudes slightly from the skin, then the color of the abscess should be similar to that of the body, and there is no pain, but it appears in various situations. (This sentence seems to describe the symptoms of an umbilical hernia with a slight protrusion.) And if it is due to the hernia protruding, then you must locate its situation with regard to that which was previously described, in a more serious and diverse manner; when you press on it with your fingers as mentioned earlier, it is hidden, and it should return; there is significant pain at that place, and you must introduce hot baths and strong work. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to deal with an umbilical hernia that protrudes more significantly.)
But if it is due to moisture, there should be no pain when pressed with your hand and it is not constricted nor hardened. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to diagnose an umbilical hernia caused by moisture.)
If it is due to pus, then you will observe the following signs of the abscess turning darker in color. (It seems like the text describes the appearance of an umbilical hernia caused by pus.)
But if it is due to a mass of flesh, then the abscess will be severe, large, and hard, and it will grow according to a certain amount. (This sentence seems to describe the characteristics of an umbilical hernia caused by a mass of flesh.)
But if it is due to ventilation issues, then there should be no pain when touched. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to diagnose an umbilical hernia caused by ventilation problems.)
The procedure for it (the umbilical hernia) is that you consider whether the protrusion of the umbilicus is due to pus from an artery, a vein, or ventilation issues; in such cases, you should be prohibited from treating it because there is fear and dread as previously taught in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins. (This sentence seems to summarize the previous discussion on umbilical hernias and warn against treating them in certain circumstances.)
If the umbilical protrusion is due to the intestine or the hernia, you must command the patient to lie down and extend themselves; then press on the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command them to stay facing upwards between your hands, and surround the umbilicus with a spatula made of lead around the area that you have marked with the probe; and stretch the thickness of the abscess at the incisions above one inch; and tie it in the circuit with a strong thread or cord, using an appropriate knot. (It seems like the text gives advice on how to treat an umbilical hernia caused by the intestine or the hernia itself.)
Approach the midline of the abscess extended over the wound and insert your finger into that opening and seek out the intestine; if you have not found it or guarded it by the wound, then you extract the pus and push the intestine towards the incisions inside the belly.
If you have found the membrane (tela), then take an uncus (a probe or stick); and incise the superfluity (surplus) of it.
But if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that spot and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them firmly in the flesh and pierce two holes through the circle you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and tightly bind the abscess into four sections over the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and let the flesh shrink back into its place by itself; or incise that which is thinning and falling apart, and carefully treat it with water that comes from the mouth until it heals.
And if the eminence (protrusion) of the navel is not much flesh or because of moisture, then you must suck out the abscess as we have said and strain the pus or moisture, which you place in it, and treat it with water that comes from the mouth and consoles the area.
Chapter 33.
On treating scrofula (scrofula).
We have already said in the division that scrofula has a specific type and the way to treat it with medicine, and we have said that it is suspicious when cured with iron so as not to be ulcerated; and we have said that scrofula originates in the womb (uterus) and the caution of its treatment.
The ancients said that in some cases scrofula can be eradicated, such as on the skull (cranium) located at the breasts or its resemblance to other members that are used to drain it all, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and large, you do not need to worry about it, as I cannot heal it or have not seen anyone else who has achieved this result.
The operation on it (scrofula) is when it is located as we have said, that you precede and let the patient rest and purge black bile for some days, and then fumigate it, if there is a clear filling.
Prepare the patient with preparation in which the operation is located, and prepare needles that are necessary for it; and in all ways, compress with a cloth good percrucitation (application of hot objects) until there is no cause left for its reasons. Allow the pus to run out, and do not open it lightly, but press on the places, and wash away the thick pus with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach among the instruments.
If there is opposition to a large, uncontrolled bleeding of a vein or an artery, then cauterize it where the blood flow ceases, and care for it with other treatment until it heals.
The first sentence in this new text appears to be a reference to a specific section or chapter (Capitol .liv.) within a larger medical text. This is often used as a way to organize long treatises, especially in medieval and classical works. Here's the translation for the provided line:
The new sentence appears to provide the title or topic of the following text (De curacio de ydropici). Translation:
We have already discussed, in the division, the types of edema caused by water and their signs, as well as the treatment of each type with medicines. Here's the translation:
The type that is treated with iron is none other than the species of edema caused by albumin alone, and it should not be treated with iron in the case of tympanic or hypoarchic edema, as this is fatal. Here's the translation:
When treating the species of tympanic edema with medicines and it does not improve, you should consider that if the patient has already experienced debility or another type of edema, such as in cases of cough or stomach ailments similar to these, then be careful not to treat with iron, as there is concern about this. Here's the translation:
However, if you see the patient with excessive vitality and there is no other disease besides edema alone, and neither a child nor an elderly person, then the manner of operation for them is to raise the patient on your hands, place their abdomen exposed to you, press the water out from the lower part of the navel, and take a piece of sharp-pointed reed according to this form:
The reed piece should be of two sharp points, with one end as sharp as a reed; however, it should be somewhat short, so that in the operation you do not enter the intestine and hurt it. Here's the translation:
And consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, as in this case you must, with the incision, move away from the navel by about three fingers' width below, on the right side over the navel. Here's the translation:
However, if the generation of edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' width. Here's the translation:
If the generation is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. Here's the translation:
Your incision must be over the rib that the patient will lie on to prevent fluid from accumulating at that location. Here's the translation:
Then pierce the entire cord with the instrument and enter the incision, lift your hand with the reed between the cord and the abdominal wall and cut it out; if it is as thick as a nail or more. Here's the translation:
Then pierce the siphon (or siphac) to where the reed reaches the water location. Here's the translation: Then you extract it and insert an instrument with this form: Here's the translation: and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver, copper, or brass, with a small hole at the lower end, and three holes on the sides: two on one side and one on the other; and the inscised end is shaped like a quill, as sometimes:
And in the upper part of the insertion is the armillary, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you immediately close it on the instrument, thus evacuating an appropriate amount of water, for if you evacuate more than needed at any given time, the patient may die prematurely due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they could experience convulsions that are close to death. Here's the translation:
However, evacuate it according to the vitality of the patient and based on your understanding of their disposition, pulse, and general well-being. Here's the translation:
Approach the instrument, and retain the water that causes it to be held back by the bandage around the neck of the bladder, which you are recommended to perform according to that method.
Approach the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and draw out a small amount of water, do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to let the water remain too much.
But if you fear the patient, and allow a large amount of water to remain, then care for it with burial in hot sand, rub with soap, and wait for a long time in the sun; cure it with drying medications until it is healed.
Cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the water extraction, as I have previously reported.
Chapter 15.
On the treatment of children whose locations for urine are not perforated.
Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's abdomen, and the head of the mix-up is not perforated (or it is too narrow or not in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to perform perforation as soon as possible when the child is born with a thin spatula-like instrument according to this method:
Then pause in the wound a thin leaden nail and tie it, and wait for three days or more.
And when the child wishes to urinate and urinates, return it.
If you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which passes through the area does not close this opening.
But if the wound is narrow, it should be treated with a leaden nail as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But those in which the wound is not in its place, these should be treated by lifting the penis with the hand towards the parts outside; and it is not for generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should according to nature, and this is a serious illness.
The method of the operation is that the patient should be turned on his back, and the head of the penis should be extended from it with your left hand with a strong extraction; then cut the head of the penis where the foreskin is located with a sharp instrument like a feather or any blade, so that the meat of it becomes similar to the head of the penis and the wound falls into its proper place as necessary.
And be careful during your operation of bleeding, because it often happens; pause and let the blood flow out, then stop the bleeding and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On whitening that happens in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and scabs, darkening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Often this whitening occurs on the penis and is a sign of serious illness.
And one is malicious, and the other is not malicious.
Not malicious, it is necessary that you suspend it with thin thread and remove it completely; then pause over the area submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply Egyptian ointment to it every day until it is healed.
If the whitening is malicious, with a dark color, it is necessary that you administer cautery near its incision and remove it.
But if the whitening is in the foreskin on the head of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin, and the other part is outside; it is necessary that you remove the whitening from inside first until it is consolidated; then you treat the outside, because when you treat the foreskin at the same time, it is not ensured that it will not be injured.
Also whitening, blackness, and corruption in the genitals and foreskin often happens, so it is necessary that you remove all that has already been damaged or is about to become corrupted or is already corrupted; then line the area with a mixture made of honey and the flour of milled wheat and crushed herbs and spices.
Then care for it with the other treatment until it becomes healthy.
If blood flow occurs, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
The cautery is beneficial in two ways: for stopping blood flow and for treating an infected wound.
If the head of the penis rots and is destroyed at that time, it is necessary for you to insert a lead tube into the foreskin of the patient so that he urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this does not occur except in one who is circumcized, and it occurs without being forced; when the adhesion occurs due to an infection or a boil), it is necessary that you cut through with a blunt spatula until the adhesive tissue is dissolved and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
And if it is difficult to desire that (the foreskin), it is necessary that you cut through with a spatula for the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when thin, can be easily perforated due to its subtlety.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp blade, which has been moistened in warm water to prevent them from sticking together again.
Then treat it with a styptic until it is healed.
Chapter 77.
On the purification of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a permanent solution like other diseases; however, since it is our operation and our will, and the need for it is particularly in children, it is necessary to choose the best method and easiest way to preserve health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws, and they only started using it after experimenting with it, which was due to the fact that I have found that most artisans and barbers used circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they used oil and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and will not find a better purification method using scissors, oil, and the finger, because most of the time the skin is torn up, because the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and one layer remains behind, and it can easily be punctured again and cause certain pain. And the purification that is done by the alphecatis (the female circumciser), and it is digital, which is used by shoemakers, is not secure because there is a risk of injury to the tip of the male organ since it can enter the wound.
But in the operation using the finger, iron will be exposed and corrupt your operation. The skin of the child is short by nature, and most of the time it does not require purification, and I have seen that.
But the purification that is done with scissors and oil using the finger is not good, because the scissors are made for proportional incision, so the sharpness at the top is the same as the sharpness at the bottom; therefore, when you press your hand in proportionate pressure points, you cut it in a single stroke; and this leads to compression of the oil around the penis from all sides, which can cause errors.
The method of the first operation is that you keep the child (especially if it is a small one) in a state of rest and do not perform any incision on it except for applying oil to the penis and leave it for another day.
Then make the child happy in every way that is possible according to his understanding. Prepare yourself to stand between your hands, neither too close nor too far apart; hide the forceps in your hand or put them aside so that the child does not see them or any other tools.
Prepare yourself to place your hand between the buttocks of the patient and blow into the wound, then pull it out so that the head of the penis emerges, and clean off any matter attached to it due to filth.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning is as follows:
The nails should not be cutting or uncut, and the nail of the big toe should not be cut, and the length of the two points should be equal to the length of two handles.
But if the error is made during cleaning by injuring the scrotum internally or cutting it, then one must sew it up again.
Therefore, you should stretch the finger of your hand in front of the wound and sew it up accordingly.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then pull it out with a hook and sew it up.
But if it has passed three days and the swelling remains under the foreskin wound, you should let it be released with the cautery and then remove it gently, sewing it up as you are prepared to do so.
And beware of the head of the penis, because this is not for it.
Therefore, treat it with a powder that consolidates the wound as recommended in the treatment of powders.
If the scrotum is sewn up too tightly, observe the parts above it to see if there is any swelling.
But treat it with that which was mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or blood clots, or tumors or ulcers, similar to those mentioned in the section on methods of treatment.
If the stone is not dissolved with what has been mentioned before and the cause is very strong in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction of it using an instrument called a syringe, whose form is as follows: It should be made of silver and be slightly concave like the needle of an eagle pen, with a thickness similar to that of one finger and a half, with a thin tube at its tip.
The method of emptying the urine through the syringe is to grab the foreskin and pull it back into the area where the linen or wool is located, with good lubrication; then insert the eyelids of the foreskin into the area behind the syringe, and if necessary, sew any cause of the linen using forceps, but insert the linen into the tube with vigor. Then move the syringe slowly and steadily towards the body and apply oil or albumen of egg.
Hold the patient on the bed and wrap the bladder and penis with olive oil and water. And apply alum water to it.
Then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the tip of the penis; then fold the penis over to the place of the anus; then push the syringe into that area; and continue pushing it towards the bladder, so that the patient is relieved of the cause of pain, but not in this order, but rather in the direction that leads to error.
Approach the field (wound) with wool slowly, for urine wets the wool.
Approach the bladder with a remedy for urination, and use a catheter, do not stop doing that until the bladder is drained and the patient finds relief.
Title: The Treatise on Medical Matters - Chapter 16
Of what quality is the cleansing of the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this procedure?
When ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it is congealed blood in that area, or there is a hard stone blocking it, and you want to drain water and medicine into that area, then do so with an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
If the outside part is closed, it is blocked (or obstructed). There are three parts in that: two of one kind, sometimes.
At the beginning, it is a concave area where there is a buildup of pus, depending on its amount, without any addition, until some cause is pulled from the humors, and when it is expelled, water should be poured into it, and when it is expelled for a long time, according to what the catheter made with naphta in naval battles can do.
Therefore, to allow the water to flow into the bladder, insert the end of the catheter into the pus, and draw out the water that is buildup in the upper parts, for the water is drained into the concavity of the catheter.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra as recommended in the catheter; then draw out the pus with water, for that pus reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient relieves himself.
The shape of the thin cystic instrument with which the bladder is cystoscopied, and this is its form:
It should be made of silver or lead, the head of which is shaped like a small feather, and inside it there is a long, slender canal.
Then grab the bladder with forceps, and stop the flow of urine that you want to cystoscope in the bladder, and place a double ligature around it with strong suture thread, and heat up the urine.
Then insert the end of the cystoscope into the urethra.
Then press your hand on the bladder with urine and structure until the patient feels that the urine has reached the bladder.
If the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; perforate the entire circumference; and forcefully insert a strong wire into those holes, so that they rotate; then attach the circle in such a way as to form a plug, as long as you stop the flow of water, oil, and water.
Then tie that to the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, and press your hand into it until the urine reaches the bladder.
Title: The Treatise on Medical Matters - Chapter 17
On Stone Extraction
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their cure with medications, and the difference between stones originating in the lungs and those originating in the bladder, as well as the signs of this condition.
We have also discussed the surgery and cutting for stone removal.
The stone originating in the bladder is the one that lodges in the bladder itself.
They are telling of an obvious and abbreviated exposure (of the issue).
Therefore, stones originating in the bladder are found mainly in children; and their signs are that the urine that is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in gravel; and the patient scratches his genitals, and observes blood-stained bedding, and the stools become loose, and for this reason he protrudes his anus.
The healing of children from that condition is up until they reach the age of 14; and it is difficult to heal in the old (people). But in young people, it is mitigated by this (medication or condition).
And the stone that is larger and the healing is easier in that one; and if it is little, it opposes (or worsens) that condition.
Therefore, when we approach the healing of that condition, at the beginning, we must clean the patient with a cruse (basin) which extracts all the wound which is in his intestines; because that wound sometimes prevents the finding of the stone and requires its search.
Then let the patient be placed with his feet and be examined and washed in the area to force the stone to descend towards the opening of the bladder or it jumps from that location on some occasions.
And prepare that instrument in your hands and have the assistants move away from him, so that the entire bladder is made to descend towards the side of below (or outlet).
Then pierce it (the stone) and all its surrounding area.
If you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly make an incision over it.
If you do not touch it completely from below, then you should anoint it with oil on your left hand, if the patient is a child, or rub it if he is an adult, and place it in his rectum. Then pierce the stone that was below (or inside) your hand. And gradually convert it (the stone) towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your hand and expel it from the opening outside the bladder at the location where you made the incision.
Command the servant to press the bladder with his hand; command another servant to extend the thighs to the opening above, and command another servant to lift the loincloth that is below the thighs, at the location where the incision was made.
Then insert the spatula with this shape (a small cup or bowl-like spatula): Make the incision between the anus and the genitals, not too deep, following the curve of the left side; the incision should be on that stone and your hand should be in the rectum, making a transverse incision so that the opening is wide outside and narrow inside according to the amount of stone exposed at that location, but not too wide as it would compress the hand holding the stone, and this must be done easily without difficulty.
You should know that some stones have angles and edges, making their extraction difficult because of this.
And from that stone (the one mentioned earlier) comes the lion-shaped one that resembles a walnut and is round and made of soft material easily extracted.
Therefore, if it is the one with angles and edges, position it in the fissure (or slit or narrow opening).
If it is not easily positioned, then you should press on it or apply pressure to it gently with a suitable instrument, whose tip should be like a rasp applied to the stone and not slip away from it; or place a curved thin instrument below it.
But if you cannot press on it, then you should widen the wound a little and, if you see blood flow, cauterize it with heated vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, you should first press your hand against the opening of the bladder and make an incision over it; then press a little on it as well; perform the same steps if there are more than two stones.
If the stone is large, ignorance consists in making an incision too big because it may harm the patient in one of two ways: either cause his death or lead to continuous urine distillation due to insufficient consolidation of the area.
But administer expulsion from inside (the bladder) when it is appropriate, or force it to break with forceps from inside until it is removed in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloespoke and dragon's blood, and bind it (the wound) tightly. And place on that cloth infused with oil and wine, or rose oil and warm water, to encourage the abscess to be released.
Then return the patient to their bed, and do not undo the bindings for three days.
And when you have undone the bindings, wash the area with water and oil, and treat it with a poultice of diaphoretic and diuretic herbs until it is healed.
However, if an abscess forms in the wound, it should be treated with cautery and corrosive agents, similar to when blood is frozen in the bladder, and thus urine is prohibited (and this is known as hematuria or blood in urine), therefore, pour your solution into the wound and drain the blood, for if it remains it will cause the bladder to decay and rot.
Then clean the wound with warm water, soap, and salt, and apply an ointment that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And during the entire healing process, you should pay attention to the patient's needs and adjust the medication that has been applied to the affected area.
If the stone is small and located in the bladder, and it causes urinary retention, then treat it with a solution that will cause it to pass, for prolonged observation of this condition is considered as causing obstruction; I have previously stated this, and it is known that you should use a perforating iron, which has the following shape:
triangular with an elongated tip, sharp, inserted into a handle.
Then grab the stone with forceps, and remove it from the bladder to prevent it from returning.
Then insert the iron into the bladder and perforate it easily until the perforating iron reaches the stone. Rotate the perforating iron around the small stone with your hand, and you will gradually make a hole in it until the other end of the perforator passes through; for the urine is quickly released.
Then press your hand on the broken piece of the stone that is outside the bladder, as it has been crushed and forgotten by the urine; and the patient will be healed.
However, if this treatment is not possible for any reason that prevents it, then grab the stone with one pair of forceps and another pair on top of the stone. Then cut the stone in the bladder between two incisions. Then remove it. Then undo the bindings and remove the congealed blood from the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind the stone to the foot, except if it does not return to the bladder, and the other binding is not for the purpose that when the stone approaches the opening of the bladder, the stone will return to its place and heal the wound.
And for that reason when you bind the stone above it, you should lift the bandage above the separation, or if you need to remove the stone, you must lower the bandage and heal the wound in this way as has been said.
This appears to be a numbering system for chapters or sections within the treatise. In medieval manuscripts, chapters were often not numbered consecutively, but rather assigned individual numbers. It's possible that "capitol" is a translation of the Latin word "capitulum," meaning chapter or section.
Title: On the removal of bladder stones in women.
Bladder stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a bladder stone is found in any of those [women], the cure is difficult and forbidden because of many reasons.
One reason is that a woman who is still a virgin experiences great pain.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to discover [the stone] if she does not tell the doctor when she is a virgin or from those women having husbands.
The third reason is that you have no experienced woman skilled in this art, especially the operation with more mastery.
The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for bladder stones in women is far from the stone's location, requiring deep incisions and causing fear.
But if necessity compels you to this, then you must take a woman who is skilled and experienced in this matter. This is rare.
But if you are deprived of that [skilled woman], then you must seek one who is experienced and knowledgeable, or present a mature woman skilled in the care of women, or a woman who has mastered part of this art.
Therefore present this matter and command her to do everything that you instruct her regarding the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is that she must check if the woman is a virgin, in which case she should put her own words into the woman's mouth and desire the stone.
Therefore, if you find that, dismiss her from her words, and then command her to make an incision on it [the stone].
But if she is not a virgin, command the mature woman to put her own words into the mouth of the patient and inquire about the stone, with her left hand pressing on the bladder, and grasp it with good discernment.
Therefore, if you find that [the stone] is in the orifice of the bladder near the separation, you must gently guide it out of the opening with the help of your skill until it reaches the correct location.
And then make an incision in that area of the hand of the mature woman, and find the location of the stone from any side it is positioned at, and center the stone on that separation. Let the words of the patient not be removed from the stone that has been expelled.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; and then insert the lancet into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the size that you know the stone will be extracted from there.
And you should know that the varieties of bladder stones are small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have rough edges.
Therefore, you know the types of stones through what you have said about what you intend to do.
If you see blood flow, adjust the location with the vitriol-treated instrument and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation once the stone has been extracted.
And prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the treatment of bladder stones in men, to help you with your operation.
If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of the blood is due to the artery being incised, then you pause powder on the location and strengthen it with pills and astringents, but do not repeat this; instead, leave the stone and do not extract it, for great pain will kill the patient. Cure the wound.
When the flow of blood has subsided after several days and the wound is healed, then return to your operation once the stone has been extracted.
Chapter LXII (sixty-two)
Title: Incision on hernia of the scrotum.
Hernia aiguoza is not anything other than an addition of moisture in the white cavity (abdomen) which remains uncovered by the genital girdle containing the intestines, and it is called a hernia and named as a cavity.
Sometimes it is in the proper abdomen that nature has prepared for the intestines at their point of exit, until it becomes another intestine; and it is the girdle of the genitals between the white cavity (abdomen) which we have mentioned earlier, and not just anything.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, because this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to impact made on the genitals.
And this moisture has various colors, because it is gradually turning into yellow, red, purple, black and slimy, or white and watery, and this is what is more common.
And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is: because if it is in the white cavity (abdomen) that we have mentioned earlier, then the abscess (pustule) is rounded and gradually decreasing in length like a figure of an intestine, and the genitals are visible, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper abdomen, then the abscess (pustule) is rounded at the point of exit of the intestines and from this it is believed that it is another intestine.
And if the moisture is between the girdle of the genitals and the white cavity (abdomen), then make an incision below the navel.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should express the color of the moisture in the abscess (pustule) after it has been cut open and its form has appeared; and according to what comes out from within the abscess, judge what is inside it.
Therefore when we come to the healing of it (hernia), you must order the patient that he should be bled if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty him of his contents.
And lay something soft on his back for a short time or a while, and place some cloth under him.
And place yourself to the left of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who should extend his arm from one side to the other at the girdle of the genitals and at the point of exit of the intestines.
And take broad spatula (tongue depressor) and divide the girdle of the genitals from its middle to a distance close to the navel.
Make the incision according to the rule, with a straight edge, at a distance from the line of the hair on the genitals, until it reaches the white cavity (abdomen).
Excise it (the intestine or hernia), observe, and pay attention so that you do not incise it (hernia); and your excision with which you have excised it by the middle should be suspended in the most intestine (small intestine) as thinly and carefully examine the excision according to its quantity as possible.
And then perforate the abdomen full of water with a large perforation and extract all the water.
And then separate the two labia (lips) of the incision with stitches, and extend the abdomen at its edges; and do not touch the girdle of the genitals, and incise the abdomen in the way that is possible for you. Incise it (the intestine or hernia) completely or in pieces, and especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the intestine proceeds from outside of its girdle during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the abdomen, return it (the hernia) inside and then sew together the two labia (lips) of the genital girdle with sutures, and care for it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the intestine corrupted by another illness, then you should remove the instruments that are holding it suspended and extract the intestine, and care for it as mentioned earlier.
But if the water is accumulated in two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part as you have done in the other one; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then you should do it.
And you should stop the bleeding and go into the incisions with wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and put another wool that has been immersed in wine and oil on top of it, and spread it over two genitals and the navel; and place thin cotton cloths and powder on top of them and underneath with the following linen:
And then two cloths should be pressed and filled with woolen batting of this type; and they should be made at the edges where pressure is applied by cotton or wet wool, and attached to the waist of the undergarments. One edge should take hold of the buttock between the two, and the other at the split of the scrotum, and two edges on each side on both sides and two edges elsewhere on both sides, and the entire structure should be adjusted in the waist of the undergarments.
Here is the translation for the next sentence: "And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery at a point of incision with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautioner's knife and cut the scrotum, and ignite it as soon as the white chalk containing water has been exposed, and then you take cautioner in this way:" And it resembles Greek letters.
Then pierce the white chalk, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then stretch the white chalk with scissors, and cut it, and burn it with a fine cautery; incise it as much as possible until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is more secure and further from bleeding, and better than an operation with incision.
If you encounter an abscess during the operation of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then you must take care of the one that is harmful to you, with treatment appropriate for it according to what has been said.
If the patient is weak and does not expect a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I recommend; and it should be certain that you, according to what has been said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
You must hold the patient over some raised cushion, then pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a narrow channel and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough for all the water to run out.
Then place it on a cushion and let it rest there, to allow the remaining water to run out. And take care of it until the wound is healed.
If the problem is the expulsion of water from the wound at that time, you do not proceed with this, but rather because the white cloth in the orifice of the wound prevents and prohibits the emission of water, it is necessary to place a pen or instrument in the wound from which the water can be extracted, the shape of which is described; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small one.
And know that the water returns, and it is collected approximately two months or even more; and when it has been collected, you should pierce it according to the method described earlier, because the patient will then pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
On incision of fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this hernia there is fear of losing it to danger in the greatest preparations; because I consider its release and being saved by the better method.
And I remember the operation in that case and the properties of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses arise in the bodies where the genitals are composed and this is done for various reasons: either from acute bitter excess, which is absorbed into the genitals, or from injury.
And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body, and it is not found in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A flat abscess is hardened, the color of which is dark, and it does not open up.
Sometimes it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by inflammation of those, as its memory has been perceived earlier, or by inflammation of veins.
But what is caused by the inflammation of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not have to be touched.
But what is caused by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed by any cause due to pressure with your fingers.
And it is possible that incision can be made on this type and on other flesh; and it is that you cut the scrotum, and place oil at the openings above, and extract that from the white chalk, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and cut the suspensory one that you remove from all the openings of the oil.
Therefore, if the oil has been consolidated with those fleshy parts, you must remove the oil and incise it.
If there is adhesion for any reason to the white chalk or between vessels, you must remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is native flesh at the site of the adhesion that is behind it, you must incise everything that is of it, and extract the oil as has been said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in warm oil and vinegar; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
It seems that this text might be part of a medical manuscript, possibly from the Middle Ages, based on its language and the topic of the texts provided. However, without additional context or information about the original manuscript, it's impossible to accurately identify the specific work this text is from. The text appears to be discussing treatments for various medical conditions such as gout and hernias, and providing instructions for surgeries and wound care.
This sentence appears to be part of the same text as the previous sentences, possibly continuing a discussion about medical treatments. It translates to: "On the treatment of hernia." It seems that this manuscript is discussing various medical conditions and their corresponding treatments in medieval times. The use of Latin-like language suggests a European origin for the text. However, without more context or information about the original manuscript, it's difficult to provide a precise translation of this sentence alone.
The patient has an abscess enclosed by some membrane resembling scrotum with testicular softening, and it makes exercise and walking difficult for the patient. This sentence continues the discussion of medical conditions and their symptoms in the text. It translates to: "The patient has an abscess enveloped by some membrane resembling scrotum with testicular softening, which makes exercise and walking difficult for the patient."
And in the treatment of this illness, it is done with caution due to the fear associated with it. This sentence seems to continue discussing the treatment of the medical condition mentioned earlier. It translates to: "And in the treatment of this illness, it is performed with caution due to the fear associated with it."
However, we must first perform the operation as described earlier. This sentence suggests that the author of this text is providing instructions for a specific surgical procedure or treatment. It translates to: "However, we must first perform the operation as described earlier." Without more context or information about the original manuscript, it's difficult to accurately identify the specific work this text is from.
I say that you must cut the patient on an elevated couch; and then loosen the suspenders of the testicles at the sides; and then tie the lower part of the genitals with cords that are known to be effective at the anus; and have another servant hold them apart, extending them violently.
Then make an incision with a sharp instrument along the vein until the vessels are exposed.
Then remove all the fatty tissue from that side as I said in the extraction of the arcerectasis, which are located in the temple.
Then insert a double-pointed needle into that area and let it go in at the first of the places where you found the abscess, and let the other end be seen on the other side. Then make an incision in the middle along a straight line according to the length of the body, and remove what has been added due to putrid and corrupted fluids.
Then treat the wound with other treatments to ensure that the blood vessels are not damaged, as it is not harmful for one of the testicles to be removed.
However, if the testicles are involved in all cases, you must remove or damage the testicles along with the vessels to cut off all nutrition and stop their function, as they are not beneficial for that patient.
This suggests that the previous section of text ended with a chapter, and this is the beginning of another chapter in the manuscript or document. The numbering system is common in many medieval texts to help organize and reference the information. Without more context or information about the original manuscript, it's difficult to accurately identify the specific work this text is from. However, based on the language and topic, it appears to be a medieval medical treatise discussing various medical conditions and their corresponding treatments.
On the care of intestinal hernia.
The onset of this hernia is by a section that penetrates into the abdomen from the sides of the abdominal muscles due to which the intestines protrude through the rupture of one or more of the intestinal sacs.
This rupture can be due to the cephalic or the external part of it, and such a thing can happen in two ways for various reasons: by blows, by falls, by shouts, by an elevation caused by some grave condition, or something similar.
The sign of such (rupture), when it is due to the cephalic, is that it happens gradually over a long time, not suddenly, and it is an abscess formed around the hernia because the cephalic compresses the intestine.
The sign of such (rupture), when it is due to the section of the cephalic, is that at the beginning it causes a strong sudden pain; and the abscess appears in various places other than the natural opening, which is indeed the intestine itself, and the body swells in the parts outside the cephalic.
And in some cases the intestine is forgotten and this hernia is called strangulated intestinal hernia, zirbal.
And in some cases it is done with the windbag (enema), and in some cases the intestine tears, and it remains, and this is a very serious danger to the patient, and in some cases it causes bad and worsening pain especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease, fear arises, so that care should be taken to avoid hunting in such a case.
The method of the operation for such is to command the patient to return the intestine with his own hands inside its cavity, if he can, and to place a bandage over it on its backside, and raise the legs upwards.
Place a bandage that cuts the opening of the scrotum in half, and cut through the scrotum completely from top to bottom; and insert two fingers into the incision as needed to divide the incision with them.
If the incision is made according to the amount that you can possibly forget about that (the intestine).
Place the hernia sac outside the scrotum until the white hard cephalic is found in each part.
You insert your finger into the hernia sac that is between the white cephalic and the testicle, and separate the cephalic according to its position, and free it from any adhesion that is in the back of the hernia sac.
Place your hand on the scrotum in each part, and with that extend the white cephalic in each place with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the cephalic to the incision site; and command the assistant to stretch the hernia sac and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with complete solution.
Search for any cause of the intestine being enveloped in the white hard cephalic. If you find such a cause, then remove it from the abdomen.
Place an incision in the back of the scrotum according to the section that flows blood and pus as we have recommended in what has been said.
Place a linen bandage soaked in oil and wait on the wound; and administer the binding that we have recommended (and sometimes the white cephalic is cauterized, which has been mentioned to prevent blood flow, as this often happens), and leave the binding until it falls off by itself.
If hunting is delayed, soak the wound in hot water and wait on it until it falls off as we have said.
Care for the wound with the other care of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
On hernia ventosa (windbag).
In this hernia, no one has been seen to be cured by surgery.
At first they said that the hernia due to water should be treated thus as we have recommended in hernia with urine; which is to tie the vessels near the incision with ease; and to cut in the middle where the abscess is formed around it, until the vessels fall off.
Tend to the wound according to what has been said until it heals.
Chapter 77.
Of the incision made in the ankles.
Some frequent occurrences involve rupture in the ankles as we said before, and moreover...
And do not allow the causes of hernias to reach the genitals; and if they do, it is rare; and always return them to their place.
But if it lasts for a long time, a slit is made in the scrotum before the hernia enters the scrotum; this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum which is in the ankles as we said before, and this condition arises because the scrotum is extended, softened, and becomes inflamed and swollen.
And the treatment for this is with cautery, as I will now explain.
And sometimes the treatment is performed by iron in this manner: and the patient lies on their back with their legs held apart, and the affected area of the hernia inflammation is dried out using linen cloths soaked in wine or vinegar, and then a small incision is made over the swelling with a knife according to the size of three fingers.
And apply a white linen cloth underneath the scrotum until it is exposed.
And take the rod and place it over the prominent part of the scrotum and press it against the lower abdomen.
And apply sutures to the two prominent areas at the end of the scrotum using a thread.
And remove the end of the rod completely, and do not cut into the scrotum or extend the incision any further, nor cause any other damage as you know in treating an internal hernia.
And treat that with the treatment of abscesses, and when you make the incision, cleanse it and restore the abscess to its original state until it is healed; for the scrotum contracts and the prominence of rupture is not corrected.
And cautery is better in this location, as it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
In certain men, the scrotum of the testicles becomes softened because the flesh between it is softened, and its treatment should be given attention to.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one treating the condition to make the patient lie on his side, and completely separate the scrotum that has become softened from the natural scrotum; and then sew together two lips with stitches.
And if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and secure a firm stitch.
Then close the incision between the stitches, and care for other afflictions until they are healed and the pain subsides.
Chapter 69.
On castration.
Know that castration is prohibited by our law, but for the sake of my memory I recall it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except in two ways: one because the doctor who is asked about it knows its treatment if it occurs; and the other way is that we often have need for castration of other animals for the benefit of our use, such as with horses, cattle, pigs, and similar animals.
And so I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision and sectioning.
But in the method of strangulation, the procedure is to seize the animal by its tail before its testicles are softened and lined up. Then hold them with your hand until they become resolved and do not appear again.
But in castration by incision and sectioning, it is necessary that you have the animal and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the spermatic cord and make an incision over each vessel to a depth of two fingers.
And make an incision in any pus that you may have to drain it. Do not leave any cause for the abscess, but only the fine one that is on the veins.
This method of castration is better when performed by strangulation because strangulation quickly eliminates any cause for the testicles to desire coit.
Care for the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two ways: one is when a gap appears in the scrotum between the testicles, and within it there is a conch-like formation that resembles female genitals with hairs.
And certain cases of a hernia in which urine collects in the scrotum.
In women, there is a special case: and it is that the conch of a woman on the pelvis is similar to two testicles of a man with only a small part protruding from the vaginal opening like male genitals and two testicles.
The treatment is in three types: for one type of men and for one type of women. It is necessary to make an incision and drain the inflammation of that area until the condition improves, and then care for it with other treatments.
In the second type of male ailment where urine is in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation on it.
Capitulo xxi. (in English: Chapter XXI)
Of prolonged and prominent flesh due to female causes.
Prolonged swelling due to natural causes is reduced and properly treated with the right regimen, but sometimes it becomes exacerbated in certain women so much that it spreads like in men and reaches the vagina.
Therefore, you should remove the excess swelling with your hand or oil and incise it.
And do not continue incising, especially at the root of the lesion, to avoid bleeding.
And take care of that wound until it heals.
Flesh born is flesh that grows within the womb of a woman until it fills it up, and prolonged swelling is like this (and for this reason some people call it caudated disease); therefore we incise it as we would an abscess, and treat it until it heals.
Capitolo LXXII. (in English: Chapter LXXII)
Of the treatment of arthritis.
Arthritis is a condition where the cervix does not open or it is narrow. It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has occurred before, and it is caused either by swelling of the flesh not properly reduced or by cysts that are subtle or large.
It is caused either in the root of the uterus or in its costae (or sides), or on the superficial pus or deep pus, and it forbids coitus, engagement, and conception, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
The recognition of this condition is made by the midwife if the opening is visible, but if it is not, you must seek for it with fingers or with a rod.
If the opening is due to a subtle cyst that is close to the two labiae, you must break it and separate it.
This means that you place your fingers between the two labiae, and indicate with both hands in which direction to proceed.
The woman lies on her back with her legs extended and you spread the two labiae apart with force until that subtle cyst is broken and the opening is opened up.
Take wool, dip it in oil and place it over the area, and leave it for a day to ensure that the incision site does not become consolidated.
But if the cyst is large and thick, you must incise it with a spatula or a leaf of myrtle.
But if the opening is due to fibrosis, you must suspend it with oil and incise it.
And use the medications that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as henbane, dragon's blood, and poppy seeds, mixed with albumen of egg whites.
And administer a wide lead cannula to ensure that the wound does not heal easily.
Keep it for several days and administer hot water poultices.
And let it be cured by other methods of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes the uterus expels other fleshy substances during childbirth, and it is necessary to incise them according to this method. But if it is an abscess containing cancerous matter in the uterus, do not apply iron to it in any way.
Capitolo LXXIII. (in English: Chapter LXXIII)
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail (prolapsed rectum) and red botch that may occur in the cervix of women.
Hemorrhoids are recognized in the openings of large veins where blood continues to flow from them; and chronic hemorrhoids should be treated as thrombosed hemorrhoids (?).
I have already mentioned in the division the species of these [conditions] and their signs, and I will say thus those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
And now I will tell you about those that are internal in the mother's womb and do not appear to the senses, therefore there should be no treatment done with iron for them.
But those that are in the openings of the mother's womb, where you can touch them, are those that are cured.
And it is necessary that you put the woman into warm water and apply mustard oil or linen cloth with sharp scissors or rough wool and cut them with the blade of the scissors.
And apply powder on them made from the blood of one of the incisive teeth with a mortar and pestle, such as arnica and similar [plants].
Then wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and then place it in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make a decoction of camomile, wormwood, milkwort, and yarrow, and similar [plants].
Then take barley flour mixed with honey and wine, and make an ointment of it to be applied on the thighs.
And if the bleeding is separated, that is good; otherwise, make it adhere with two bandages, and to the breasts with scarification.
And take wool and dip it in the juice of coltsfoot or comfrey or goldenrod wine, and apply it to the place; and cure the place with a mouth rinse until it is healed.
And heal that place until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Chapter on the perforation of accidental hernia in the mother.
Types of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as cancer, tooth abscess, ulcers, boils, carbuncles, erysipelas, fistulas, anal fissures and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases, their types, and their signs, as well as their cures, in the previous section.
And in this treatise I will talk about the cauterization of an abscess in the mother that is associated with a healthy abscess and if you want to know how to perform the operation on it with iron.
Therefore, you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with a blow and fever and swelling, and if it does not show signs of worsening, then do not perform perforation of it; instead, heal it with liquids that help in maturation until the symptoms subside.
Then you must perform the incision on a woman lying on a table with two legs, and lower her back, place her feet at the edge of the table far from the abdomen, spread her thighs apart, and place her arms on either side of her neck, and each one should be bound to what is appropriate.
And after the mother follow the right side and provide the instruments necessary to open the opening of the womb; the shape of which will come in those cases that are appropriate.
And when you want to use this instrument, you must position it at the opening of the womb on the woman, and nothing that comes out from the instrument into the womb should be more than the opening of the womb itself and the hand of the sick person. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place powder on the texture of the opening of the womb so that no instrument can enter into the opening of the womb.
And you must stop the flow of fluid that flows out from the instrument on top and the one who provides the instrument should turn it until it is inserted into the opening of the womb.
And when the incision is made and it is touched with the hand and moistened, then you must cauterize its head with a hot iron rod.
And when the discharge is evacuated, then you must apply a plaster immersed in rose oil or other ointment containing some herbs on the incision in the womb and hold the cloth over the opening of the womb.
And then close the woman's belly with clean wool immersed in water boiled with herbs.
Then let it be treated for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is healed.
Some intervals are washed (the anus and the wound) with water and honey, and then with water in which is crushed a rational amount of licorice root or long-acting oil, and then returned to the enema.
And if the wound is inside the anus and swollen, then it is necessary for you to abstain from treatment with iron, having care from what has been said in the previous section.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner the afterbirth should be medicated when it is born abnormally according to its figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the beginning the figure of normal delivery by signs from it, and when you see the woman push at the birth and desire to smell the air, and it is scraped off by what is above her in delivery, and she quickly delivers the afterbirth, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and its appearance on its head, and the second one with or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the abdomen of it be compressed so that the afterbirth descends gently because if they descend on their head, the second one will descend with it, and it should be cleaned with good cleansing.
But if the afterbirth is abnormal and unnatural because when it is born on its feet and the body of it is born before its head and its feet, and one hand (or foot), or the head of it and one hand (or foot) is born, or in the abdomen of it, and it is forcibly turned over its neck, and similar to the unnatural figures of it.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And I will show you the entire figure of it, and what method is in it for it to be understood and remain on that.
When the effluxion (of afterbirth) is born on its head by natural expulsion, and it is violent towards the woman and difficult to deliver, and sometimes the strength of it has already weakened, then do the scissors, or what the women have, and evaporate the congealed blood from it with fenugreek oil.
And the midwife enters between her teeth a small spatula and cuts through the second one (afterbirth), or dries it with her nail up to where the moisture in it runs out. And press the woman's abdomen until it descends the afterbirth.
But if it does not descend, then the woman must be washed with the mucus of chicken and mucus of fenugreek with a razor.
And command it to be compressed, washed, and made to vomit with a mixture of the following; then put your mouth on it and its nose for an hour because the afterbirth will quickly pass through.
And if the two ends of the afterbirth are quickly forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them with gradual ease. But if the instrument does not enter, then the woman should rest on a chair and raise her legs, and the chair should be moved over the ground; and the woman should be held so as not to fall too hard.
And if the ends are not turned inside out and the afterbirth dies, then you incise them and extract the rotten part of the afterbirth or pull the body to the hand with cloth and extract it equally, because that will quickly pass through.
When the afterbirth is born on its feet, then it is necessary for you to press them upwards, and turn the afterbirth into a small ball, and hold it together, and take one foot of it and stretch it gradually.
When he is inside the thighs, command him to express himself and make him turn around with a condition, because it will be forgotten if God wishes.
If it is not forgotten as we have recommended, then you return the little thing bit by bit inside that second figure naturally, because it will be forgotten with slight effort.
If everything we have recommended is prohibited, then take alum and dissolved gum, and grind them well in a mortar with good percussion, and apply the paste to the woman's lower abdomen. Then mix that paste in tepid water until the hypogastric hernia is reached.
And when the parts around it are relaxed, then subject him to a fumigation of myrtle and make him rest in that position. And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then make him vomit by mixing the paste on a tray and making him strain his mouth, removing it, and pressing gently on the lower part of the abdomen with slight compression, because the matter will soon be forgotten.
Immediately hold onto the matter longitudinally with one of his hands. Try to reduce the hand of him, but if you cannot do so, then raise the woman and make her run.
And if she cannot run, then make her lie down on the bed and hit the joints of him with vigorous percussion and promptly administer the remedies that I have recommended for lubricants.
If the birth has begun, then make her vomit on a tray and study the reduction of the hand, and insert it according to its natural figure, and make her strain and command him to contract himself until it is forgotten.
Immediately place the matter on his neck, with the opening of him at his mother's chest. Make sure that the midwife holds the hand of him and gently rotate it little by little with ease.
And when it is rotated and rotated, then pause on the cervix of him with the oil and lubricants that we have recommended.
And command him to push little by little and when you have done so, make her vomit on a tray and command her to lean over the right side, and command him to contract himself; and make her strain with a condition. The fetus is prepared on the right side.
When the mother is having labor in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second membrane with your nail up to the point of being drained of its moisture.
And if the fetus is hanging on the face and neck of him, incise the umbilical cord to ensure it does not remain and die.
And press the fetus gently into the rectum up to the point that it comes out and command the woman to contract herself, and it will be forgotten with slight ease if God wishes.
Birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are usually born in labor, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and unfortunate; however, it is due to nature, not human action.
And separate the second membrane, whether it is multiple or not, using scissors, and distinguish each fetus by cutting its umbilical cord. Sometimes they are forgotten as if they were a single birth due to natural ease, but sometimes they are born unacceptably as we have recommended.
If a difficult case arises for them, you must sedate them and eventually reach the point that was previously described in terms of abnormalities. At this point, you should treat them as we have advised.
The subtle and smooth midwife does what is needed for ease, subtlety, and delay, and is clever according to every figure prepared by the art of healing.
Remembering that which forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
There are certain days that occur at the end of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and sometimes even more, and it is necessary to check that a woman has given birth after twenty-five or thirty weeks, which was caused by measurement of the wise.
All this indicates that the midwife should be aware that similar cases may appear and act accordingly.
Chapter LXXVI (76 in Roman numerals).
On extracting a dead fetus.
When treating a dead fetus as mentioned in the division of medicine and it has not been expelled yet, you must determine if the woman is of good moral character and not subject to any accidents that are feared for her safety.
The woman should be positioned lying on her left side, and her head should be tilted downward, with her hips raised.
The assistant should hold the woman's legs together or tie them to her left side, so that the body does not extend during the removal of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with warm oil and honey, aloe vera, fennel seed, and herbs.
Then lubricate the midwife's hands with those oils and emollients, insert her hand with ease into the woman, and position herself at the location where she will grip the fetus.
Choose the appropriate location: therefore you must consider if the fetus is prepared to be extracted from its head or another part. In such a case, grasp it by the heels, neck, mouth, palate, beard, shoulder blades, ribs, or hips, or near the loins.
However, if the fetus is positioned feet-first, grab it by the heels or middle of the back.
The hand should grip the fetus with the fingers, maintaining the curvature at the point between the mentioned fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently to reach one of the locations mentioned earlier until the cause is achieved.
Then stop and position another hand on the fetus, or a third if necessary, to ensure that it is pulled inwards rather than extended along its length.
The pain should be eased everywhere, so that its intensity is reduced just as it is done in tooth extraction by removing it.
Cover it with something soft, so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary to have the midwife anoint some oil on her fingers and insert them skillfully into that area and turn what is retained.
If the delivery is forgotten (mistakenly left incomplete), then the midwife's fingernails should be trimmed and inserted into the place that is deeper inside, doing this until everything is expelled.
But if the hand is out of position and cannot be reduced by manipulation, then fabricate a bandage around it; and extract it slowly until everything is expelled, either at the joint of the hand or in the pelvis.
And do the same to the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large or it occurs that the head is compressed in the birth canal, or the water sac of the fetus is not properly positioned, then insert between the two spine-like objects and split the head and extract the water, or cut it with an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will be described in the chapter that follows.
Do the same if the fetus naturally has a large head: and then insert a hook or catch it with an alundat as previously mentioned, and extract the bones using forceps.
If the head is out and compressed by the pelvis, then it should be cut open so that the moisture within the pelvis can drain.
But if there are no complications or excessive swelling of the cervix, you should insert the head as soon as it is possible for you.
If the abdomen is protruding or there is edema in it, then you should perform a perforation to drain the moisture that is inside.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the attraction and direction of it to the mouth of the mother should be light.
But if it is compressed in the abdomen and pelvis, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and pelvis so that moisture that is inside can drain.
If other limbs remain and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is blocked, she should insert her hand into the perineum, seek the head with it, pull it towards the mouth of the mother, and insert one or two fingers, pulling it with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is blocked by an edema that occurs at the urethra, do not force it too much; instead, you should administer a moist, oily solution. Apply plasters; and continue to care for the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on the patient's side, attempt to insert it as much as possible if feasible; and administer the solution previously mentioned for a live fetus.
If that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
You must not leave any cause of the second one (infection).
When you have completed your work, then administer the solution previously mentioned for the treatment of postpartum infections that occur in the mother.
If there is bleeding, then stop it with styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
I have seen a woman whose stomach contained a dead fetus, and on top of that fire, another observation was made, and the fetus was already dead. There has been an edema in the patient's belly for a long time; it has swollen so much that it is now producing pus.
I was called to treat him and have been treating him for a long time, but the wound has not healed.
Then I applied strong adhesive plasters to him, and extracted an object that was believed to be a bone, but after several days another bone was extracted; I was astonished because there were no bones in the abdomen.
And then I thought they might have been from the dead fetus's bones.
So I cauterized the wound and extracted many small bones, the woman continued to live in this manner for a long time, but developed a small fracture in one arm.
I did not think it was strange because in such cases knowledge and skill with the hand are useful to treat this.
On the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
The shape of a loop used to open the mother's cervix:
This is the shape of a clamp used to hold the forceps, with two prongs at the ends of two rods. This virtue must be very subtle and made of strictor or from poppy seed or from the root of birch tree.
Let the length of each rod be two fingers and the width of both be one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of two rods there should be two adjustments of that rod which are already firm, the length of which is equal to the width of one palm and slightly more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
These two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth to keep it open when you apply the prescribed virtues.
Make another substance similar to that, but slightly heavier:
Make it with rods of poppy seed or birch root as with forceps. However, on the end of it (the rod), there should be two adjustments similar to this, and the length of those adjustments is equal to one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
When you want to open the mother, first lay the woman on a bed with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. Then insert your hand with the instrument similar to forceps as you would with tongs, according to the depth that you assess based on the size of the mother's mouth and the amount that the cervix dilates.
The ancient remedy that I will tell you about:
A remedy to induce labor:
Remedy for the elimination of a large head:
It is similar to forceps at the end, as sometimes, and some of the times it is made long like forceps according to this shape, as sometimes, at the end of which are inserted and crushed like teeth of a saw with which it is cut and broken. Remedy for reducing excess fluid:
Remedy for pulling out a splinter:
Remedy for removing two splinters:
Form of forceps having two prongs with the head being cut off:
Form of two spatulas flat:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more of that kind are multiplied and the species prepared, the craftsmen should make it as light in operation and as small in quantity as possible for men.
And the works of those instruments must be carried out, regardless of whether they are small or large, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
On the extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is retained, the child must be commanded to hold its breath, and then you must make it sneeze with care, and place your hand over its mouth and nose, and if by doing so it has escaped, that is good.
If not, then you take a potion and perforate the covering with a hole and place it over the mother's mouth so that the herbs penetrate the mouth calmly, roughly, aniseed, camomile, arabic gum, cassia bark, and sweet woodruff. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the potion, and it is placed over the fire.
And place a tube of cane in the mother's mouth, and let it remain until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And make it sneeze as we have said, and the second tooth will be expelled quickly.
But if the treatment persists and the second tooth does not come out, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sesame or in alum powder, and insert it into the cavity with care so that the second tooth is found, and when it has been found, take it out bit by bit but carefully so that the mother does not strain herself excessively. It must be immobilized on the right and left sides with ease.
If the mother's mouth is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and the potion of water with herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself in attempting to extract it repeatedly, but rather let what comes out of her mouth lie in the female's cavity and anoint it with saliva and tetraformication; for it will become soft and dissolved in a few days and be expelled.
But when it becomes soft, raise the bad humors to the head and stomach, and let the patient suffer from this; then it is necessary to administer sub-fumigation and suitable remedies.
But one of the ancients has already spoken about fumigation with garlic and dried figs.
Form of instrument for female fumigation to retain menstruation and the second tooth:
Made of iron or clay.
And the thin end should be placed in the cavity and the wide end on the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And let it remain until that fumigation is consumed and another is prepared.
Treatment for the unborn child's anus:
Newborn children and unperforated anuses, which are soft and oily. Then the midwife should perforate it with the tool mentioned above; if not, then perforate it with a sharp spatula and be careful not to touch the intestines.
And place a wool soaked in wine and oil on it, and anoint it with saliva until it is healed.
But if you fear that it is oily, place a tube in the hole for several days and stop it when the child wants to defecate.
And occlusion of the anus occurs due to ulcers or abscesses; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation and treat it with what we have said about the cure and lead.
Treatment for fistulas that run downwards.
Fistulas that run downward in the lower part are nodular and swollen, which run towards the anus outside or in the space of one partition.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that nodule is old and runs with foul, white, or putrid discharge, some abscesses of this type may perforate.
Those penetrations are recognized by what is exuded from them through discharge and wind; sometimes the patient experiences discharge, and the worm is often strong in those cases.
Sometimes those fistulas can be observed penetrating into the bladder space and into the meat of the penis, and sometimes they penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the navel.
Fistula penetrating into the anus but not outside is known as when you insert your finger in the anus and try to find the fistula with a subtle probe or iron, if it is not treacherous.
But if there is treachery in that, then insert a probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
If you do not feel it at all or you do not find any cause for discharge, worms, or wind as mentioned above, then you should know that it is not penetrating and you can proceed with treatment.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the penis meat, its meaning is evidently that it is of urine and it is forbidden to use that place with medicine until the area has been consolidated.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the hip or bone and pain is encountered in the area, this signifies that if the probe can enter the bone without treachery, pain will be felt in the surrounding area; that pus forms quickly; and that no medication works there, nor does it heal with salve.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for them all, and the cure of these is the labor and futility of foolish doctors over which they are obsessed.
But in the one that is not penetrating and is not old, healing with iron is hoped for as I will recommend to you, and what I have already proven.
It is that the patient lies between your hands over his chest and raises his legs upwards, so that the thighs are inclined towards his stomach, and then insert a probe of lead or iron (if the fistula is not treacherous) to find its location.
If the patient feels pain around the neck, then you should insert your finger in his neck.
If you feel the probe penetrating by itself, or if you feel it between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; therefore do not work on it, for there is no healing in it as mentioned above.
But some still say that it heals in certain men.
The medicine that is hoped to help in this case is that you ignite a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned earlier, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then you rotate it two or three times until you know that all the tissues adjacent to the fistula, similar to goose feathers, have been tightened.
Wrap it with bandages until all the tissues that have been tightened can be seen, and treat it with a medication to nourish and consolidate the flesh, and if it heals, that is good; otherwise, it is not cured in a certain amount of time by another treatment.
If the probe is inside and does not penetrate your finger in the anus, but there is a tissue or flesh covered by it, and sometimes the fistula appears to be covered by the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula and you will see that the skin dries with the probe, and continue until the incision reaches the location where the end of the probe emerges, and through the probe it is freed and caught.
Wash those fistulous tissues which are similar to goose feathers and remain without any cause.
But if blood flow sometimes comes out between you and your action when incising those tissues, then the remedy is to apply milk or a mild instrument for cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, as cauterization with fire provides good healing: it consolidates those tightened tissues and abscesses the excess bleeding of fluids.
Wrap it with bandages or splints until the place heals, and treat the wound with hard salve to nourish and consolidate it.
These are medications with astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it has been healed and there will be no recurrence.
But if the fistula has penetrated the rectum of the anus and is elongated on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
And thus if the probe and you are close to flesh or tissue, and it is almost penetrating, then there is no operation in that place but rather by trust and hope.
The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as mentioned before; or make an incision until you achieve the cavity so that it becomes possible for you to enter and treat it directly; do not proceed with incision for fear of piercing the rectum and causing harm directly to the patient, and instead treat it with what has been said as it is a strong healer; or elongate the membrane or remove the pus that is incised near the anus, as mentioned before, or with the probe or another sharp instrument, and then clean those fistulous tissues which are in the incision, and finally force yourself to heal the entire wound by continuing to incise it, and if the abscess pus does not consolidate above the anus, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, it will be more easily irritated by the patient. And at some times the fistula is closed according to this method: it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, and at the edge of the anus around the body's surface with a cord, and at the margin of the anus, then take a probe of perforating extremity, which is thus like a needle for preparing wounds in this manner:
And insert a probe into it, surrounded by five threads or around the threads; then insert the probe into the fistula until it achieves its cavity.
But if you penetrate the edge of the anus deeply, then you draw out the thread from that hole as you insert your finger into the anus; extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends, tighten each one, let it be for a day or two, and when the thread sinks more into the flesh, tighten it further until those flesh parts which are between the two ends of the thread and fall into place.
Then care for the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, make them penetrate, using any method you prefer, but do not cause pain, because it is not your job to do this so that they do not become inflamed; then let it heal until it is healed.
The way to use a spined spatula for closing the fistula: its curved part is sharp and the other part is not, so that it does not penetrate unnecessarily, as sometimes happens.
The stitching of hemorrhoids where blood flows from the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, either like coal near the anus, or as if they were filled with grease from radishes. And they can be small and large, and blood flows from them constantly, and they are one kind, and they are multiple, and they extend outside the anus, and at their ends.
But those that extend outside the anus are in months with little moisture, which discharge clear water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and their color is according to the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to expel until the anus becomes dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut and suspend them with scissors or what you have available, using your nail, and then cauterize the roots of those.
But if scissors are not available for those due to their moisture and softening of those, then take them with rough cloth or leather or woolen cloth, extract those with your fingers, and then cauterize those and sprinkle some caustic powders near the incision on them, so that they are in place of cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization. And care for those with other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not open, you crush the patient with a crutch with slight biting, and wash it with the water that is in the anus and causes the anus to open slightly when the patient squeezes it gently.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, the cause of them is light, and you grasp those with your nail, or you grasp those with scissors, penetrate those, and then care for them with the water that has been mentioned until they are healed.
And for those who have incisions, you should provide suturing of them according to this method: take a probe wrapped in thread and insert it with a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper part, and make the probe penetrate into the side of the other part with the needle, and wrap the two ends of the probe longitudinally around the part below the needle, and tie the hemorrhoid strongly, and knot the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one and not sewing it, so that the excess blood can flow from there.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the anus and let it rest there, and let it rest on the anus and command the patient to rest. And leave that one inside until it heals; and when it is healed, care for those with enemas or other treatment until they are healed.
And since they are old and of little value in that medicine, you should then cauterize those with the point of a spatula or your nail until they become wet and are stopped from healing upwards, which prevents them from consolidating; and care for those until they are consolidated.
Then you dry those with a very strong reason before the first blood flows and they are scorched; and care for those until they are healed.
Know that the pulse, which is crucial, should not be felt incorrectly, as it may not appear as a round one according to the color of the body similar to a clavicle head, and it is felt throughout the body but more so in the areas below the feet and the hands, and for these pains, it must be sought out.
And therefore, it is necessary to cut what is in the circle of the nail and keep it with forceps or oil, and remove it from its root; then heal that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the following which is mentioned in its own chapter.
Moreover, a wart is a small rough, round fistula on the surface of the body, and it often appears in children's fingers.
The treatment is to stretch and incise it, or compress it with a hot iron or a wool thread that can be bound around it. And if you wish, cauterize that as mentioned earlier, with fire or sharp medicine.
Moreover, a scab is a small or large rough fistula on the surface of the body that moves on the skin and when touched it turns into a pustule similar to an ant bite, and it grows around the body.
The treatment is to use a lancet or a needle with a sharp tip, and press it over the pus-filled blister to contain its circle around the area; then rotate your hand with the lancet inside to incise what is in the circle of the scab, and press it on the skin, and remove the scab from its root.
And if you wish, do that with an iron or steel needle in this manner:
The portion above the needle should be drawn out gently, blunt (not pierced), wrapped in such a way that upon pressing it, the pain of that area is alleviated and its rotation is reduced.
And if you wish to cauterize the scab as mentioned earlier in the cauterization of athlete's foot, do so following the instructions given there.
Concerning the instruments that are administered for healing purposes.
Sometimes the instrument is made of silver or lead or iron melted or hammered; and sometimes it is made of small and large instruments according to their purpose, for the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and those with rough or painful tails, the craters of these should be small.
The form of a large and shallow crater:
The head of the needle above, where the pouch is attached, should be wide according to this method; and it should have a distinction where the pouch is attached in such a way as sometimes.
And the extremity of the pus below, which is inserted into the tail, should be blunt (not pierced) and thin, extending to subtlety; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the hole should correspond to the thickness of the rays and a large pus a small hole.
And the pouch in which the medications of animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed should be one palm wide.
And it should be perforated in such a way that it can be rolled up; and if the space between the holes is too large, make it smaller with your finger.
Then insert yourself into those true strong cuts, fierce and cruel of the same kind, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is stopped there, tighten the head of the plaster between two distinguishable points with strong compression, and cauterize that wound: But the quality of cauterizing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the patient's tolerance; and ensure that it is not too hot nor too cold.
The patient should be positioned on their back, and raise their legs upwards and place a cushion or a blanket under them; then oil, lard, alum of hog or juice of fennel or similar substances are applied to the wound opening, and it is inserted gently into the anus with ease, and the attendant should take the bag and press it firmly and repeatedly until everything in the cautery is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cautery and the patient lowers their legs to the wall.
If the medicine is not sufficient for that purpose, take more of it; and if it persists in the wound for an entire night, it is less beneficial.
But if you cauterize it in the cases of belly solutions and evacuation of the wound, then you repeat the cautery until it is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a fine and thin cautery, with which children are cauterized.
On treatments for sores.
I have already said in the division of treatments for sores what is appropriate for a free person, and I say the treatment of those with more and with medicines according to their completeness.
Therefore, I say that sores are differentiated according to what causes them and according to the place on which they fall.
And the various causes by which sores are often formed are such as falling stones, or incisions of a sword or dagger, or striking with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to these.
But the sores that are in the parts of the body are such as a sore that falls on the head, neck, foot, stomach, or buttocks, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the treatment for some sores based on this reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I begin with the simple sores of the head, as the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, I say that when a simple sore occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by falling stones or something similar, and the wound has already been stitched with the chain but is large and you fear the patient will develop an abscess, then immediately lance the cephalic vein and do not delay; and remove the pus from it according to the strength of the blood if there is no other reason prohibiting lancing, especially if the blood that has come out of the sore is little.
And the lancing should be on the opposite side of the affected part; and ensure that the patient does not eat or drink, or thick food.
But if there is any reason for the lancing to be prohibited, then it should be reduced by food and do not approach meat or wine.
Stop the sore if an abscess develops on it, and apply a hot oil or wine in which is steeped an herb that stops inflammation to it.
But if you are sure of the abscess, stop the sore, if it is fresh with its blood and air has not yet changed the powder that I recommend should be applied carefully.
And if the air has already changed it, stop the wound with some soothing agents until it is healed.
But if the sore is large or from an incision of a sword or similar, and the lips are not properly closed, then close it with suture as I recommend for their closure.
But if the sore is open to the bone and there is only a small suspension and no retention of it, then make an incision on it and treat the sore with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are coarse: meats and broths similar to them, until it is healed.
And if the skin turns rotten and does not adhere to the bone, then make an incision all around it and cut everything out, and treat that.
But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow out and has not been separated by medicines, then ask about the artery, and if it is not separated, make a puncture on it with a spatula or lance it; and if necessity forces you to do what I have said does not conform, then cauterize it until the blood is separated.
And if these sores are simple and small, the cause is minor; therefore, sprinkle this powder on them as it hardens before the air changes it.
The method of the powder is as follows: mix one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood (dragon's blood sap), three parts of non-extinguished charcoal; all must be well ground and sieved, fill the wound with it, tightly bind it with good binding until it adheres, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then tightly bind it above with the powder and release it, but do not loosen it until it is healed, for the medicine has not been absorbed into it until it is healed.
Sometimes just make cautery (burn), when you do not have olive oil and dragon's blood sap at hand.
This method of treatment is done for large wounds that require binding and tightening when necessary, and for new wounds with their own blood, where the air has not yet affected them.
If the air has altered it, and especially in summertime, then do not intend to place this powder, but rather treat them with what was mentioned before, so that you bind them with appropriate dressings or that you bind them with oat flour paste mixed with water and honey until they become granulated; and apply the other treatment to them until they are healed.
But if there is a bone fracture in the wound, and it is small, then you extract that with forceps.
And you will say the treatment for skull fractures that are poisonous.
For wounds on the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is like a simple skull wound.
But if the nerve or artery in the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, do not hesitate to cure it with what causes violent coagulation, such as zinjabar and zegi that is like them because they harm nerves and constrict it. And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and its continuity is with the brain, which is the root of all members.
And if there is something that is cured with light medicines such as being washed with soft water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and therefore when it is washed with soft water and the other remedies are minimized according to this method, and keep it moist.
But if the wound is large, administer suture or sew the lips of it, and apply powder to it until it is healed.
But if there is depth in the wound or it is located in the lower part of the flesh, you perforate it in the most depressed area.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
But if the spondylus of the gulayro (vertebra) has been cut or saved, and the veins in the neck are protected, then you adjust the lips of the coccyx with suture on the axis of the gulayro and do not touch it; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with appropriate structure, and let it rest for several days; and apply gentleness with stimulation until it is healed.
But if the wound has already penetrated the bone in danger, then you percuss it, and if there is fragment of bone, extract all that you can; and what remains unattended, let it heal on its own until the wound becomes granulated, and separate it and relieve the pain.
And if the wound is new, sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you. But if there is a fistula in the wound, treat it with what will be remembered in its own chapter.
If it is a stab wound by a lance or sword, and sometimes of great depth, then consider whether the wound has a foul odor when the patient complains of it; know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is not much depth and the wound is new with its own blood, then you wait until the first hour to apply powder, and do not press it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and harms the patient, but apply attractive moisture and remove it after two days.
And if the moisture is not available, you wait for the wound to heal over with old scab so that it draws out what comes from the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in contact runs out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no spasm, tremor of the heart, palpitations or other good conditions, then you know that the wound is healed; and at this point cure it with heat and the other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is doubtful and it is always discharging, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is due to a stab or sword, and it is shallow on the surface of the foot or back, then care for it with what comes first - stitching, if large, or powder, if small.
If it has already caused harm to the bone, and if those sharp objects have pierced it, then you twist the wound and apply pressure to draw out those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then you press the wound shut that it may heal more easily, as the removal of them is relieved.
And for other wounds occurring on other parts of the body, the remedy in treatment is the remedy that we have said.
Of abdominal wounds.
The condition that occurs in the stomach is either great, small or moderate.
A small rupture is difficult to repair by other means, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take care to push them back into their place as soon as possible, for it swells up and becomes enlarged, making re-insertion difficult.
Therefore, the best hernia is a moderate one, as in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike the two types mentioned previously.
Know that the stitching of the stomach is according to four methods, but two of these are common and necessary in the stitching of other wounds on the body.
The other two methods are specific to other types of wounds, but they are particularly applicable in the stitching of the stomach.
I recommend that you expose and declare [the procedure] to everyone.
Thus say that if the wound is small and there is some cause of the hernia by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the small rupture as mentioned before, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore, when this is the case, it is necessary that you heat the affected area by submerging a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or by soaking it in warm water, and adding cyperus, spike, and bindings to push the inflamed intestine back into place until the inflammation is resolved.
In some cases, this can be seen where there is stiffness, and it is better to use water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
Therefore, when you see inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallow are mixed, as this helps to relieve the pain caused by it.
But if the intestine has not been pushed back into place with this treatment, then you make a small incision in the rupture using a sharp instrument to drain pus-filled abscesses.
The first sentence in English is: "The initial cure is better when it is not a section, and there should be no attempt to section unless strictly necessary and unavoidable."
"Of the instrument, choose its shape according to [the condition]:"
"One part should be angular and sharp, the other not-sharp, and the end should be subtle but not too subtle like a spatula, but rather slightly rounded."
"And since the abscess is enlarged and out of its place (hernia), it is necessary that its reduction should be in its natural form, in its proper place, if possible directly over it, because this is best."
"But when the rupture is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back, with their legs bent as much as their head; and if it is in a higher part of the abdomen, then you should raise their head and bend their legs downwards."
"And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should always focus your intention and consideration on which side the abscess is closer to."
"And similarly, it is necessary that you treat both large abscesses and smaller ones."
"In small abscesses, place what you have prepared there, and make sure the one who administers it is among your most trusted, who will hold the rupture with his hand and adjust the edges of it, and carefully expose the abscess that may cause any obstruction to the suture."
"And this is the common method of suture: take a needle or counting needle according to the size of the abscess; and hold the needle from the edge of the rupture of the little finger, and tighten the needle one, without putting too much force in both ends of the thread, with both ends of the knot outside the edges of the incision until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added both ends of the thread and both ends of the knot, making four rows."
"And tighten with double force around the needle, and some watchful looks on both sides, and carefully bring together the edges and the abscess by stitching; and release the pressure of the finger and insert another needle in that place, and tie it in the same way as the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completed the entire contraction of the abscess with the needles."
"And the needles should be of a medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles easily penetrate the flesh; and the large ones are difficult to insert into the knot, and therefore it is necessary that they should be of a medium thickness."
"And it is not necessary that the needle should be inserted at both ends of the incision immediately, because this may cause the flesh to be easily penetrated and the abscess to break before its consolidation."
"And do not prolong the stitching so that the abscess is prevented from consolidating."
"And carefully penetrate the ends of the needles so as not to cause pain to the patient while they sleep, and pause over the suture with expanded pulp of all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the abscess has consolidated."
"And these types of stitching with needles in this way are more suitable for small abscesses, because they require only one needle or two or around them."
"But the second stitching is common: and it is that you administer with the suture the four ends, of the incision and two ends of the knot, in one look, with a needle that should be tightly wrapped around its entire length."
"And when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle, withdraw the needle from that part where you started, to draw back all the pus from the upper part of the abscess towards the lower part, so that the stitching may be like sewing fabric where the fabrics are tightened."
"And pause between each stitch the thickness of a little finger."
"This stitching is known by men."
"And with this stitching I healed a wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen, which was covered with a coat of mail and was the rupture of a large abscess measuring one palm and protruding from two palms from the hernia of the lower part and the rupture was in the middle of the limb; and then I reduced it after the hernia had been out for 24 hours."
"And the abscess consolidated in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured him and he recovered; and he lived for many years and continued in his normal activities."
"And other doctors had judged that he would not recover; but by a miracle, because I did not cure him with the mouth (medication), because there was no place for it in his condition or any medicine, but instead I pressed on the abscess with a piece of old cloth two times a day and washed it constantly with honey water until he recovered."
Two kinds of stitching are said to be proper, according to the narrative of the Word.
And it is that you begin with sewing from the outside to the inside with the needle passing from the outer part to the inner part.
And when the needle enters the suture and passes through it and all along the body, leaving the tip of the thread at the point where you inserted the needle; then the needle is passed from the inner part to the outer part in the other end of the suture on the other side of the wound.
And when that has been passed through, you pass it again through the same opening from the outer to the inner side of the wound; and leave the tip of the thread at the point where this occurred, and pass the needle from the inner part to the outer part on the other side of the suture.
And pass through it with your penetration, which you passed through the wound at the point that you saw in the inner part of the incision where everything will pass through.
And begin with this passage on the side that is toward the point where you saw the suture, and pull out the needle from the suture that penetrated, and return it to the suture and bring the end of the suture to the opposite side of the wound, and pull out the other part of the suture from the suture.
And do this again and again, and continue to sew all that is outside following the same example.
And the entire method of this stitching is that you sew with skin sutures, which sews the skin, as you sew the wound once from the tip of the suture, and leave the other side until it is completed.
However, the second kind of proper stitching, which is called Gallic, and this is known from it and recommended for use, is that you sew according to a semilunar shape as some physicians sew in such a way, joining all the parts to their corresponding part by nature; and they apply the end of one to the other end and the point of the wound to the other end, and this is done as I have recommended.
You must insert the needle at the point of the wound on your side of the incision, and make it pass through to the inner part only, leaving two ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it pass from outside to inside in two ends of the suture.
And turn each one, and make each one pass from the inner part to the outer part in two opposite ends of the wound.
And this method of stitching is better than common light stitching, and it is the stitching that I previously mentioned.
This is the Gallic method.
However, some say that the abdominal stitching is corrected with two needles, so you insert each one a thread and start with the entry of the needle on your side, and make it pass through to the other side as those who sew the heart do.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, the stitching of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
However, the treatment of pustule is considered a treatment for other pustules.
The cause is that when you obtain the pustule before its own blood appears and the air changes it, reduce the intestine and sew it up properly, then stop on the powdered dressing.
And if the air has already changed the pustule, stop on those healing agents that are present among you until they become hard and the threads are pulled, and let it heal properly; and care for it in this way as with other pustules until it is healed.
However, if you are not present with the medicines, stop on it immediately, because it begins to weep pus, ointment, and change it every two days as you have taught me, until it is healed, because you do not need other medication for simple pustules in most cases.
However, if you fear that the pustule may communicate to major injuries, it is necessary that you immerse lamb's wool in steeped oil of quality or roasted oil, and stop it on the circuit of the areas that are between the joints and leave it as I have told you.
And if pain or putrefaction occurs in your hernias, because it often swells up, you should cauterize that with black-stained white vinegar, and especially if the purulence is present in the hernia and is made to exit through the cavity of it.
You should know that the large hernia heals more easily with pus than the small hernias.
It is difficult to heal because the hernia that is called "gigunu" does not receive healing from pus that occurs there; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, the size of it that is in them, and the delicacy of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If the wound is from a cut, obtain fresh linen and reduce it in accordance with your rule as you would reduce hernias.
If it has been left open and has turned black or white, then you should tightly bind it over the area that is corrupted by it, so that blood flow may come out, since in linen are veins and arteries.
Then insert another linen piece and place the ends of the bandage hanging from the wound side on either side of the wound opening, so that the attraction to it is alleviated. By cutting the linen and releasing the pressure of the wound, blood flow may be encouraged.
Remember the wounds when they occur in the hernia.
When there is a small disruption in the hernia, it may be possible to restore it in some men, so that the following is known: I have seen one who was plagued in his abdomen with a piercing lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and from this treatment and persistence, healing occurred.
Therefore, the cure continued because it was not yet complete in healing, but rather focused on cauterizing the area that was still infected and heating the site to consolidate it.
And I saw the area consolidated, I warned the patient about the danger of another accident in his abdomen; and no one should endanger himself by that accident and disrupt his usual diet and hydration, and approach a bath and exercise in his bed.
And some experienced people said that when a wound occurs in the hernia, and it is small, it is necessary to tie it in this way: take large breadcrumbs; align the edges of the wound and place one of them on the open side over the edges of the wound; so when you grab them and tighten their mouth, cut off the tip, since it adheres and does not dissolve.
And place another breadcrumb next to the first one, and do not stop making breadcrumbs one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
Then reduce the breadcrumbs and suture the wound; and leave the tips attached in the hernia until the hernia is healed, and no harm befalls the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia can be tied with a thin string made from an animal's intestine, as it is more delicate; and you take the end of this fine string from the intestine, which is already disinfected, and tie the end of it with a linen thread, enveloping it, and insert the needle through it into the hernia, stitching it with that thread and reducing the disruption.
And this method of suturing with breadcrumbs is not a guarantee or hope.
But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the delicate hernias, then it is not advisable to operate, but rather cauterize, and healing will not be complete.
Treatment for fistulas and abscesses.
Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes old and decayed, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and exudes pus continuously without being drained, in any part of the body, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it an abscess.
A fistula in truth is a hardened node, white and painless with a cavity similar to that of an ulcer, and it is called a swollen abscess or "rizzo".
And in some men, it may be moist, exuding pus; and the moisture is usually drained in some hours. Sometimes this moisture becomes thicker and coarser, and sometimes it is more delicate.
I have shown all those causes, the signs of them and the treatment with medicine in the division.
And it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment for fistulas, which is performed by surgery with a knife.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; those being fistulas that reach veins, arteries, nerves, spinal cord, hernia, bladder, ribs, spine, or joints composed by complexion such as hand and foot; and these are the ones that cause proximity to the main part and similar things.
And thus, the fistula of this kind, following this method, belongs to difficult-to-heal illnesses that do not accept cure and occupation with it is labor and ignorance.
If the depth of the fistula does not reach these places as mentioned and you hope for its healing, and wish to find out about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows the correct path, look for it with it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a probe of lead, as lead has the ability to be lightened and curved along the twists.
If the fistula is covered in horrible movement, it is not possible for you to investigate it with a probe.
Therefore, close the horrible openings by using a probe on them, as the moisture used to close that one will go to other openings and run out of them.
Then examine it with great care, to determine if you have bones or nerves, and whether the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it is a fistula that has many horrible openings and is situated entirely on the surface of the patient, and the discovery of pain must be due to your compression on the area, and similar to the signs and causes of an abscess.
And when you have examined all of these causes with certainty, then go to healing with confidence: it is that you consider whether the fistula is superficial, near salt, distant from a joint, or near nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the places which I told you.
You then dry out the fistula as previously mentioned in the description of it, and remove whatever is in that drainage and rotten flesh, and whatever has been born in the sores of the skin or similar, and heal it within until it is healed.
If the fistula is deep and follows the correct path, then you must incise it as far down as possible for you, and clean out all of its rotten flesh; and apply hot poultices wrapped in medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have filled with iron.
And do this several times until the hot poultice has destroyed all of the rotten material in the cavity of the fistula due to its corruption.
And then restore it with healthy tissue until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, you then cauterize it as previously recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify this, then investigate it and dry it out as previously recommended, unless there is any cause of a vein or nerve or major limb as previously mentioned.
If the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackening in it, you then remove it until the corruption is completely destroyed; and heal it with what nourishes it until it is healed.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as previously described, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then examine it again more carefully and make the reason for it clear and the cleaning of it with the last strength you can muster, and then restore it.
If it heals, that is good; and if not, you should know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and in this case, there is no hope but to leave it as it is.
If the rotten bone is small, or can be removed by force, then remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
If there is movement of bones, then examine it carefully and remove all of them, ensuring that there are no causes with your strength.
If there is any obstacle due to the wetness, and in incision there is no fear or error, you must incise those ligaments or flesh if it is necessary, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, you must wait for the wound to heal before attempting to operate on it again, and leave it with flesh and ligaments around the bones, ensuring that the wound is not consolidated, and contracting the section which you have incised in your operation.
If you are afraid, wait for the wound to be covered with a dressing soaked in oil, or a wound covered with an Egyptian paste, or one of the green poultices, as when they heat up, the ligaments will soften and the bones will be separated from their adhesions, and the attraction is alleviated.
If it is a large bone such as the hip bone or thigh bone or resembling these, and what is corrupt is only its surface, then scrape that with resin only to the point where the blackness and corruption remains, and then restore the wound.
If the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to saw off that part entirely and cut into the place where the corruption has been reached, and then heal it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that before operating on a man, you anesthetize and support him in the same way and assist in your operation.
A healthy young man of about thirty years old who has pain in his lower back and the affected part inside his body is towards the internal matter of his body up to where the matter reaches his lower back, and it is a matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused externally.
And therefore, the time was prolonged due to the error of the doctors until the abscess had healed, and a wound was made in the matter, and his healing was postponed until the abscess had become fistulated, and they put in the wound materials that were motes, and the foulness and humidity of the body came out through these.
And so a large number of doctors attended him for about two years, and they were not wise but skilled in their craft until I was summoned.
And I saw the abscess and the matter flowing from these wounds, and the body of that man was now completely stabilized and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of these wounds and reached the bone.
Then I cleaned and probed all the wounds, and found that they were connected to all parts of the abscess.
And then I cut into one of the wounds to the point where I discovered a bone fragment, and found it rotten, soft, and decayed; and a part of the abscess was already corrupted to the point that it had penetrated into the intestines.
And I cut out what I had discovered and prepared of the bone fragment.
And I recognized that it was not a fracture in the bone but the corruption that had caused an abscess and been cut out, and I had already drained it.
And then I restored the wound with a strengthening medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And then I explored and discovered again on the bone secondly following the first discovery, and found continuous corruption in the bone.
And I removed what appeared to be of that corruption, and then I performed surgery and restoration on it, but it was not restored.
And then I continued to explore and cut the bone bit by bit, and perform the restoration of it, but it was not restored until I cut around a palm's width, and that extracted with the marrow, and I restored it with medicines, and it healed slightly and became healthy.
No further exploration or incision in the operation and section of the limb was necessary except for the positioning of the leg and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because at all times due to excessive bleeding and malicious fainting it happened.
Therefore, it healed completely and nothing remained in the place of the bone, and the positioning of the limb was good within its body and restored the vitality of the limb; and it was maintained in its position and not caused any harm to it in walking or discomfort in any way.
Mays if there is a fractured bone protruding from the body, then you must cut it off in this manner: namely, you should hold and tighten the protruding bone at its end, and have someone extend it; and place the linen bandage thicker than the first one on it; and place that over the surrounding flesh, and stretch the area to pull the skin away from the sides, and you will discover the skin over the location where you want to cut so that the cut does not injure the skin.
And place a board or table below the bone properly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to cut with the knife so as not to cut the rotten flesh.
It is necessary that the cutting be done on the rotten part little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and not apparent to the touch, then the second exploration may be necessary.
And if the bone is rotten but not protruding, then one continuous division runs along the other, and the corruption is at one or several locations in the bone, then you discover all the skin from all parts; and place a board below it, and cut that division where the corruption is until the second cutting continues.
And the cutting should be small at the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupt joint, and then saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then that is not rational but a ruse.
If corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and excise that, clean that as possible according to your ability, and with any instrument be corrected if not contrary to veins or nerves.
You must know what saws and chisels are used to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their subtlety and their coarseness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of operation tools suitable for that operation.
You must know that this operation signifies to you the type of instrument required; when you are knowledgeable and experienced in this art, and have seen many ways of treating illnesses, then you will already know what is suitable for each tool for all types of illnesses.
And you will be forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will need, as well as those with which you will proceed according to your discretion, which you will test on others. Form of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a ray: The head of this ray should be in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be shaped like the heads of pegs.
And it is not suitable unless the heads of the joints are brought together when they are corrupted or have a wide opening.
Small knife form:
Small blade shape:
Another blade shape should be made: a bow-like one with the length of the blade slightly higher and the sharpness of the edge from iron, and the handle of the knife should be made properly. Shape of it:
The shape of the knife with a concavity:
Another blade shape, subtle:
Shape of another blade with curved end:
Shape of small scissor-like knife (resembling tweezers):
Shape of smaller pliers for cutting bones:
The shape of another type of pliers (similar to a ray), its end is like a saw and used in many places during bone surgery.
The shape of a ray that is suitable for drilling bones:
And the end is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly shaped to all the causes mentioned for knives, pliers, and saws.
For drilling holes and cutting bones.
The drilling holes can be performed either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as you will have medicated the corruption for its cure and it does not improve, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent cause, in such cases it is necessary to drill the affected limb into the corruption to allow the patient to escape by that route either death or a more serious complication of the limb.
And the sign of that case is when the limb becomes black before it has been cauterized, or if pus spreads into the limb and burns it completely, taking over the entire body; therefore, take care to drill that.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poisonous impacts such as those of the sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and similar.
And if the corruption or impact is on the finger tip, then you should drill the finger and not give space to the corruption for it to enter into your hand.
And similarly, if you reach the arm, drill the hole at the joint of the elbow, and do not give space to the corruption until it enters into the arm.
And if the corruption spreads to the arm, then you should drill the hole in the shoulder joint of the arm.
And if the corruption passes through the shoulder and sometimes surrounds it, then in that case the death of the patient is inevitable; providing another treatment in such a situation is an excess of virtue.
And similarly, if corruption spreads to the foot and affects the toes, then you should drill the hole into one of the toes.
And if it penetrates into the sole of the foot, drill the whole foot. But if it penetrates to the heel, then you should drill the cavity into the ankle joint of the foot.
If the corruption has already reached the heel, there is nothing to do but dismissal and allowing the patient to die.
The method of drilling or sawing the limb is to tighten one ligament on the side of the part you want to drill, and tighten another ligament on the opposite side; then extend one ligament on the side you want to cut and extend another ligament on the other side; and separate the flesh between the two ligaments using a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make an incision or saw it.
And you must stop all the ligaments at all the parts so as not to touch the affected area, and bring the dressing to the patient with suitable injury and sterile dressing.
But if bleeding occurs during surgery, you should cauterize the site carefully or place some hemostatic powders to stop the blood; and then return to your treatment when it is complete.
And cover the affected limb with an appropriate dressing and treat it until it is healed.
I recommend to you what is appropriate for a man in his foot, this event occurs that I also advise, which is when blackening of the skin on the foot occurs due to burns resembling fire.
This corruption first appears in the affected toe and then affects the entire foot.
Therefore, prepare this man by giving him more painkillers and anti-inflammatory drugs as the healing process approaches the affected limb with the intensity of pain and burns increasing, and drill the hole in the joint, and heal it.
Over a long period of time, this persistent corruption appears in the finger tip (of the hand) indicated.
And then it comes to me, and I am pierced to expel that surplus with water that should rest on the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and the surplus is not returned and begins to go into the other said inside before it starts in the hand.
And he called me to incise (make an incision) on his hand, but I did not want to do so fearing the return of that surplus, and instead I feared the incision of his hand might be fatal because the patient's vitality was weak.
And since he fainted from me (the doctor), he returned to his land and I was informed that the man prepared and incised his entire hand, and he recovered.
And this narrative has not been added except as an aid for what is known about this disease, and as a signification by which it may be understood and acted upon accordingly.
On the care of sinuses and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged before collection of pus, it should be broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from there, leaving a hollow cavity resembling a vessel, and the dressing that is placed over it should be thin and not lead to further corruption, nor press on bones or nerves or ligaments. This is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged before corruption sets in any member, it is called a fistula and not used.
And the treatment of this is to incise the entire dressing in the same manner as it is rolled up, especially when it is made thin and treated like cloth, and make sure it does not adhere to the area due to corruption.
But if you hope that the dressing will adhere and that corruption has not been achieved through subsequent consequences, and if the dressing contains pus on its surface, then you treat it with cleansing.
And if it is considered to be a sinus and it is large, and the stench from the arm is strong, then you should cleanse it with an Egyptian remedy that consists of oil, vinegar, and zenna root powder, which are mixed together in a vessel and cooked until they become a pure liquid.
Then you take the necessary amount from it (the Egyptian remedy), dissolve it in water and honey; then cleanse the sinus with this liquid, and tighten its opening, and leave the medicine there for a period of two hours.
Then remove this with care, and continue doing so for several days until the sinus is purified and the smell is gone.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; and in such a case, you should take the ashes of vinegar and put them in water, then boil that solution and use it to cleanse the sinus until you are confident that the sinus has been drained.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian remedy or water of ashes, then cleanse it with water and honey mixed with zenna root powder, or with vinegar and honey, because honey has properties to purify and clean, while vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess stiffness and dryness in the vinegar.
And when you have done this several times and are confident that the sinus has been drained, then cleanse it with a solution that makes the flesh grow there.
And you should take defyfinicon oil and dissolve it in rose oil and vinegar, or cleanse it with various remedies and ointments that have properties already mentioned in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifices of the sinus are narrow and cannot accommodate the canula of the clyster, you should gradually widen it with a small iron, pausing at each point where it is wrapped in Egyptian wool or Basilicon gauze until it is fully widened.
If the orifices are wide, you should add the lips to it with stitching and leave the quantity within the clyster unchanged.
If the orifices of the elbow joint are raised above the parting lines, then you should dry it in the affected area so that the arm can run into it below, because when the arm is bent at the angle of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
If it is not possible to dry the sinus into the bone as you desire, then pierce the member to prepare it for the procedure by which the arm will pass easily through it according to how it suits you and that there is no obstacle preventing the arm from passing.
However, the one that is over the sinus orifice should always be kept wet to prevent anything from sticking to the arm there. And so that you may know whether what is passing from the arm is more or less, or digested, or undigested.
And in this way you observe the location of the sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess.
When your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter excreted over the sinus orifice has adhered, or adhesion has occurred, then you should detach it or on the third day, when you detach the wound, you change the cloth and renew the dressing.
However, if from the sinus there is a subtle discharge of fluid, do not despair of adhesion, because healing occurs there, for some men in whom slow generation of flesh in wounds occurs, and of those it is made contrary.
If the arm is undigested for more than several days from the sinus, then you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its cause is prolonged, then you dry the medications, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they become as dry as diaphonous ointments when excess addition of zizy is applied.
The next remedy that cures is to take diaphonous ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and have an old remedy in its substance, and mix it with that and use it.
And it is similar in this action when there is no arm, diaphonous ointment, honey until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and grind everything into a powder over the honey that is on the fire, and apply that to the sinus with a linen, and strengthen it with the honey that you have heated until it thickens, and grind it again into a powder and apply it.
Some days are administered with long aristology and the essence of celestial lily (and this is celestial lily) and the flour of iris and centaury, and use them as simple or compound remedies, grind those and sift and powder over the recommended honey; and use it.
If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in its depth, and you begin an investigation into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with fistulous treatment as previously described.
Of the treatment of panaric and fingernail removal, incision, and section.
Panaric is an abscess that comes from the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and it grows strong in other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is valuable or it becomes an abscessed panaric or corrupted, and it gushes arm into the root of the nail, and it completely corrupts that one, and it carries its corruption to the bone into a foul odor, and the tip of the finger is destroyed, and the color of it is made dark.
Therefore, when you have what has been said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with an iron all the excess that has accumulated from the nail and apply cauterization to the wound near it, because cauterization is beneficial in this case.
However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail press the flesh at the sides inside, and it begins to penetrate there, then you should stop the subcutaneous pus at the angle of the nail that penetrates the flesh, and force it up and incise the flesh easily, and pause over what remains of the flesh with corrosive medicines until everything is drained; and apply it with ointments until it is healed.
If corruption has already spread in the bone, it is necessary that you drill the bone and extract it, for no time will heal if the bone is corrupt.
And if the decay and corruption spreads to the bone, it is necessary that you drill it as soon as its location is remembered, and apply care to that area so that it may heal.
If the finger or toe is subjected to percussion or traction, and pain is intense, it is necessary that you first anesthetize the patient, then cut the nail sharply with a transverse incision across from top to bottom, but not to penetrate into the flesh beyond the nail, for you will cause intense pain to the patient and it may cause excessive growth of the surrounding skin at the location; and apply care to that area with something that relieves pain.
That which is said to be "adjusted", that is born in the hands of many men, it is strong in flesh and bone, or it is strong in nail.
And these are born at the joint or they are the growth of nails from those [joints]. That which is born in the nails of the finger is not harmful, but that which is born at the joints is harmful.
And from those which are fleshy, the section will be easy and you should drill its root with a large drill.
But from that which is born at the joint's roots, healing is difficult, so take care not to open it up (i.e., do not perform an incision).
In that which is born in the finger, it is necessary that you drill the flesh of it at first with a round drill into the bone, then use a suitable saw, and apply care to that area so that it may heal.
Consolidation which occurs in the fingers between its motes (i.e., joints) or due to human birth defect, or due to consolidation of wounds or burns, or for similar reasons, it is necessary that you remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
Place a pad of fine oil-soaked cloth between their (joints) to prevent them from consolidating easily, and separate them or place a thin layer of lead between them until they are consolidated as necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, you should remove that consolidation as it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Of drilling defects, they are varicose veins.
Defects (i.e., vices) are varicose veins, and are large twisted veins full of melancholic bile that occur in the members of the body, and their major manifestation is in the legs, especially in those who travel, work or carry things.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body of black bile several times with strong emesis, and draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
But the treatment of their (varicose veins) with iron is done in two ways: one is that it is drilled and the black blood is drawn out, and the other way is that the vein is raised and all of it is extracted.
The sectioning of it (varicose vein) is done in this way: first, the leg is wrapped with warm water up to when the thick blood is resolved, which is a dark substance from the vein, and then the patient's leg is strapped above the knee to the most prominent part of the calf down to the ankle with a bandage, and then the vein is cut in one or two or three places, but make a wide incision, and raise the black blood with the iron rod from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount and what you want to remove has been removed, and this will relieve the pain of the patient.
And tie it up (the bandage), and order him to abstain from foods that cause black bile.
And repeat the treatment by anesthetizing (the patient) when the veins are full and you notice this in the patient.
The elevation of them (varicose veins) is done in this way: you should shave the patient's leg if it has sores and then immerse the leg in warm water and wrap it with hot water up to when it becomes swollen and the veins become prominent; or exercise it forcefully, if bathing is not available, until the member becomes warm.
And then cut the cord along the vein in a long or short section depending on whether it is on the right side of the vein (i.e., medial or lateral), or at the bottom of it you should use the heel.
And then open the cord with scissors and peel off the vein from all sides until it is felt, and it should be noticed that it becomes darker and more painful.
And therefore, when you notice the white cord that is the vein.
And then place a roll of linen beneath it (the vein) until it is raised and detached from the cord, and suspend it with iron wire.
And then cut another section on the same side for three fingers' width, and peel off the cord above the vein up to where it appears.
Then lift and incise that [area] in the rear section, you must cut the heel, then extract that and raise it to the second section, and extract that from the section above it.
Then extract that from the section above it (the highest or most superior one) until it is completely outside; then incise that.
If it does not bulge out, insert a strong double-pointed needle and tie it off, then extract it, or pierce it with the lance and turn your hand all around until it is pierced through. Be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it will make it difficult to raise the hernia and may cause harm to the patient because of that.
Once that is completely removed, place your hand on the location of the wound, which has been soaked in wool dipped in vinegar and both roasted and unroasted oil, and cure it until it heals.
If the wound is contracted and has tortuosity with an enclosure at the partitions, and it is not according to what has been said, then you must cut along the entire length of the tortuosity and at the locations of the enclosures, and suspend it with stitches until it rises completely.
Be careful not to incise the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult to raise the hernia if you do so; and use your discretion in that matter.
The form of the incision made to the broken vessel:
It should not be done in this way as with the stitches or of an acute point so that it does not injure the vein; and it should have a thick, flexible lion's head shape, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having an excessive thickness as we have said.
On the extraction of the vein in the leg.
This vein is generated in the hips in lands located in the south, such as Al-Andalus in Arabic lands and in the southern and arid lands of India with little fertility where there is neither herb nor tree.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body, other than the hips.
And its generation is of putrefaction that comes from the intestines, such as venom inside the body coming from snakes and worms breeding between the intestines and flesh.
The sign of the onset of this condition is a swelling of that vein which occurs in the hip, and when the area is inflamed, the vein begins to flow from the location of that swelling, as if it were growing like a plant.
When the limb appears, then you must cover it with a lead weight of about two drachms and bind it tightly to keep the lead suspended from the bed.
And as often as this occurs outside, cover it with lead and leave it hanging. If the pain persists, you must make an incision on it and cover the remaining part; do not incise more than is necessary for it to come out, because if you incise too much, it becomes constricted, enters the flesh, causes abscesses, pus and ulcers in the area.
Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely expelled from the body without leaving any trace in the intestines.
And from this vein, some men have been born who are as long in length as five palms and more than ten, and it has been reported to me that one was twenty palms long.
If it is incised during the time of treatment, insert the iron into the wound and perforate it with a long iron rod with the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the location for some days with medicines; and cure it by treating abscesses.
This vein sometimes causes ramps, and more so when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and causes numerous abscesses, from each of which ramifications grow.
Therefore, cure it as has been said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
From the incision on worms generated under the skin and called bovine disease.
This disease is called bovine disease in some lands because it often invades cattle and is a small worm that is born between the intestines and flesh, which grows throughout the body, rising and falling, and is eventually expelled through the bowels.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of some humors such as worms, snakes, larvae and tapeworms in the abdomen.
And it is feared due to its malice, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it causes a strong stench and enters the nose and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
Therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, you must not do so unless its movement and appearance are felt by the senses; and therefore, you must strengthen what is on top of it and what is below it and apply strong pressure, and then press down on it and extract it.
If it is tied in the flesh and does not burst, you must stop the cauterization with fire on the location until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it, which corrupts the location as has been said before.
If you see it reaching the head near the nose, strengthen and apply strong pressure on the forehead, press down on it and extract it; and the patient must use body cleansing with medicines that evacuate putrid humors and avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
From the incision on the disease of the liver (jaundice).
This disease is called jaundice in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is bound from member to member.
And I have already seen this as I recommended to you. You were summoned to a sick woman at a village, and you found her arm exposed and saw a small inflammation on the vein of her arm, and although it had been opened for an hour, I saw that inflammation spreading as if worms were crawling towards this place, but more slowly than expected, as if silver was flowing from place to place.
Then, pain occurred in that area and settled into the muscle, and wait here for an hour.
Then return to the other side of the body until you reach the other arm.
Then I instructed him to rotate the body all around as I observed; and he was very surprised by the change in position and the swiftness of one member to another. And he had seen similar things in the most severe cases according to that method, but I have observed more of those that change pain from one member to another. But I did not observe it as much in the cases of women.
And I did not consider it to be only due to the woman being old, as the body and veins were exposed in such cases, and this manifested as a breathlessness that was changing.
And it is necessary that it does not recur in those who are pleasing and have moist bodies with weak veins.
And as you wish the cure of it and the patient feels pain, do not approach the inflamed area as I have said, rather strengthen yourself on it and let it be slightly moist and cold over that area until that constriction is released, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it in your cases, then cure it by evacuating the body and expelling any breathlessness, and give him fumigations made with foul-smelling herbs and pills of serape and similar ones.
Of extracting sage.
Sage is diverse according to the species and according to the places in the body where it grows, since its variety is that some have large points, small, concave, mute, are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those to which there are tongues; and of those to which are spikes.
And of the symptoms of serpents is when you find sage, pierce the bone and it emerges from the cavity that is above the brain, which happens due to violent soda, blindness, dizziness, hotness in the body, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and the speech becomes faint and destroyed, and the voice is lost, and there comes out from the wound site white moisture similar to dust, and eyes like watery flesh.
Therefore, if these symptoms appear to you, then avoid the cure and the extraction of the sage unless necessary.
But the signs of the sage that grow in the heart, which is near the left nipple, are as if it were embedded in a hard cause, and not empty; and strong movement of the sage resembles the movement of the thumb, and bleeding from the wound is black, and there is loss of heat at the extremities, sweating, and fainting; therefore, know that death is imminent.
The symptoms when the spear has pricked the lung specifically with bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are applied, and the patient's color is changed, and they exhale a great spirit and ask for air in distress.
If the spear pierces the covering which is in the foot, and pain occurs near the small bones of the ribs, and it causes great and intense pain with heavy sighing, and he is not able to move all his limbs due to muscle pain.
And if the spear pierces the stomach, immediately there will be a foul smell coming from the wound.
And if the spear pierces the abdomen and is lodged there, a tear or hole appears in the wound, or the intestine or hernia that was torn apart cannot be removed, and there is no hope for healing from the extraction of the spear.
And if the spear pierces the bladder and is expelled outside along with urine, and it causes infection outside, and strong pain occurs in the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
However, other members such as the head, neck, throat, neck, gullet, shoulders, and their similar parts of the limbs, such as the spine, collarbone, pelvis, hip, waist, and their counterparts, are saved provided that the spear does not hit a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
And I recommend that you be aware of these spears since they can indicate the nature of the wound for healing purposes.
The cause is that in a man a spear enters the tear duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extract it from the other side, leaving the hair of the eyebrow undamaged, and it heals without causing harm to the eye.
And I extracted another spear from a Jew who it had entered in him at the root of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact, and the spear was already hidden and could not be found except for a small tip adhering to its shaft, and it was a sharp spear of Turkish origin with a lion's head without hair.
And the Jew is unharmed, and there is no adverse effect on his eye.
And I extracted another spear from a Christian who it had been shot in the neck, and it was an Arabic spear with feathers; and then I cut into it between two guide-lines, and it was submerged in his neck; and then I softened it with that, and placed my hand over it, and the Christian recovered.
And I extracted another spear from a man who it had been shot in the stomach, and I thought he would die because of that; but since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition due to his actions, I cut into the spear and carefully removed it, and he recovered without any further injury.
And I saw another man who had been shot in the back, and the wound had healed over, but after six years, I extracted the spear at its source.
And I saw a woman who had been shot in the stomach, and the wound had healed inside her, and there was no change in her condition despite taking medication, and the woman suffered no harm from any of her natural activities.
And I saw another man who had been shot in the face and the wound healed, but when I removed the spear, there was no further pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
And I extracted the spear from the man of the king who it had been shot in the middle of his nose and had started to protrude slightly on the right side and was completely hidden.
And I was called to treat him three days after the wounding by the spear.
And then I examined the wound of the spear, which was not very deep; and I tested it with a fine probe, but did not feel anything; but I felt a prick under the right eyebrow, and therefore suspected that the prick was from the tip of the spear.
And I spread the area with a plaster containing astringent and digestive properties, assuming that the area was covered so that it would appear to me the location of the spear, so that I could cut into it.
And there was no adverse effect in the area that indicated that the spear had reached that location; and I continued with the plaster over it for several days without any further injury; and the wound healed in the meantime, and the patient recovered from the extraction of it within a few days until one day he felt the spear inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I covered the wound with a strong corrosive medicine for several days until it opened, and with the probe, I felt its tip, and I removed the tip of the spear gently from the shaft.
Approach the wound in the opening of the injury with that sharp medicine as soon as the tip of the arrow becomes visible to my eyes, and pass some time with it for up to four months.
When the wound is swollen, make it possible for forceps to enter it and secure them in place without moving. Then do not stop refining and inventing means to treat it until a day comes with suitable forceps to remove it; and when this has been done, restore the wound.
Some doctors thought that the nose cartilage had not been restored, and you restored it and the wound healed, and the patient was cured by complete health, and never suffered in any way from it again.
I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows for which you will have to follow this rule and significance on what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understood through narrative or by reading these books.
The wise craftsman compares a little with much; and what is present on what is absent; and he must use new operations and new instruments to deal with the strange causes of the art when they occur.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not lost from the limbs in which they are inserted except by two means: either through attraction to the place in which they were inserted; or through the opposite side of the other part.
And the one that was shot into the place where it entered or was an arrow made of flesh and was shot and lost.
If you do not move at the moment when it is shot, then you must leave it for several days until the flesh around it has healed and the attraction and its exit have been alleviated.
Similarly, if it is inserted in the bone and you do not move, then leave it for several days and turn it with attraction and movement every day, and it will be lost.
If you do not move for some days, then you must perforate the surrounding tissue of the arrow around that bone with a fine instrument to enlarge the area around it, and then remove it.
But if the arrow has been hidden in the body and is not felt, then you must search for it with examination, and if you feel it, then shoot it out with suitable instruments appropriate for attracting it.
If you cannot move it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and it is not a bone or nerve or vein here, then make an incision over the wound until it can be enlarged enough to extract the arrow.
If there are any wounds around it that must be kept, then you must cut the flesh in which it is inserted on all sides with all the skill at your disposal; and invent something, if you cannot move it due to the evasion of the flesh in the breakage of the auricles and twisting of those until it becomes necessary.
And when you perform the removal of the arrow in any location where it is, you must use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes obedient; and refine it with the greatest subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and is removed with great difficulty due to its attraction and extraction.
If you cannot operate at that time, leave it for several days until the swellings around it can subside, and then repeat the process when it has been alleviated. If the flow of blood opposes your treatment, administer what was said in its section for cure.
Watch over the virtue of incision in vein or nerve, or cord, and administer every possible means to avoid the escape of pus; perform it with ease, calm, delay, and firmness as I and you recommend.
Therefore, compress the abscess to make the patient conform to the figure in which you must lance the abscess; it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, administer what is possible according to the figures.
But abscesses that are located opposite another part, or which cause one part to spread over the other parts, or cause swelling in the outer part of the abscess by sensation of the part above the cavity and sometimes protruding; in this case you should incise it; and make the incision according to the size at which the forceps grasp it; and tie it, as it is easily cut off.
But if it is retained in the bone, you must twist the lancet contrary to its direction until the abscess enters the bone, and widen it, then extract it.
If not, leave it for several days, then repeat the process until it bursts open.
And if the fistula of the abscess is in that area, you must push it with something.
If the fistula is cut and you wish to administer pressure, introduce your finger into it, if it is closed, use a spoon concave on the inside so that it enters the concavity of the fistula and press it with something.
If the abscess is concave, you must press it with a strong spoon inserted into it, as the abscess is relieved by this.
If the abscess is surrounded by hard tissue, you must cut away all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and treat it with what is appropriate.
If the abscess occurs on the foot, belly, bladder, chest, or side and is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and if it is possible to incise over it, do so, be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, extract it, and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Make forceps for lancing abscesses:
The tips of them are made like a bird's beak that is made with a saw when they grasp the abscess so it does not slip.
And from these are made different sizes: large, few, and medium-sized forceps, according to the size of the abscess and its contents, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Like a rod to relieve the obstruction in the concave abscess and push it with that one.
On venesection (phlebotomy).
The veins to be cut for phlebotomy, it is customary to make a cut of 30. in the head, there are 16 veins to be cut for phlebotomy. There are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, called auricular veins; there are two herbs that are in the two temples; and there are two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes, called lacrimal veins; and the vein located at the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two veins that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called "angular" (I assume it's a typo for "anterior"); and there are two veins that are below the tongue. But the veins that are cut in the arms are 5. Because one of those is a cephalic vein, and it is necessary to let the wild goose fly; the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is a minor vein, and it is made up of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people call it "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is paused at the domestic artery, and it is called "cephalic," and the vulgar people call it "the abdominal vein"; the biceps brachii, and it is located above the elbow, and it is the one that is cut, and it appears on the outside; the cephalic, and it is the vein between the previously mentioned one and the next one, and it has two branches.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins: one of those is called the great saphenous vein, which is located at the bend of the large toe; the second is the small saphenous, and its location is the back of the thigh of the large toe; the third is the sciatic vein, and its location is the back of the thigh of the large toe; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to these.
The support for the veins that are near the ears is useful for treating ancient catarrhs, migraines, and old ulcers of the head.
The quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be shaved the patient's head, and the patient's head should be wiped in the occipital area at the locations of both veins with a large, clean cloth; press the patient's neck with one hand using a bandage that shows the locations of their ears in two places pressed on the sides of the patient's head; and try that method, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is the test.
Then take the surgical lancet, which is pointed, and insert it into the vein in the cavity to the bone where the blood flows out. And then lift your hand with the vein and cavity to the incisions above, and cut the vein with a pointed instrument. And the length of the incision should be two fingers' width or approximately that amount, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And press the pulse and leave it until it is healed.
And at the beginning of this book, the incision and cauterization of those have been described.
But of the two arterial veins at the temples, the benefit of bleeding is for migraines, old and chronic ailments of the eyes, and acute corpus disorders in the head.
The quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's neck so that both veins are felt with clear perception, and show the pulse of their pulses with your finger; then you will know if the test is successful.
Then lift the cavity over the vein at the incisions indicated by your finger, insert the lancet with a pointed tip below, and lift the vein upwards; cut it in this way as you did with the other veins; and let the blood flow out according to your need.
And unbind the patient's swelling, place your finger over the vein for an hour, and press on that spot and hold it firmly, then leave it until it is healed.
And the reminder of them, as well as their incision and attraction, has been given at the beginning of this book.
And therefore, the benefit of bleeding the vein on the forehead is similar to bleeding the occipital vein for ancient facial diseases, migraines, and putrid ulcers.
The quality of bleeding that is as I recommend to you: the patient should hold their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and take the instrument called the cautery, which has this shape:
Press the pointed end of the instrument at the top of the fossory vein and strike it with a blow or in another manner, and let the blood flow out according to the amount you wish; then unbind the perforation of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
Sometimes bleeding is opened with the cautery, but it should not be done with a very sharp point as in other bleedings; instead, it should be from a broad point, and bleed it transversely because the bone is close and strong, and the bone may easily break when the cautery is fine.
But the benefit of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes for eyelid inflammation due to redness and swelling in the eyes, and facial diseases.
The quality of the bleeding is that the patient holds their neck with a bandage, and you bleed them, standing over their head.
Make the bleeding transverse in width less than one finger at the tip because there is not much tissue in that location; and if the bleeding is fine, its tip is easily broken.
And let the blood flow out as much as you need, press on that spot, hold it for a moment, then unbind them.
But bleeding from the nose vein is useful for treating acute fever and violent vomiting, facial diseases, migraines, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
The quality of bleeding that is as I recommend to you: the patient holds their neck and places your left hand under their nose, and take the fine lancet long enough and put it in the middle of the nostril where the vein is not felt, because the blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary that you gradually withdraw your hand from the lancet and let the blood flow out according to your need, and hold it for a moment because it recovers easily.
The advantage of flebotomy of the two veins (guidegui) leads to constriction, the beginning of leprosy, and various bad illnesses, as well as inflammations and corrosive ulcers, such as hydrophrenia.
And the quality of that flebotomy is such that the patient must remain quiet on the bed with his head elevated, and the practitioner is over the patient's head.
Then make the vein incision long and shallow, making the incision little by little; and remove blood as needed or as much as seems necessary; and make the other vein resemble it.
Then relax the patient and gently tie both veins with a moderate constriction to ensure that the patient is not overwhelmed, and let them rest until the wound heals.
The advantage of vein flebotomy for varicose veins is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and decay of gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers around the nose and the area around it.
The quality of that flebotomy is such that you must hold the patient still, keep their head elevated with a bandage, and turn their lips to show both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more so because around those veins there are many small black veins; and then make an incision in each one using an incision instrument.
But if you have doubt about which one is that, then make an incision in the larger of them, and make a clear determination from their swelling.
And make a comparison of the veins on the lips above.
But of the two veins that are under the tongue, it is more advantageous for flebotomy of the cephalic to treat prostration that is in the throat, throat problems, and mouth diseases.
The quality of flebotomizing them is that the patient lies between your legs, and elevates their tongue, and looks down at it, from one side you see one vein and from the other side you see another vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
And then make an incision in each one; but be careful not to damage your hand when flebotomizing them, as they are arteries below.
And the veins that are flebotomized in the neck are those where it is customary in all men, and the flebotomy of them is done in two ways, either by applying myrtle oil or olive oil with decreasing fineness; or by cauterizing with a flebotomy knife and calling it alnessil, and this is the name of it:
It may be the case that you will have to open convex veins full of apparent thick blood, and those containing coarse, dark blood.
This flebotomy is smaller in size and with a more subtle tip, and it is suitable for flebotomizing fine veins containing thin blood of lemon.
The benefit of the venous lancing (phlebotomy) of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it draws blood from sicknesses that are of the back and neck, and from what sciatica and stomach pain occur.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist, when lancing (phlebotomy) that vein, to be careful and be cautious since there is an artery nearby, and if he errs or accidentally punctures the vein during phlebotomy, he will cut the artery and cause bleeding. Therefore, it is not advisable to perform phlebotomy with a sharp instrument but with a blunt one like a lancet.
If the basilica vein does not appear due to a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you should look for another one or seek its branch or find the end of the arm, since it appears clearly there; and cut (phlebotomize) it with a blunt instrument as has been said.
But if you want to perform phlebotomy at the wrist, then it is necessary in front of the narrow part of the arm that you touch the place up to where you recognize the location of the hands, and put a pad over it; and hold the arm and cut the vein with a concave instrument (such as a lancet) as has been said; and be careful to make the percussion sound in a certain space from the location of the artery.
When you feel, as the ligament is tense, swell in the location that you have indicated with a pad, then that swelling is due to the artery and it will move away from there.
If you see blood flow in the phlebotomy like that of a child's urine, and the blood is thin and red, then you know it is from the artery; and you must hold your hand over that area for a long time; and lift your hand away if the blood flows, since many veins are cut if the blood flows frequently, then you must tighten the arm and leave it.
Take care of the patient from his moisture (discharge), be careful and do not let him move it for several days until he is cured.
But if the blood does not flow (stopped), and you find that you do not have medicine for it, then cut the artery if it appears to you; since its end will contract and the blood will stop flowing; or take a fistula, make an incision in it and take one of its ends and tighten it over the location of the vein with narrowing between the ligament and pulses until the next day.
If the blood flows (unstopped), that is good; otherwise, treat it with the remedy that was given earlier to remember the location of the powders causing bleeding.
The removal of blood from there is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the tightness of the ligament in the arm.
But the phlebotomy of the dark vein (vena fusca) is beneficial as it draws blood from the superior part of the head and the lower part of the body; since it is composed of branches of the basilica and cephalic veins, as has been said.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful in the phlebotomy of that area, since there is a nerve nearby; and if he accidentally hits it during the puncture of the vein, it will cause numbness, and healing will be difficult and it may not heal completely. This nerve often appears in sensation; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not visible, then you must stop phlebotomy with that instrument and avoid the nerve using your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then make the vein incision longitudinal (along its length).
The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with facial swellings.
In this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy with a blunt instrument (lancet) or a sharp instrument (needle), since the puncture is safe for all veins as it does not contain an artery or nerve.
Nevertheless, in some men, it is painful (swollen) when not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but the swelling does not appear later on.
The first of them is that you must know that phlebotomy is administered only in the conservation of health and with hope for it, and as a precaution against illnesses, and that it should be done in one of the veins located in the arm: cephalic, fusca, or basilica; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in the spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when there are signs of swelling.
And let a phlebotomy be performed, and on the third day or at the first opportunity that has passed three hours since noon.
However, phlebotomy must be performed when it is appropriate and necessary according to the patient's condition, either during daytime or nighttime, at any hour and in all circumstances.
It is necessary that an infant should not be bled before they turn twelve years old, and a pregnant woman should not be bled until the fourth month at the earliest, and the elderly should not be bled who are already over sixty years of age.
And whoever wishes to be bled by any method must prepare their intestines before the bleeding with a lion's clyster, if there is any wound or fissure in them, so that the superfluous fluid does not enter the veins during the bleeding of the intestines, which are pure, and that it does not affect the main members.
Nor should bleeding be performed on patients with nausea or constipation, nor on those suffering from illness or drunkenness until the condition has passed, nor on patients with dropsy, but rather bleeding is feared near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal conditions, and multiplication of the liver and kidneys and excessive exercise, fasting, vigils, or any cause that dissolves virtue, either corporeal or animal.
And one must take into account the subtlety of humors before the bleeding if the blood is thick with food and drinks, and with medications, if it is feasible to do so.
And one must enter into bathing if there is no reason to prevent it, or exercise in any way so that the blood may be made subtle.
The bleeding should cease on the foot of the day, that is to say around third hour, as we have said.
And therefore that the foot of that day is kept on that day from all animal and bodily mishaps, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily strains, such as excessive labor and pain and heat and similar to them.
And in its storage, place the causes to be used in accordance with the custom of men with aromatics and scent and balms and similar to them according to the amount of possibility.
Follow the bloodletter over a cushion that is raised above that of the patient who must be bled.
And pull out the arm, and rub it with your hand the bloodletter two or three times, and strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
The tightening should be done carefully, for when the tightening is not enough, or the tightening is with superfluidity, you must prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is with mollification, then you must prohibit the corset of the blood immediately.
And the tightening must be done, it is necessary that the patient who must be bled rubs their hands together on them until the veins are inflamed and can be felt.
And the bloodletter anoints his blade with a little bit of ancient oil, and then places his left hand on the vein at the place where the bleeding is to be done, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is stopped because it is one of those veins that are found like strings fleeing, and from them comes ventosity, and when the bleeding is paused over there, it must be contracted by the bleeding, and it is discovered, and the bleeding does not open the vein, and if it opens, it is tightened.
And thus, the bloodletter must be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And pause the bleeding, but if the vein is pierced in one go, that is good; and if not, you must wait a little longer at that place or hurry up, if the place is not apophthegmatized (?).
And if the place is apophthegmatized (?), or the patient feels fearful, you must leave it for a day or two, and not tighten the ligament because it will draw out an apostemic cauterization, nor enter into bathing.
And repeat the bleeding if the wound is still there.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows gently, and you fear that the amount of blood will not come out as desired, then repeat the bleeding in that place according to the rule and adjust the opening a little, and do it quickly before the place is apophthegmatized (?), because in many people a large opening should be made sparingly.
But if the opening has already apophthegmatized (?), then you do not repeat it over there because no excuse is given to you; and pause on some part of the oil-wound, for it alleviates the flow of blood. And this place is better with oil and other oils.
Similarly, an oil-wound is administered in all bleeding where the prohibition of corsets must be observed on the blood vessels, and make Tyriacum alfadoc and sagenea when it is stopped from one of them on the place, for the blood is made subtle and is returned when it is thick.
And if a large apostema is generated in the place of bleeding, which often happens to those who are not well bled immediately or when the vein opening is small, then you must catch it, and pause over that place with a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and tighten it for an hour, because it dissolves.
It must be done to bring this compress against the blood of that vein with its completion or another vein.
If it remains in the area for some days with any blackness or greenish discoloration, do not notice it; and if you want, place a plaster made of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a plaster made of mint juice or camphor or similar on it.
And many times abscesses and protrusions occur in the basilica, you must use lancet incision.
Therefore place your hand on it, and if you find softness you must place the compress on it, then that protrusion is bad; and therefore be careful to place a plaster of what I mentioned above, for strong blood will flow from the artery.
Make an ointment with what is stiffening, to harden the area, and treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
It must be to draw blood from everyone according to the amount of its power and according to the color that prevails in the blood according to what appears.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, keep its sharpness until it has been dulled.
For the one who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting on one day, let the incision of the vein be widened and the incisions be wide.
In a weak person, do the opposite of this, and in such a case let blood be drawn too little, and let the cuts be narrow.
The best method for vein incision is to make a cross section, not a puncture.
This method of vein incision is safe from bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more acceptable and safer than vein incision according to width and length.
And in the case where fainting usually occurs, you should perform bloodletting, and it is necessary to take care of him before bloodletting with a small piece of bread soaked in milk-granules or simple oxymel soup; and let out some blood from him for three days or four.
If it is inflammation of the complexion, take before bloodletting a drink infused with myrrh or honey-infusion flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or a scented and fragrant drink.
If fainting occurs due to excessive blood, you must perform bloodletting, and it is necessary to drink water of meat and fragrant infusion, and use aromatics and be careful with your feet on that occasion.
Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
Who wants to alleviate his arm and thin his blood daily, it is necessary for the one whose bloodletting is excessive evacuation, and the power of him is fragile, let him thin his blood little by little, as much as the power in continuous days.
But who wants to alleviate his arm and expel blood on occasion, and his body is strong, let him do this about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
But who wants to increase the amount of blood in his body contrary to the direction it flows, let him do this on the second or third day.
But in the body in which the blood is already heated and sharp, causing fever, it is necessary to expel that blood from his body on one occasion and let a large amount of blood be drawn out and make a wide incision until fainting occurs, so that you will have preserved all the conditions for bloodletting; and you must place your hand over the pulse of him, so as not to cause death in the place of fainting, for many times this happens when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and expel blood daily as the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult for blood to flow out, that you press hard on him with force and straighten it slightly, for this is very bad.
Leave it until it is bloodletted again; or repair the problem caused by coagulated blood in the vein orals with turmeric or sage and cover it with a light compress until the blood flows out.
And if the vein is abscessed, let it be left alone and do not touch it until the abscess is subsided.
And if there is a need to expel blood again, and it is not an excuse, let him make an incision on that place or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "thread of the arm" is bloodletted in the area of the groin or basilica when it is not constricted or numb, as it is composed of them.
The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the probe becomes blocked and the vein appears clearly.
Approach it tightly on the one who is in pain with the narrow constriction; and perform foley (or catheterization) along the small transverse one, not longitudinally or along the length.
Make an opening that is wide and your foley should be such that you catheterize it on the joint of the hand, a small one.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, you must irrigate your hand in cold water and allow the blood to run into it until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the summer days, you are exempt from irrigating the hand with cold water, and in winter, the body should be immersed in cold water at certain times.
The catheterization of this vein is safer than all the other veins because it has no pulsating vein or nerve afterward.
The catheterization of the cube of the right hand is given to liver diseases.
The quality of the catheterization is that you tighten the hand or your hand, since it has been placed in cold water, until the vein swells and is clearly visible to the eye. Then catheterize it transversely. If you insert it deep into it, nothing will be noticed by the eye.
And be careful not to harm your hand during the catheterization because there are exposed nerves of the fingers.
And perform irrigation on the hand with cold water and let the blood run through it because if you do not irrigate it with cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's orifice and its flow is forbidden.
And as blood is extracted according to the required quantity, you must pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not hardened too much; similarly, you should do the same for every branch (of the vein).
But the advantage of catheterizing the vein of the left hand is that it is given to spleen diseases.
Do the same in the catheterization of this as you did with the other.
The advantage of the saphenous vein catheterization is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as scrotal diseases, retention of menstruation, and diseases of the genitals and old sores, and their similarities to other diseases.
The quality of the catheterization is that the patient immerses their foot in cold water and performs friction on it until the veins are clearly visible. Then, over the joint of the ankle with a strap (or band), one should place the location of the vein that will be incised, and from there, the vein's branches should be cut off at the surface of the foot as much as possible.
And so, you should open the abscess wide or allow the bed to be lowered, for the leg's addition is better and more healthful.
If you are opening the abscess on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are below it, and make an incision through which you can drain.
Let the incisions (i.e., cuts) be made with the lancet.
However, the bleeding should not be allowed; you should irrigate the foot with warm water and allow the blood to run into that container where it can be evacuated.
If the lancet user errs in the first look, then you irrigate again with the lancet in a little while, for the place is clean; and do not fear the trickery, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
Do the same with the swelling on the other foot accordingly.
And from the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is to be below the heel of the hip on the wild side.
The help for the lancing of that (i.e., the sciatic vein) is to apply a hot compress to the pain in the lower back when it is due to bleeding.
The quality of the lancing (i.e., the procedure) is that the patient takes a bath, fasts, and strengthens their loins from the lower part of the waist to above the heel for four days with a long, fine bandage, which should not be removed except by that.
And so when it appears, then you should lance that according to each device that is possible for you and according to the transverse (i.e., across), and this is better; or you may incise it with an incision or cut it with a section, for the place is clean.
And it is in many weak men; and if that disappears and does not appear to the sensation of everything, then you should lance any opening from there, and that is the one which appears on the top of the foot towards the ear and the ankle.
Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
And loosen the constriction (i.e., the swelling or blockage) and place your hand over the site of the lancing, holding it firmly, for it will heal easily.
Of ventouse and of the qualities (i.e., uses) of those.
Ventouses are for corns, or eruptions, or wounds.
Ventouse is done in two ways: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is without incision (i.e., a suction ventouse).
This ventouse done without incision can be performed in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
And the ventouses administered with incision and extraction of blood are in twelve places of the body, among which one is where ventouse is applied, and that is at the ankle; and the mid-point of the neck; and ventouses on the chin below the jaw more below the mouth; and ventouses of two spoons; and ventouses of aloes, and that is near the end of the intestine; and ventouses of two cups, and they are from the elbows; and ventouses of two thighs; and ventouses of two hands.
Ventouse does not drain the blood but rather from small veins scattered in the flesh, and so it does not capture its virtue as in lancing; nor is it necessary that ventouse be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by a blockage inside before the entire body is evacuated.
However, if it is necessary due to illness or chronic condition, administer ventouse at all times at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of that and at some other time.
And so when it occurs in any of those causes, and particularly if it is around the third or middle of the month, then you command that ventouse be performed after two or three hours have passed.
And an additional benefit of ventouse on the neck is that when it causes gravity in the head and thus it is sunken into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by total evacuation of the body.
And this ventouse is at the site of lancing in the skull (i.e., cranium).
And it is not permissible to use that which is for complete cleansing or in which there is catarrh, as it gives great harm.
And for that, it is not necessary to use old remedies in heads where there are illnesses.
Furthermore, to avoid forgetfulness from continuing on it, you must command the leecher to place his hand a little near the veins away from the area, fearing the production of forgetfulness.
Instead of leeching at the site of phlebotomy on the vein of the basilica and the great vein: this confers asthma, constriction of the lungs and the division of the stomach muscle, cough, and repletion.
It is necessary that the leeching be gently stopped, for if it is left in place, it causes weakness of the body and stomach.
The leeching of the skull confers headaches and otolaryngitis, migraines, fever, pain in the roots of the teeth; it is at the site of phlebotomy on the basilica vein.
It is necessary to command the leecher not to press his hand against a scratch so as not to cut the artery and cause bleeding.
The leeching away from the chin confers alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, resemblance to diseases that are in the mouth, and it is at the site of phlebotomy on the vein named alisheric, which is in both lips.
The leeching between the two cheeks confers catarrh, which is caused by retention of heat.
The leeching between the two parts deep within the eyes confers, at the same time, phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, the facial and the cerebral, for it attracts blood from all those superficial veins that are in the flesh, and the small veins from other veins deeper until it reaches the attraction to the three main veins.
Command the leecher not to proceed with scratching, for the area is denuded of flesh, and nerves and arteries are exposed there.
It is a leeching that is applied to the anus and confers diarrhea of the rectum and ulcers thereafter.
It is necessary to command the leecher that the leeching should be large and made of a ram's horn, for the area requires a strong cut; and a strong, pointed leeching made from a thin piece of horn should be scratched with a scratch.
Smaller leechings in the armpits for minor manifestation, as they will draw blood from the entire body, and confer old coughs of the lungs and uterus, and of the bladder; they provoke menstruation, and confer swelling and edema; they are at the site of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and at the elbow and ankle.
However, excessive bleeding from all over the body causes fainting in many men.
And the leeching at the elbow joint confers, at the same time, the benefit of the leeching at both arms.
The quality of the positioning of the leechings is that you place the leeching at first sight and suck it up with timely suction, and do not prolong the position of the leeches, but remove them lightly, and keep them moist, and let the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not stop repeating this and continuing until you see the area redden, swell and the scab of blood appears.
Then you scratch and repeat the suction little by little, and pay attention to the positioning of the body.
For a man with thin skin and rare pores, it is necessary that you scratch once and not more, to avoid ulcers at the area.
Command the leecher to make the incision wide and deepen it a little, and take the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary that you scratch twice, for in the first scratching, the channel of fineness to the blood and to its wateriness is opened. But in the second one, the persistent pursuit of the extraction of thick blood is sought.
And if the blood is very mucus-like, it is necessary that a third scratching be made so as to achieve the end result.
Finally, when we want to extract little blood or a small amount, this is sufficient with one scratching.
If we want to extract much blood, we scratch with many scratches; and if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to scratch deeply.
The term "scratching" refers only to the depth of the incision.
If the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas of leeching be treated gently, resolved with more resolution; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of daisies, or oil of camomile, or similar ones. And if it is in winter, use oil of nutmeg, oil of lily, oil of camomile, or similar ones.
If the superfluity is thick, use oil of myrrh, oil of balsam, oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
If the ligature is wide and soft in flesh, it must be forbidden to oil it, and it must be required that the locations of ligation near them are washed with warm water or water from salts, or water of cochineal, or water of borage, and similar to those.
For the one whose blood is of damp humidity, wash their ligatures with vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, similar to those.
For the one with thick superfluities, wash their ligatures with vinegar, or water of wormwood, or dill which is greater annual, or decoction of fennel, or camomile, similar to those.
The ligation should be kept away from bathing; it must be administered immediately next to the bath for an hour or two, and it should sleep near the ligature.
It is necessary that the windpipe (trachea) of a person about to be bled (phlebotomy) be restrained before ligation.
You must consider at the beginning: if the ligature or the one who is to be bled has a hot and windy blood, you must take cooling measures, such as milkwort acetic, and wormwood and lettuce, and dandelion, and juniper, and similar ones.
And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, acidic foods, and similar ones.
For the one with cold complexion, take emesis of alum water or anemarrhena root, sumac, and a moderately strong smelling herb between autumn and spring; it is commanded to drink sparingly and eat little, and pause their food from poultry, canabis, fish, and small birds and doves.
And it must be that on the day of ligation and bleeding, drink more than eat.
And it must be given to drink in some hours to certain men turmeric elixir or medicine of musk, which is musk or celery root before ligation or bleeding or near, so that the main members are comforted and the blood becomes thin; and they should not take that scalp oil.
But the ligations which are not scratched (incised) are the ones stopped near the liver, on the spleen and gout, on the umbilicus, in the joints of the fingers, and in the ankle, because these members cannot bear incision upon them.
And not for these (ligations) is desired attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a ligature on the nipple in sickness of blood flow of the nose; and they use that to dissolve cold inviscid windiness of the member, such as stopping on the abdomen and umbilicus; because it thins the member and soothes it, reduces pain as it resolves windiness.
And it has been stopped on the nostrils when they occur in their opening or pore, because by the strong attraction it overcomes the opening and eradicates the pore from its place.
And similarly when stopped on the liver and spleen it holds windiness in those places.
These ligatures are administered with juice alone; others are sometimes administered with fire.
Others are sometimes administered full of hot water in sickness of the spleen.
This is why the ligature should be filled and made larger, which is hot water alone or water in which appropriate herbs are infused.
Form of ligature administered with fire: The width of the orifice should be the size of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the thread should be as large as a palm; and in the thickness of it, at the site where it is in the circumference, the thickness should be the same, the trough should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with an awl.
Made of yarrow or lemon balm with thick edges, lion's tooth and smooth for it not to damage the member due to its position on it.
And at the middle of it, a horizontal bar of yarrow or iron where the candle is stopped with fire.
And this ligature should be much larger than the one we recommended earlier; and the small amount of it according to the sickness and the state of the one who uses that one.
The ligatures of infants and extended ones are others than the ligatures of young people and large-sized throats.
The quality of stopping this ligature with fire on the member is that it stretches the meat with fire properly in front of a little candle of wax, and stops it on the middle of the horizontal bar in the middle place of the ligature, so that the fire is lit around the sides of it to prevent burning the body of the patient.
And it is to be stopped on the member of the patient, and it should be on the trough that we have mentioned, until when we have the ligatures and do not need to hold it down and let the steam come out over the trough, then the ligature will soon dissolve.
And burn the meat according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary.
A vacuum that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, without a transverse or longitudinal fissure, and it is not administered unless filled with water, and it is placed only on the member.
And this is its form: The larger the vacuum, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Capital. 107.
Sanguisuggae are not administered in any member, but only in the members where it is impossible to apply vacuums due to their small size, such as the mouth and gum-like areas; or in denuded flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those found Sanguisuggae is to find them in muddy freshwater pools.
And they should be laid out in muddy water for the day and night, and no cause remains in their belly; and evacuate the body first with flebotomy and vacuums; and cool the patient's limbs before they swell; and lay them on it.
And when they are filled and closed. This sentence likely refers to the Sanguisuggae, which suggests that once they have been cleaned in muddy water, they should be filled with something (likely a medicinal substance) and sealed. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
And if it is possible to extract juice from the area with the vacuum, it is more helpful as a remedy. This sentence suggests that using the vacuum (likely for bloodletting or draining fluid) and collecting the resulting juice (possibly for analysis or treatment purposes) is beneficial.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and apply coarse water, and rub and squeeze it. This sentence suggests that if it's not possible to extract juice from the area using a vacuum, then it should be washed with vinegar and coarse water, and then rubbed and squeezed. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
If the body's wound has prolonged bleeding and the Sanguisuggae are not effective, then place a cloth soaked in cold water on it, and let it rest until the bleeding stops. This sentence suggests that if the wound continues to bleed after applying the Sanguisuggae (likely bloodletting or draining fluid), then a cold cloth should be applied to stop the bleeding.
If the wound multiplies, then sprinkle vitriol triturated or similar stiptics substances over it until the wound is drained; or lay the largest pieces of cooked fava beans over the area until they adhere to the wound, and the wound is drained. This passage suggests that if the wound becomes infected or multiplies, certain substances (likely antiseptics) can be applied to kill bacteria and promote healing, or larger pieces of cooked fava beans can be placed on the wound to help draw out pus and promote healing. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
If necessary, repeat the application of Sanguisuggae when they can be replaced. This sentence suggests that if the wound continues to bleed or become infected, the application of the Sanguisuggae (likely bloodletting or draining fluid) should be repeated, and new ones used as needed.
And if the Sanguisuggae are forbidden for suspension, then wash the area with recent or old blood or insert a needle into the area where bleeding occurs; and let them rest, as they will quickly stop bleeding. This passage suggests that if the use of Sanguisuggae is prohibited, an alternative method can be used to stop bleeding: washing the wound with fresh or old blood, or inserting a needle into the bleeding site. The purpose of this is to prevent further bleeding and promote healing.
And when you want them to adhere, sprinkle a little powdered allium sativum (garlic), salt or ashes on them and let them dry immediately. This passage suggests that if the Sanguisuggae are used for bloodletting or draining fluid, they can be made to adhere by sprinkling them with powdered garlic, salt, or ashes, and letting them dry quickly. The purpose of this is not specified in the text you provided.
Similarly, the process for the third part begins: restoration. This suggests that the previous discussion (presumably about treating wounds and infections) is now transitioning to a new topic, which may be related to wound healing or recovery from illness. The specific focus of this section is not specified in the text you provided. This chapter is very important for the practice of medicine; and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocation accidents in the bones. This suggests that the new topic (likely related to wound healing or recovery from illness) will focus on treating fractures and dislocations of the bones, which is an essential aspect of medical practice.
Oh, son, know that the foolish doctors and the common people boast about this chapter; and those who do not read the works of the Ancients nor learn anything from them for a long time. This suggests that although this chapter may be important in the practice of medicine, it is often overlooked or dismissed by some practitioners, particularly those who do not follow the teachings of the ancient medical texts.
And for this reason, the method of these scholars in our land is hidden; and I have not forgotten it in a short time, and I have not used what follows, except through long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of their teachings, until I extracted the science from them. This suggests that the author acknowledges that this medical knowledge is often kept secret and not widely available, but they have learned it through extensive study and application of the ancient medical texts. The purpose of this passage is not specified in the text you provided.
And direct yourself to experimentation and study for a long time. This suggests that the author encourages the reader to continue learning, experimenting, and studying in order to gain a deeper understanding of medicine and improve their skills as a practitioner. The purpose of this passage is not specified in the text you provided.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the essential knowledge and upon which much experimentation has been performed; therefore, I condense it for you and relieve you of excessive occupation; and condense it at the end of the condensation; and show it at the end of the demonstration; and form many forms of instruments that are administered in this, as shown through additional explanations, just as I have done in two preceding chapters. This suggests that the author has already covered the main points of this chapter in detail, but will now summarize the information for the reader to make it more accessible and concise. The purpose of this passage is not specified in the text you provided.
Title (Capitol) First
Summary and Compilation of the Causes of Fractures of Bones, from which the preliminary is necessary before we begin to recall the fractures of members and the various kinds of each (of them). Therefore, let us begin the introduction of this chapter by giving the summation of the discourse; and the chapters following will be understood by those who are experts and stationed at the truth of these subjects; so it is for you and for those who can learn or understand this noble art from you.
And therefore say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or displacement occurs, it is necessary to begin with trepanation or ligation of the place, or whichever one, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as debility in strength, or if it is the case that the person is at rest, or old age, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
And let it be filled with food consisting of lettuces and meats of birds and crabs; and forbid heavy meats and filling with food or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of a cauterized aposteme, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to their usual care with which they are accustomed.
And since the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat flour and water, rice, cabbage, peas, beef, veal, mutton, pork, large fish and similar ones, and with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more quickly.
And know that the bones that are broken in men of old age and the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and connects some cause similar to a glue on the broken bone in any part, causing swelling that adheres and strengthens it until it is also consolidated, until the end of softness and weakness comes, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit this from its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, foods that are heavy, viscous and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone in the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and the fracture of the bone in the foot is different from the fracture of the bone in the hand; and similarly all other members are different from each other.
And I will come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter separate from the others.
The diversity of fracture within itself is discussed below. The types of bone fractures are diversified in their details; for there is a curved fracture and one that occurs at the star, and some are fractured according to the length of the bone: and there are the fractures of the shin and ankle and addictions, such as those produced by blows and those not produced by them, such as the fracture in the penis when it is prepared for writing, and the fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and the fracture with a crack.
And each type has its own remedy or torture in restoring it, as will be remembered separately for each one.
Sign of bone fracture. For this is how bone fracture is recognized: it shows twisting of the limb, and the prominence and appreciation of the injury in sensation, and it is that which you compress with your hand.
And therefore when there is no obvious twisting in the place, or it is not felt during examination, you must press the bone with movement and if the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that there may be twisting or a small crack, in which case you must press on it with your hand and compress it all; pause over the medicine of which the remedy appropriate to the place will be remembered at this moment; and it should be held tightly by traction.
And know that if the place is curved and not cut in two or something else does not occur in the shin, as for example, the entire circumference of its comparison is affected, then it is necessary to begin from your time at the rectification of it, having first applied cauterized aposteme.
And if a cauterized aposteme has occurred, leave it for several days until the aposteme ceases; and bind it according to any method that you can do with gentleness and skill.
And know that the restoration of the limb and the alignment of the fractured bone is easier than in a shinbone where this has occurred.
And strengthen it according to what will be remembered for its remedy.
If there are splinters in the bones, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with cords, or with one cord and the hand.
Place your position such that the injured member is extended according to its natural figure, while the parts are being extended from the broken member, then proceed to make it return to its original position with tools and in whatever way you can manage at their locations.
Be careful that your actions do not harm or injure the patient, and proceed as your strength allows to apply one bone to another in the best possible ways.
It is necessary at that time to apply your hand skillfully to it (the bone), and if you find any other cause there, correct it and align it according to the amount of your force.
Apply forceful extension and compression, as foolish doctors do when they cause abscess or caution to occur through their actions, or as we have seen happen through the action of those foolish doctors.
The quality of the tightening of a broken member is the one I recommend, because you should know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of those.
And for those that are small, like the arm and the elbow and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of thin fabric.
But for those that are large, like the thigh or leg, it is necessary that the wrapping be broad and hard, because the thickness connects the large and strengthens it all over with tightening, in order to prevent infection.
And begin, align your evacuation with convenience, place firmly suitable coverings on it (the fracture), three or four depending on the member's need; and strengthen your hand slightly with the linen.
And bring it up to the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen a little more than your tightening with which you have tightened the location of the fracture. And bring the wrapping of the location of the fracture out slightly, and loosen the tightening little by little, until you grasp a large part of the location.
And bring another bandage and wrap it over the injured location with the wrapping, and bring the wrappings to the part below the fracture; and your operation should be in tightening the bandage and loosening it according to what I have said in the first wrapping above.
And bring padding of leather or fabric to straighten the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything on it for any reason.
And place another bandage on it, and bring padding over these well-made stitches immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location, and then place it on the abscess site and stop the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you strengthen over the stitches.
And the stitches should be made of strong cane reeds or well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm ramps; and their size according to this form and shape:
However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and harder than the other stitches, and the length of the stitch according to the member's size and smallness; and strengthen over the stitches with another bandage according to your initial tightening; and tie it up above with thread properly, as I have said about tightening, and it should be your tightening according to the location of the fracture more, and when it is farther from the fracture, it should be less tight.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and be of flax; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some fools using ropes of twisted flax, it is a great error when the narrowness equals [the affected area].
However, very thin threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve the desired narrowness with them, and it is necessary that between each stitch there be the width of one finger.
And if the patient is afflicted by the tips of the stitches near the narrowness in those places, then place a stopper made of beeswax or felt there to prevent injury.
Sometimes fracture occurs along with an abscess, and it happens in the sutures, and I will recall it again in the chapter on special cases.
And you should know that it is not necessary to suture all broken members immediately; the reason being that when a member is large, it is not necessary to stitch it on the first day but rather after 5 or 7 days, depending on your confidence in the development of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that ancient physicians used to restore, which involved suturing fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Common plaster method for fracture restoration, suitable for complex cases and more commonly for women and children, since it is on what neither heat nor friction acts: you must take powder from the mill, and it is the medlar pit that you should grind in the walls of the mill.
And you should prepare it in this way, unless you sieve it with albumen of egg, and the mixture should be neither too thick nor too thin; and use that [preparation].
Another method of immobilizing fractures, dislocations, and twists is to use an ointment made from asafetida, lapis Lazarus, acacia, elm, myrrh, and aloe vera, all equal parts by weight of about one drachm; of frankincense and aloe wood, half a drachm each; alcohol or egg white if the patient's condition is scalded; apply this ointment as it has a good composition that restores broken bones gently and confers strength to weak men.
Another method of immobilizing a fracture or twist is to use an ointment made from myrrh, aloe vera, frankincense, and elm, all equal parts by weight of one drachm; white clay, half a drachm each; and Armenian pitch in large quantities.
All [ingredients] are ground in a mortar with contraction powder, sieved, and mixed with water or egg albumen, and administered.
Method of plaster for joints and separated bones from their places, and to relieve pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take wool soaked in vinegar and oil of cedar and apply it on the area.
However, this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration, abscess formation, or the expulsion of pain specifically.
Another plaster method that restores fractured bones: take fig leaf peelings and wild opium poppy leaves; grind them all together to make a plaster from them.
Method of plaster for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want to resolve the persistence of an abscess: recipe ground from chalk, camomile, violets, hops, and wild oats, all in equal parts. All [ingredients] are ground in vinegar if the member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then prepare it with water of colander hyssop or water and use that [preparation].\] Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.
Another method of applying a strong plaster for resolution, when an abscess lasting long occurs on the body: take radish root and its seeds, ballast nut, clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, of all parts ground and crushed; all are steeped in water of savory or sweet water or vinegar, all according to the quality of the member and the relaxation of the color of it.
Hippocrates does not say in his book that it should be placed on a broken member for its restoration, but rather a plaster made of wax and oil should be applied and no other cause; and he recommends it to be neither too thick nor too thin.
Moreover, in Gaul it is seen that they should be applied on a broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat, such as myrrh, incense and similar to them of those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster for wounds and pain: take poppy seeds, celery, human skin scraped or goose feathers, radish, salt, ground and sieved; make it into a plaster.
Moreover, the quantity that corresponds to the extent of the wound and it should be removed, consider whether there is pain or swelling or if the bone is broken from its place; then do not remove for many days. And if it happens that the place becomes painful or swollen or inflamed, then cut or remove it at that time and apply plaster to it.
Take cloth and sea sponge soaked in warm water, submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the affected area until the swelling and pain cease; then let the member rest for an hour; and apply wool soaked in vinegar, oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are sure of the abscess being cauterized, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and the pain of it is relieved.
Also, apply gentle and small pressure to that slight constriction and do not tighten it with your first constraint, and gently until it is healed.
And when the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation and all the symptoms have been relieved, and you need neither plaster nor bandage, then massage it as you did at the beginning of the treatment.
And if no cause of those mentioned occurs in the member, then do not remove it except after three or four or six days. And after certain intervals all of this is left for twenty days according to your observation through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the flesh coagulates on it.
Then adjust the bandage more than your first bandage in all places, and adjust the swelling of the patient's wound according to the memory of it.
Moreover, if you see the location of the fracture drying out and extending more than necessary, then know that nourishment should not reach it; therefore wrap it in warm water daily to prevent it from drying out; and let this be for three days; and loosen the bandage slightly, and by this operation allow the member to receive nourishment, and heal lightly.
Those who restore the fracture of the member with other methods when it is not restored at the beginning, as necessary, and restore it incorrectly according to their operation, and have great fear, and if they were righteous, they would have increased these in their books and warned against doing it.
I have not seen anyone do this, so it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capital: On Fractures when they occur in the head.
The species of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are various, and their causes are distinct, because some fracture is caused by striking with a weapon, which shatters all the bone into small pieces, which is called scalping; or the weapon cuts some part of the bone, but does not penetrate to the back of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the wound of these two fractures can be large or small, and whether it is contracted or protruded; and the cause of it is striking with a hammer or crossbow on stone, and similar.
This fracture is penetrating and approaches the panicle, which is adjacent to the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the wound of these two fractures can be large or small.
And this fracture is narrowed in the bone, in its subtlest part, and for that reason this species of fracture is called capillary fracture.
This fracture is caused by striking with a stone or impact on a stone, which causes one layer of the bone to enter into the internal layers, and it occurs in concave places such as at the joints when they are struck and split open and enter into the internal layers.
And moreover, it is done in bodies made of moist bones, such as those of children.
To all these kinds of dislocations and fractures, they are afflictions like separated needles. The patient will return to its place (position).
We must recognize all these kinds of fractures by observation on them and by inquiry into their symptoms, as well as the rotten flesh that is over them.
A capillary type (of fracture) is recognized by what is revealed over the bone and it is cleaned, and limited in size with a probe, because the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, it is necessary to consider first the accidents of the patient, and afterwards examine if they indicate by obvious signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscesses of the throat, fainting, acute fever, swelling and redness of the affected areas, and similar symptoms in the major dispositions, for it is doubted whether it will heal.
If there are no unusual accidents, you hope for health, then you begin its treatment.
The cause is that if it has been afflicted at the beginning as it is afflicted and this is during the days of winter, then you must study the removal of the bone fragment before the twelfth day according to all disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, you must remove the bone fragment before the seventh day, because what remains of the bone can become rotten with putrefaction, and the accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the pannicol covering the brain, and it is divided into small pieces and adhered (stuck together), then you must incise the divided area, compressed and adherent, according to what I will advise you.
It is that you reason the patient's head afflicted, and expose (examine) over the bone according to custom and as possible for you according to the appearance of the wound, and it should be gentle with the patient.
If it occurs to you, you must detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess, then you oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and it is that you apply warm compresses made of wool soaked in wine and rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess subsides, and be sure of blood flow; and then begin the circumcision of the bone and its removal.
And that may be one of two methods of operation.
The first method is that you incise the bone with a straight incisor and this is its form:
Then apply the incisor tool that is longer than the second one.
You must have several incisor tools of various sizes, some longer than others; and some shorter than the rest and should be at the end of sharpness of their tips, and made of iron or steel.
Use them (the incisors) easily when striking on the instrument to avoid hitting the skull and damaging it.
If the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with chisels (taravels), which are called non-penetrating chisels.
They are not called that because they do not pierce the end of the bone to where it is near, for this reason the chisel has a rounded tip or edge over what is left of the cap of it sharp, similar to an edge or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing through the bone.
It is appropriate for you to take a large number of these splinters that each one corresponds to the specific bone, until it is present in all parts of the skull, the end of which is sharp. The quantity in length and width should be according to the size of the bone splinter.
Here is the form of three types of splinters: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the splinter on the bone and twist it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then move the splinter to another location, and stop when it reaches a place where the splinter's size matches the length or thickness of the ray.
Here is the translation: Then insert a chisel and chisels between each crack of the bone, and make a subtle incision on it at the end of levitation, as we have said, until you cut the bone, or with your hand, or with some other means using various tools that you will have prepared for this purpose, such as mallets and forceps.
You must be very careful that the chisel does not touch any of the nerves.
Therefore, when you perforate the bone and it is continuous with the nerve if it is so, you must separate it from the nerve and extract it. You should cut and file it on the roughness of the bone with another tool similar to a chisel, but be sure that it is thinner and more delicate than other chisels.
And if any small pieces of the bones remain and are stuck, you must take it with ease with what is appropriate from the tools at your disposal; then care for the wound with linseed oil and ointments that we have mentioned.
Here is the translation for this line: The other method of operation is easy and far from fear, which we call Galen's dry method, and it is highly praised; this is its explanation: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin by uncovering the fracture site where the break is most evident and visible. After you have discovered that fracture and have stopped at the place with the slow and gentle tip of the chisel, which has the following shape:
The round fracture is long and does not cut any nerve, while the sharp fracture has two edges advancing in length, as sometimes happens; that the round fracture should be adjusted to the nerve with the sharp edge cutting into the bone.
Then strike the chisel with a small hammer on one side of the fracture until you have cut through the entire bone with ease as it rotates, and you are sure that no panic occurs in any way in case of accident that worries you; if the patient was very foolish and most ignorant among all men, certainly he was asleep.
If any nerve remains attached to the bone of the panic at certain locations on the bone, you will cut it with the round tip of the chisel and release it gently without harm or fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the panic, and what is separated or remains of the bone is its face, and it remains rough and subtle indentations, you must file that roughness and remove those indentations with fine files which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places at the most convenient time and the right place for each one depending on where you find yourself in your operation of that broken bone and the shape of it.
You must use reason when filing the bone at first with the least of those files, and then use the most delicate part of it, without ceasing to do so continuously until you reach the point where you can administer the thin and fine parts of all of them.
But in the case of other small and subtle fractures, you must care for it according to what you find for its correction.
The reason is that it is not completely understood in all aspects by those who study that art. And we will write about what we have shown for large fractures.
If the panic is rectangular when you cut the bone, then you must take cloth in accordance with the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another cloth doubled or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the primary cloth, and apply gentle pressure on it that you can apply without damaging the nerve; and administer a thin ointment to it, but do not press too hard on it, only as much as the wound requires.
Leave that patient in this care for a day or two until you are certain of the abscess cauterization; then separate him and administer medicines suitable for dryness, such as linen rag and oat flour, powder of figs and Aristolochia, and similar ones.
It is that you make a powder of these medicines and sprinkle it over the sore, so it becomes dry; and in general, administer to him all medicine with properties that absorb and do not irritate.
Be careful that the sore in your care is clean; it should not be covered with grease or anything else; nor let it fester; for when it becomes infected in the brain tissue, it corrupts it and poisons the patient, and leads to a great evil.
When the skull is opened, as the bone is cleansed and especially when the treatment of it is prolonged, and it becomes black on the surface; therefore consider whether the patient has experienced the accidents that we have mentioned, know that it is dangerous without any doubt.
If the blackness does not come from the medicine applied, but is due to the properties of that medicine, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil. Take a linen cloth and lay it over the skull; place a poultice of appropriate healing herbs on top of it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into two halves as it is sometimes mistakenly thought, but one of them is slightly displaced or observed, because in it there are two bones, and the break is not complete, but rather a dislocation, twisting and narrowing.
But if one of the two halves of it is broken, you must insert your little finger into its nose and guide the fracture inward with your other finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Make it as easy for you as possible, and be careful that your operation does not harm the patient.
If the fracture is in the superior half of the nose and the lower one does not project, then you must equalize it with the end of the bone that is slightly thickened.
If the fracture is in both halves, then you do the same.
Gather all the necessary materials for its repair on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, wait until the seventh or tenth day for the abscess to heal.
Insert a piece of linen cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one half, or two calques (small pieces), if the fracture is in both halves, and make it as thick as it fills the hollow of the nose.
As the old restorers say, the calques should be sewn with thread and kept in place all day, but I don't find it so; nevertheless, the cloth must be folded in albumen of coagulated egg white with powdered flour and placed inside until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
In some cases, it may be better to put something inside the nose instead of a calque, such as a piece of lion's skin, if there is excessive bleeding; and if the fracture of the nose is severe and the patient is not forbidden from breathing through it.
This procedure is not necessary for you; if you want, do it, and if you want, use calques.
If there is another abscess that needs healing, fill the nose with wax or a mixture of honey and rose oil or balm, or alum.
But if there is no abscess that needs healing, you must fill it from outside with oat flour and powdered figs mixed with egg white; and place a piece of lion's skin over it, but do not let the nose touch anything.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, you must break it further and extract them with the appropriate instruments; then sew up the opening, heal it with what strengthens and consolidates, and use plasters that are suitable for healing.
If there is a sore inside the nose, you must heal it with calques and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jawbone when broken.
When the lower jawbone is broken and the fracture is not in a sore, observe whether the fracture is only on the outside, not split into two and curved towards the inside, then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger into their mouth; and push the curvature of the fracture towards the inside with ease at the inside parts, with your other hand pushing the outside part of the bone; do this gently.
And if the jawbone fracture is separated into two, then it's necessary to administer extension of both parts according to right angle until the alignment can be achieved.
If there is a fracture or dislocation of the teeth, take care to set those that can be saved with gold, silver, or ivory splints; then place cotton on the broken jawbone and also double layer of linen cloth, and a thick plaster well made or a single piece of gauze along the length of the jawbone; bind them as appropriate according to the fracture type and necessary application until it is not destroyed.
Order the patient to rest and take only mild food, avoid sour lemons.
If you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, wait until the third day and then examine it; correct what is already altered with powder of milled pearl, albumen of egg white or flour of chalk, because you will remove the cotton from it, and place lamb wool on the plaster.
Then leave the plaster attached to it, and if the bone arrangement is not altered, let it be, until it heals and strengthens the fracture; because this fracture usually heals in three weeks.
If another pus-filled boil occurs, administer what was mentioned earlier in its treatment until it is healed and the boil is removed.
If the fracture is a wound, consider whether it is separated flesh or an ulcer; in this case, carefully separate those tissues with the appropriate tool for removing them with instruments.
If the wound of the ulcer is narrow, expand it with a trocar according to your need.
Then, when you have removed those tissues and they are not reabsorbed, close the wound if it is large; otherwise, cover it with one of the appropriate dressings and let it heal.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
In three ways, the collarbone can be broken at its juncture with muscles; and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts other than those that become ulcers; and it is easier to treat the former; or it occurs in such a way with ulcers, and it is difficult to treat the latter; or it is like when the fracture occurs with an open wound.
And the operation when the fracture occurs without an open wound is that you must have two assistants present; one to hold the broken collarbone and another to extend the neck in the affected area.
Then align the fracture with the teeth mentioned earlier until the proper shape is achieved without excess protrusion or concavity.
If more extension is needed, it's necessary to place a pillow or wool beneath the patient's back and adjust its size according to your need; then extend and elevate the collarbone and hold it in place with your hand until you align the fracture as necessary.
If you are unable to insert the extremity of the collarbone into its proper position outside, because it is inaccessible due to a previous incision, then the patient should be repositioned on their back, and a small cushion placed on the affected muscle.
The assistant should press the muscle at the fracture site until the collarbone is elevated so that it aligns with the incision above; then you must correct the fracture and align it with the teeth mentioned earlier.
But if there are ulcers on the collarbone and they are bad, it's necessary to make an incision over that area and remove those ulcers with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, you should make an incision into it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this purpose, after placing the chisel that serves as a lever below the collarbone; and the chisel has a shaft or iron in the shape of:
It is like the cupler (hollow part) of which this is the concavity; and let its width be as required for it, according to what you have needed for it, according to the size of the bone or the scarcity of it.
The length should be as far as is possible for the operation; it must have two ends in this way, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
If the tear of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the pus from the bone is wide and it appears to be an abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
If the tear is small or you fear abscess, then you fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the wound's incision.
If abscess occurs, then you insert linen in strong vinegar and rose oil and wait on it.
And in all, the splint should not be harmful to the broken bone; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, because when the limb is softened or the splint has been removed, then you correct it and strengthen the fracture.
You place the patient's head on their neck and let them sleep slightly inclined from that side; so that with this, the support of the limb from that side is elevated, and thus the fracture of the vertebra is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arms are attached to the neck of it.
And do not loosen the limb unless abscess occurs in the location or there is pressure, within twelve days.
And you renew the plaster if you have seen its face and adjust it in the stricture and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the vertebra is coagulated.
And it should be strengthened and supported for twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it is done in the month of that time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of shoulder fracture.
The spatula is broken at the lateral location, but not completely broken, only the edges.
Therefore, when the location of it is broken - and it is broken in the middle location - and it is not known except by touching, then you prepare it according to the shape of the fracture and reduce it according to its natural figure in all ways possible with any means at your disposal.
And you place powder of flour with egg white and leopard skin, and you place double powder of cloth, and you place a thin table-steel rod on it according to the size of the spatula or more if necessary.
But if the rod is concave in some of the locations of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with leopard skin, and you adjust the rod according to equality.
And strengthen it from above with a long emetic with appropriate constriction and the firmness of the rod until it is removed from its location.
Consider the limb every day; and every time it softens, the next day you strengthen it equally and adjust the rod if it has been removed from its location.
Keep the patient on their side.
The spatula is restored in twenty or thirty days.
Therefore, when this number is completed, then you loosen the limb, and you know for sure that it is of the bones from which the fracture did not begin or their dissolution.
And if there is pressure in the bone location and you place a bandage, then you make an incision on it, and remove it, and do as previously described in the vertebra fracture to avoid abscess danger if it occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of foot fractures.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle location, but the ends of it move towards each other, but they are swollen and bruised.
And when the bone of him who is fractured breaks apart, it descends into parts inside and happens that he experiences great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and it is revealed in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; press firmly on the muscles of him, and adjust his ribs with both hands, be subtle in the operation of him, and in the alignment according to all means possible and necessary, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And place a plaster and a stopper on it, and lay a thin strip of willow or caligy wood with similar properties on top of it, because you cover him with cloth; be subtle in tying that one over the fractured bone so that it is not too tight; and go along with the curvature of his back some times, and tighten it appropriately; consider the tie at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
If necessity causes the plaster to come off, you must corrode or burn it, or pain, or an abscess that occurs in the location, then you cut and remove it and remove the plaster and correct what happens due to it with a method of treatment for him; and return the plaster, if necessary, to its place; and adjust its tie until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not happen in thin places that follow the spine; and from the ends of them on the front side it is not contracted except by what is cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this should not be hidden from sensation, the investigation of it should be done with the aforementioned signs.
And the restoration should be such that the fracture is closed with the aforementioned methods, until it is healed as necessary, and place plaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint if it is required.
And if the fracture of the ribs descends into parts inside, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture, as in puncture that occurs in someone who has wept, and because the bones are covered with linen; and difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients were skillful in that with many clever methods.
And that which they said is: it is necessary to stop the food of the patient that generates inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen is inflated and expanded, and the fracture is forced outward to the parts outside.
But we should beware of this, so that it does not cause the creation of an abscess cautiously, if not necessary; and if it happens, then help with this.
And some of them said that it should be stopped above the bladder and that it should be squeezed out forcefully; and this is reasoning, but it is feared that the bladder attracts excess to the location due to weakness.
And some of them said: it should be covered with linen that is already immersed in hot oil, and pulverized material between the ribs until it is filled, let the tie be tight when you cover it according to the curvature; and cure the patient with treatment for pleurisy and medicine.
And if intense constriction causes suffering for the patient that cannot tolerate it, and the bones are pierced with a linen cloth with puncture, beware of the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location, uncover the broken rib, and place an instrument over it that preserves the cipher, the memory of which was mentioned earlier, and cut the bone with ease and extract it.
And place both lips of the wound together, if it is large, with sutures, and heal it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then you cut and pour hot water into it and place plasters over the location, and cure the patient with what is necessary for an internal abscess.
And lie on a board over which he sleeps until healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and later they contract, similar to the vertebrae of the back. And if you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider, because if his muscles are already softened and swollen and dead and cannot be made to grow or strengthen, and when you tighten them with the aforementioned ties or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain there, then you know that it is not healed, and in the month of preparation it is mortal.
And if you feel constriction and pain with the ties and piercing in those, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck that resemble this and want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider the weight of it.
When you see that it has become softened, go to those who have occurred in the thighs, and approach when he lies on his back, there is ventosity and evacuation without his will, and sometimes he is reclined on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at that point do not work on the healing of him.
But if no such cause occurs in this case, the cause is better and easier to handle.
The treatment for him is to perform the cautery of the abscess that you place over the swollen vertebra or oiled with oil, or with honey applied; place it over that for several days until the abscess is cured.
Then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it there with liniment; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not sleep on the side where pain occurs until it is healed.
And if it happens that the fracture of the bone occurs or any other cause that has already been separated from him, then you must cauterize the skin over the wound and open the bone; and align the two lips of the wound, with suturing if it is large; and care for it with a dressing made of grease until it heals.
If it is broken at the end of the bone in the heel, and that is the end of the tendon, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and grasp the fractured bone with the other hand as possible by equal measure; and place a dressing and splint over it if needed, and strengthen it.
If you feel fractures in it (the bone), then cut it open and remove it, and care for the wound with a treatment that is preceded until it heals.
Chapter X.
On the repair of the anus.
The bones of the anus are broken and if they break, the fracture is not only communicated to the extremities of these bones but they are inserted in length and decline into the sides; and pain occurs in that area and a lump forms when it is fractured.
And the repair of it (the anus) is that you extend your hand over it to the fracture which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only at its extremity, you grasp it as you are able to grasp it in accordance with the equality of grasping something that is similar to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or that declines into the sides of the anus, then you make the patient lie on his stomach until you are prepared to repair the fracture. Therefore when you have grasped it (the bone), place a dressing over it, and also place the splint of wood or skin on it, and strengthen it with suturing, without fear of the fracture being punctured or the removal of the splint.
Grasp the concavity with whatever you fill it until it is held by the suturing according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or his right side.
But if an abscess occurs, you cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is cured, and place on it what you use to soothe it according to what has been done before; and return to its repair and strengthen it as necessary.
And if the bones are fractured or shattered, you treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the repair of the fracture of the adductor (muscle).
The adductor is that which is between the thigh to the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the repair of it (the adductor muscle) is one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat splint of medium thickness in this shape:
And let them be attached to two extremities with liniment, and let it be suspended from a raised location.
The patient follows on a stretcher; and let him throw his broken arm over the pole to the tilting block in the middle location where it is attached to the curve of the pole.
And support it with some serious cause, or else the minister extends it to the sides; and the doctor who has set the fracture should hold it with his hands until the fracture returns as it should.
Another method is that the patient is laid back on their neck and their hand is supported at the neck; and command two servants, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other to hold the foot below it; and each extends to their side.
If you want the extension to be more forceful, then you press strongly on the fracture with both hands and on the other side with another hand, and each servant extends to their two sides.
Therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it should be stopped halfway at the shin and the other side of the fracture must be tied.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, it should be stopped at that location and also at the joint.
Wrap it gently with ease and without much effort, and when it is properly tied according to the situation and applied well, then press it if there is not an abscess formation.
But if there is an abscess cautery, leave the wrapping for up to seven days and press on it with a wool suture dipped in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess recedes, then press it.
The method of pressing the fracture is to apply a plaster on it and wrap a seaweed cloth around the plaster; and adjust the arm in a splint, and place your wet hand over the muscle.
And wrap the cloth and press on the splint to keep the arm in its place, unless there is any reason due to a broken bone.
And use of splints.
And that you place the broadest and strongest splint over the fracture; and place a space between each splint the width of the finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And press on the splints as previously mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And your wrapping over the location of the fracture should be tighter. And as the fracture becomes longer, the wrapping should be looser.
And if the situation of the splints and wrapping is as previously mentioned when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it.
And if there is a fear of abscess cautery, leave the wrapping and splints for up to seven days as previously mentioned.
And consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent pus or inflammation in that location, or if food is not allowed to reach the limb due to excessive wrapping; and therefore correct everything as previously mentioned.
But if you are confident that there will be no complication of this, do not remove the ligature until at least three days or more.
The patient's bed should be on their side and their hands on their stomach.
And wrap the cooked arm full of wool padding, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be unbound or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened; therefore correct everything with your judgment.
And restrict the patient's food as previously ordered, so that it is initially subtle until it starts to thicken, and then it must be made coarser.
For the custom of the splint and leg rest is that they should be strong for forty days, and then they must be loosened and a bath given and medicine applied with enema, which will correct it.
And if the fracture is laid flat, do not loosen the ligament and splint for up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm consists of two bones that are called the two focils; the smaller one is the one we call the head, and the larger one is the one that is placed below the smaller one, from the lower part.
And it can be broken only the major focal or the minor one, and they are broken together.
And when the small focal is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is easier.
And when the large focal is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, it is appropriate for the doctor to, wait a slight extension with ease until it is wrapped.
If the large focal is the broken one, then it is necessary to wait for a more vigorous extension.
And if both focals are broken together, then you must wait for the setting with less force.
It is necessary to wait for the figure of the hand in order to restore it and extend it on a cushion; the wrist should be at the sides above, as all the others have said, and the thumb should be below the other fingers, and the patient should be seated on a low stool.
And let a servant be in front of the patient at his head or feet, so that the patient does not tire.
Then let another servant extend his arm from the opposite side and hold him, and let another minister do the same.
Then let the doctor insert his finger into the bone to reduce it as best he can.
If there is a fracture of the bone, then you must try to reduce it all by your virtue.
If there is a separate fracture that cannot be healed and you do not expect recovery, then cut it off as we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is infected, you have already read about that in a separate chapter, and therefore take care of it.
If an abscess arises at the beginning of your treatment, you must line a cloth with a mixture of rose oil and white wax that is medium in thickness and strong on one side with fine suture thread to contain the abscess; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered milled chalk and clay of huou, and place needles nearby; and let it be the needle which is held over the fracture tightly and firmly.
And know that the number of needles in the arm is usually in major arrangements, or if the fracture is in a socket or in two sockets together.
And place your suture over the location of the fracture as firmly and as strongly as possible, and when it is extracted at the parts above or below the fracture, loosen the suture slightly, according to the reminder given at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or coarse; and the thread with which it is sewn should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
Consider the member and let it rest for several days. And if any cause arises for which rectification is necessary, such as swelling of the member, then you must bind the member with a cold water poultice until it stops.
Release the bandage and allow the member to rest, then tighten the suture.
If the swelling has been softened and the bone has healed and appears like those, then you must correct everything as best you can.
Consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive bandaging, for then you must loosen it slightly and allow it to run for several days until it reaches the nutrient, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not have any of the aforementioned causes, then it is not necessary to undo the bandage for more than about twenty days or so.
Then let the hand of the patient be suspended by its virtue of moving in an agitated manner, and have him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or forty days, or a little faster in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complexion and the virtues.
Chapter thirteen.
On the treatment of a fracture in the little finger or fingers.
Know that in the little finger and joints of the fingers there can be a fracture, but this does not usually happen unless it is injured by strong movements.
And when there is a fracture or injury in the hand, then you must have the patient hang down with his arms stretched out and place his hand on top of it.
Then let another servant extend the broken bones and the doctor insert them back into place with good alignment.
And you must place plaster and stop it if there is not an abscess, and place needles on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
But if the break is in the inner part of the palm, then you must make a sling-like bandage and command the patient to hold it with his hand in a closed position; let it be strong with long cloth.
And the needle of the heart should be made of cloth with light material, to ensure that it is applied to the palm; and tighten it as necessary.
But if the fracture is in the outer part, you must place needles on top and another needle at the opposite side of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and tighten the suture as needed. The hand should be turned to the ratchet between the fingers with padding.
And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, insert and tighten it as needed and hold it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight needle under it to raise the fracture and prevent it from going down.
But if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger, or little finger, then insert and align it with the digit that is next to it; or all of them together, which is better; or place a small needle on top, as we have said for the thumb.
Consider in your treatment, arrange carefully the position of the cauterized abscess and oppose it  with its own operation  whatever occurs due to any cause of that, as is repeated in the narrative.
Chapter XIV
Treatment of fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The fractured bone of the thigh, when observed, is broken and is diagnosed by sensation according to whether it moves or is covered in pus.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that a strong ligament is placed over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
And the minister extends all the ligament to its separation according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is in the region of the thigh, then the ligament should be near the back at the separation of the adductor muscles, so that the extension fits above it, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the break is near the back, then make the ligament near the buttock and extend it to the separation below.
And the doctor presses the bone with both his hands inside it as much as he can reduce it according to its natural shape and the bone is joined well by a good union; then it is necessary to apply plaster and bandage, unless the member has an abscess. But if an abscess occurs, then leave it for several days until the abscess is drained, and return to your treatment.
The bandage should be wrapped in this way: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the leg to reach the ankle and the region of the thigh.
Insert a long splint between the thigh and the leg near the back at the separation below, and the ends of the splint should reach the area above the wound on both sides; then turn it around the leg and thigh so that any excess of the bandage is covered.
Place a cushion on the thigh at the location of the fracture splint, and place another wooden pin over the bone of the leg.
And fill the hollow between the leg and thigh with soft cloth, so that the hematoma is coagulated.
And begin with a strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you approach the ligament near the fracture, your bandage should be less tight and more elastic and more moist.
Extend the splint to both ends below to reach the ankle of the foot, and tighten both the ends of the pins on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its location.
Approach the structure over that which is so that it does not affect the member with corrosion or abscess, cautery or inflammation and resembles those; and if any cause of these occurs, then you must dissect it from there, and correct everything that has happened appropriately, as many observed.
But if there is pain in the bone that grinds it down, then you must hold it as possible for you; and if not, make a splint over it and remove the affected part, and heal with what was described earlier until it is healed.
Some fractures of the thigh are strengthened by this which are adjusted to the splints, just as it was said in the adjunct and in the arm.
But in the restoration of it in such a manner does not happen to the patient with limping; and if it is restored alone, another part that is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary for the one from whom this always limps.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months, or a few weeks, and all this is according to the diversity of complications and other arrangements.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the heel bone.
Know that the fracture of the heel bone takes a long time to heal, but it happens many times with delayed healing.
But if there is a fracture, then it is not only fissure or crack in its parts, and this is with a wound or without wounds, and all this is with the sensation.
The restoration of it is such that the broken parts are held together with what was described until they are united and joined as much as is possible by alignment, ease, and fabrication.
And place a plaster and a pad over the rounded stem if needed; strengthen it with a splint appropriate for that purpose.
And consider all the arrangements that were recommended in other fractures, such as abscess and similar ones that oppose all accidents with what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh bone.
Know that in the thigh bone there are two bones of which one is large, and it is called by the name of the thigh; and the other is small, and it is called the femur.
And if any of the types of fracture occurs in two bones of the arm, and it is done by restoring the arm as described, and the operation on it is one.
If the bones are fractured together, the thigh bone is broken in all parts.
And if the small bone is fractured, the thigh bone is converted into many pieces in front.
And if the large bone is fractured, break it below, and this is due to causes that are not known to you.
And provide extension, alignment, and ligature of the tendons according to the restoration described.
But if the fracture of the thigh bone is shallow and has few setbacks, then the extension should be less and lighter, and ease with your skill.
And in the thigh bone there is some cause of operation on the arm, and this is when you hold the splints and complete all the operations described, then you will take pieces of wood from pine which are placed under the causes that have been placed on a shelf, and these are made exactly as branches of palm; align them according to the small curvature, and they should not be too heavy for the hands, and the length of these according to the length of the thigh bone, and from the heel to the foot.
And wrap each one with fabric in two layers according to its length, and place one over the fracture of the thigh bone on one side, and the other over the fracture of the other side, from the heel to the sole of the foot.
And align the two splints in three locations at both ends, and in the middle, because with this structure the thigh bone is prohibited from bending on one side or the other, and it stands well.
And a brace made of wood according to the length of the thigh bone is administered; it should be placed under the thigh to prevent movement.
Furthermore, you must do this in a fracture, and when with that it is truly a wound.
And consider in each day the thigh bone and study it with more care, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any cause of these occurs, then you must oppose it until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Fracture does not occur in the whole ankle; but in the bones of the foot it happens occasionally; and in the toes of the foot, few occur fractures, and these do not happen unless there is injury in the arrangement of position.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes these bones are elevated between them, then place the patient's foot on the ground prepared in this way.
Approximate one foot on what is raised by those bones, approximate there, press, and guide it back into its place.
Approximate a plaster and stopper on top of it, and place a small table under the foot, with two handles that can be adjusted.
Approach the limb with a descending structure (such as a splint or bandage) around it, since you have wrapped it with cloth and for other reasons that are necessary.
After three or four days have passed, you must remove the bandage, because you will find that the bones are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is thus necessary.
But if the bones are fractured, you must restore them and guide them back into place as I have shown you and as I recommend to you in the treatment of hands. Approximate the fractured finger with the length of the finger, and place it slightly oblique to it; and place under the foot this table which I have recommended to you, and hold it with a descending structure.
But if the fracture of the bones is two or three or more, you must place a splint on each finger according to its size wrapped in linen cloth, and hold the table under the heel of the foot, and stand on one of the handles of the table away from the belly of the foot to ensure good retention.
It is appropriate for you to remember that you must consider all the causes which I have mentioned to you in other fractures, and be prepared for any eventuality.
Capital XVIII.
On the fracture of the neck of the woman and the pelvis bone and the coccyx of the man.
When the neck of the woman is fractured, you must let it rest in a horizontal position, and incline it slightly to one side, and hold it behind.
And the midwife fills the neck of the bed with cotton and places it in this manner; and the woman is shaken, and gradually raises her legs a little, because everything will be forgotten in front of the neck until it is in the correct position and the fractured bone returns to its place.
And place some pillows under the legs, and when she wants to urinate, move the bed with ease, and empty it and return it to its original position as described in the beginning, and bring back the first pillow.
Do this for seven days or more, because it will heal.
If you wish, take an ovine bladder and place it over the crack with a reed cannula; insert the entire bladder into the neck of the bone, and inflate the cannula with air inside until the bladder is filled with the bone, because the fracture will return.
And let it be filled with cotton and remain for as many days as I have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the pelvis bone of a man or woman is fractured, you must administer for its restoration and treatment what I have recommended in the treatment of the hip bone.
What is correct should not be hidden in these close fractures and what little it may be, especially for the one who has some study and experience and understands my words; because that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions via righteousness in its restoration and in its treatment, and therefore understand well.
But in the coccyx of the man when it is fractured, take a walnut shell, and place the coccyx inside it; and place it on a cloth covering, wrap it, and let it rest for three days or more, until it is healed.
Capital XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when they are ulcerated.
It is appropriate for the one who suffers from a fracture with an ulcer, and especially if the bone is large such as the hip or humerus, or similar to it, that you cauterize and probe it immediately if the conditions of cauterization are present as described above.
If the ulcer exudes pus, you must ensure its retention until you apply powdered tertian antimony to it if another cause is not present.
And begin the restoration of the fracture on that day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, you must leave the restoration of it for nine days, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day altogether, because you will cause harm.
But if the fractured bone is prominent on the skin surface, you must ensure that you perforate it and guide it back with your hands and minimal extension.
But if the extension is not prepared and the situation of it with your hands, you must reduce it with this tool; and the tool that should be made of iron, its length should be seven or eight inches, and its width according to the size of the ulcer; and the physician should take three or four of these depending on the amount required for treatment in all types of fractures.
And let it be round, and let it be slightly dirty so that it is not doubled over during the operation.
And let it have a pointed end with a margin at its edges; let the thickness of it be increasing towards the top and from the base to the parts.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, which means a slightly curved spatula.
Therefore, it must be placed on top of the bone's protruding extremity and held stationary.
And press that area until the bone returns and is held with some pressure.
And therefore, apply pressure to the fracture's extremities, and if the broken extremity is thin, do not use the instrument well because of good reason, then you must bore into that bone until the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what we have recommended, then bore it with what is appropriate for the borers that we have mentioned; or it will be with one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
And smooth that which remains in the bone with roughness and small cuts.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels intense pain returning, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural location; therefore, do what is necessary for the patient's great benefit.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, and then immerse linen in black stiff vinegar, and if it's summer, do not put oil on the wound or any other cause where there might be oil, to prevent pus and rot from occurring.
And apply needles at the time of your completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you bore it with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be careful not to press the wound with the fracture, because many times foolish doctors have done such things, and it has caused death or severe illness in their patients, which is a great sin. And if your ligature is light, soft, different from the ligatures of other fractures.
If the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear any of the bad accidents that we have recommended, and pain occurs in the area, then it is not necessary to press on the needles, but apply a hard bandage where the needles are and tighten it with those.
And when the wound begins after one or two days, which is a sign of putrefaction, you must remove the linen that you had placed over it with vinegar, and then apply warm compresses, anoint them with balms, as our custom is to treat wounds, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar ones.
It is necessary for you to remove the ligament and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and it must be prepared in such a way that the pus runs from the site to the parts easily.
If the wound lasts for many days without being consolidated or abscessed from the putrefaction, then you know that here are the signs of gangrene, and therefore you must examine the wound with care. And from these signs, those that separate and are extracted, those that do not separate and make the member swell and cause pain, you must bore them as is possible for you.
If pus or corruption occurs in the wound, it is staphylococcus or another form of decay and putrefaction, then you must press on one of those with what is appropriate for the treatment of that disease as described in its chapter.
And from that, the most important thing and you should present your case: when a large bone is broken, elevate the limb in such a way as the bones of the thigh and hip and similar ones of the large members, and do not presume attraction or extraction because many times it leads to death; leave it inside for as long as possible, because strong leeches may fall from it on their own within 20 to 30 days. Treat the wound if it has been observed by you, and do not leave it unattended.
The Capitulum XX (Chapter 20) begins here:
On the treatment of knots that occur in the wound of any fracture.
Knots often occur in the wound of healing from a fracture, and particularly near joints, and are caused by the swelling of the limb; and it greatly hinders the movement of the limb in its natural operation.
Therefore consider whether the knot is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and enses, and mira, and similar substances; take some or all of these, and bind them with linen, or albumen of egg, or vinegar, and place it on the knot in a compress, and bind it firmly with good binding.
Leave the extraction alone for several days; then loosen it and apply another one until the knot is gone; or strengthen on top of that a lead plate firmly, because lead has the property of keeping anything that is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot has already become hard and tight and is causing a constant pain, cut it through the most superficial part, and remove the excess or pierce it with sharp scissors until it is gone; and heal that until it heals.
The Capitulum XXI (Chapter 21) begins here:
On the restoration of fractures when they have been restored and the limb is held in position according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb is held in position, it should not be done except for several reasons: one of which is excessive use of solutions of lime and lack of proper binding; or excess tightness of the bindings before the nutriment is prohibited from running to the limb; or excessive swelling of the bandages; or superfluous movement not at its time; or scanty blood in the body of the patient and debility.
And treatment for this is to give the patient food and make his heart tender until the blood is multiplied in him; administer a bath, and apply oil and comfort on it.
And apply a plaster on the limb, so that the plaster attracts little nourishment, or continuous swelling of the limb with hot water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its normal shape.
The Capitulum XXII (Chapter 22) begins here:
On the treatment of broken bones that are restored incorrectly and prevent the operation of them as required.
When there is a problem with the limb that has been restored already in healing from curvature and prominence of the fractured bone and knots, it is because the shape of the limb is distorted, but nevertheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is not necessary for you to receive the word of the one who claims that the limb was newly fractured.
But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear of the punishment of which death is the penalty.
But if the limpness and knots are recent, then it is necessary to swaddle them with hot water in which soft herbs that soothe are placed, such as althea leaves and radishes, melilot, and similar substances; and make a compress with mollifying plasters such as diallaquilon well made, or take mucilage from althea roots and mix it with gray of gauline or olive oil, and apply it, or prepare figs rich in oil and grated with the fat of pigeon, and similar substances of medicines that are called ameliorating consolidation.
Sometimes it is dissolved by persistent, gentle friction that is applied to the moistest areas, and movement of the member should be administered all around at all hours.
Sometimes it is necessary to cut through the swelling strongly and convert it into stone for treatment, then the pus above must be drained and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and whatever excess of hardness from that meat should be removed with fine cutters, and ease should be administered in that area with solicitude and care.
Capital. xxiii. (This is a notation indicating the twenty-third chapter of the text.)
On the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocation is essentially one of the joints' locations where movement is restricted, and the figure of the member is distorted, causing pain and serious injuries in the patient.
Therefore, when there is a dislocation, it must be treated immediately by reduction, and the reduction should not be delayed, for if it is delayed, the location becomes necrotic and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason it is not good nor advisable to perform the amputation during the necrotic phase, for many times it causes spasms and painful contractions.
But when necrosis occurs, it is necessary to perform the amputation on the patient, and let it rest before removing the necrotic tissue; then the member should be embalmed with warm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
And the entire member must be treated with a substance that will bring about healing at its location.
And it has been divided into chapters on dislocation as was done with fractures; from the upper to lower parts of the body.
Capital. xxiv. (This is a notation indicating the twenty-fourth chapter of the text.)
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, lower.
If both mandibles are dislocated, it should not be delayed; and a dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are reduced back to their locations with little movement, and are softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated and displaced, until they are softened at the juncture and the patient's saliva flows out and cannot be held nor can they close their mouth, and their tongue is swollen in its socket.
But if the dislocation is slight, then it can be reduced with fewer measures.
But if the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be reduced gently and without delay.
And the attendant should hold the patient's head, and enter their thumb into the affected side of the dislocated jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others should be outside to support it; and tell the patient to stop moving their jaws and hold them apart from each other; and the doctor will gently guide the jaw back into its location.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer embalming with warm water and oil until it becomes easier to reduce both, and do not delay the reduction of both, as was said before.
And when they are returned and closed, and the patient's mouth is not yet softened, place powdered cloth on them with wax and oil, and make a paste of wax and warm oil; and let it be applied gently and gradually.
And let the patient rest on their back, with their head between two pillows to prevent them from turning to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything; allow them a leon-like diet until the pain subsides and the jaws are healed, then administer whatever they desire.
And this should be done gently, and avoid forcing the opening of the mouth due to eating, drinking, speaking, and chewing, until the jaw is healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and not converted back to their locations, it often leads to fevers and constant sweating, and severe weakness occurs in the patient's abdomen, and violent, pure vomiting follows.
And when you see this, you should know that it is a disaster; and many times the patient dies within ten days of experiencing this.
Capital. xxv. (This is a notation indicating the twenty-fifth chapter of the text.)
On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from the base through its continuity with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer edge, and this can be confirmed by palpation.
The restoration of him/her (the patient) is that he/she walks on his/her own two feet and extends his/her arms. Then press the area with your palm using strong pressure, because it will return (the intestine or hernia).
Then place a cushion over that plaster and pound it firmly.
If the extremity that is cut off and joined together is not dislocated in any day, then it must be reduced and sutured as you have said and as you are equipped for.
Then place a cushion over that plaster, pound it, cut through the flesh, and order the patient to rest and remain still until he/she is healed.
This sentence seems to continue the previous discussion about surgical procedures, specifically about reducing (repositioning) an extremity that was separated from its location. It may refer to a procedure where a limb or body part was amputated and then reattached, or possibly a dislocated bone that was realigned. The text seems to describe the process of reducing the extremity in order to correct its position.
This appears to be a chapter heading (capitulum) in the treatise, numbered as chapter 26. It is common for medieval medical texts to be organized into chapters, each dealing with a specific topic or procedure. The exact content of this chapter cannot be determined from the given text.
This seems to continue the discussion about reducing (repositioning) an extremity or body part that was separated or dislocated, as previously mentioned in the previous sentences. The term "dislocacio" in this context likely refers to a dislocation of a bone or joint. The text may discuss specific techniques for reducing a dislocated joint, such as manipulation or traction, or surgical interventions for reattaching an amputated limb or body part. The exact content of this chapter cannot be determined from the given text.
You should know that a limb or body part (muscle) can be dislocated in three ways, of which one is that it is dislocated at the joint where it meets another bone. This implies that the text is discussing the various types and causes of dislocations, and possibly different methods for treating them depending on their location. It may also provide information about the symptoms, signs, and potential complications associated with each type of dislocation.
The second way is that it (the limb or body part) can be dislocated at the joint above the muscle, and this is often the case; it is not dislocated at the joints behind by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated at the joints in front by the nerves.
Furthermore, a limb or body part (muscle) can be dislocated and extend beyond the joint at the back, but this occurs more often in those with thin skin; however, it is difficult to extend beyond the joint in muscles with thicker skin.
A heavy blow or accident can occur in some men, causing an abscess (apostema) on the muscle of that person; and it must be drained with a cautery and treated once it is already dislocated.
Therefore, you must first assess whether you are equipped for the procedure and then proceed with the treatment of it (the injury or condition).
The dislocation at the back joint where it meets another bone is known; therefore, you should distinguish between a dislocated limb or body part and an intact one, because there are clear differences among them; and you must feel for the concavity at the head of the muscle (the end of the bone), and at the back joint of the bone, you must touch the head of the muscle in such a way that it feels like touching the heel of a shoe. Furthermore, the patient is unable to reduce his/her hand to his/her elbow, or to move it in any way.
If it is a dislocation of the foot or ankle, you should feel for clear indications and not miss them.
And with this type of dislocation, reduction is made easily when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
The reduction is that the servant raises the patient's arm above the armpits; and he presses the affected joint downwards, lifting the joint with force towards its own location, the servant raises the patient's arm, and extends it thus; and he presses it downwards so that it returns easily.
If it does not return as a result of what has been said, and is due to the beginning of dislocation, many days later, then the patient must be bathed in hot water and given an ointment that softens and soothes like if it were a burn from aloe, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and it must be administered.
The patient should be positioned on his back and his affected joint should be pressed downwards with moderate pressure, awaiting the arrival of wool that is between softness and tightness, and the doctor should press his heel on the sphere (joint), lifting the muscle with force, pulling the patient's arm away from the opposite side to prevent it from becoming swollen, and another servant should hold the patient's head so that it does not become swollen at the opposite side, as the joint will soon return to its own location.
And if you want to do this, reduce the joint in the following way: and it is that you bring a man who is longer than the patient, from the side of that part, intertwine his muscle with the affected joint and lift the affected joint towards the armpits until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the patient's arm away from the opposite side of the abdomen. If the patient is lightweight, it is necessary that something else be suspended, to weigh it down, as the dislocation will soon return.
The joint is reduced in another way: and it is that it be placed on the ground, a long post with its head round, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, should be placed near the patient; then you place cloths over the head of the post, and the patient stands according to the length of the post, and extend the patient's arm towards the opposite side; and the other part is extended with force, as the joint returns quickly to its own location.
If the reduction of the joint is difficult due to all the causes mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a post whose length is two forearms and its width four fingers, and its thickness should be reduced at the end of the pestle in the following way:
And place cloths over the round head of the post, to prevent the post from hurting the patient.
And place the affected joint near the post and extend the arm or shoulder over the post towards the opposite side, and tie the post around the arm, shoulder, and end of the hand.
Place the arm on a step of the stairs according to its width, and extend the hand towards the opposite side, and suspend the other body part from the opposite side, as the joint will soon be restored.
And when the instrument for reducing the joint is complete in any way that is possible to you, then you should press downwards on the affected joint with wool of a suitable size; and apply a plaster prepared with powder of molasses and egg white over the entire muscle, so that it is rolled up above, and tighten the affected joint with moderate pressure; and allow the linen to be rolled onto the plaster, and bind the arm to the neck, leaving it loose, and do not let the arm swell for seven days.
It is necessary that the food of the patient be sparse, until the member is comfortable, as it is easier for healing to occur.
And approach food should be given more slowly within seven or five days and exercise the affected member; and if it is firm and not softened, then it has healed.
If the joint is dislocated for more than seven days due to moisture or other cause, then it is necessary that a cauterization with three cuts be administered in it, as it was said earlier in the chapter on cauteries.
If all of the above is done and the binding and joint are not closed within seven days, and the plaster and tightening are removed from it after some days, and it remains loose, swollen, and cannot lift the arm towards the armpits above, then you should know that the nerves in it (the muscle) are injured or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be placed back in its own location.
The reduction of the dislocation on the feet and the heel or the buttocks is done by pushing and extending with force until it returns.
And apply another tightening to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if gravity and slowness in the movement of the member occur during healing, then the patient should bathe it for many days until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Treatise on the treatment of shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder joint is difficult to treat and has a similar return; and when it is dislocated in all parts, particularly in front or behind, the dislocation of this part is not hidden, since the shoulder may be displaced by falling or hitting in any way, depending on its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder with the affected arm, that is made clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot fold the arm, nor can it touch the corresponding muscle.
And it is necessary to catch the shoulder and reduce the dislocation immediately in front where there is an evident swelling, for if it comes to a visible swelling, the reduction of this becomes difficult, and complete healing is not easy; and especially when it is at the back part, because all other types of dislocation are worse than this one, and it causes more pain, and many times this condition leads to death.
The restoration of the shoulder, when possible, is that the arm of it should be extended with two hands, and the shoulder should be expanded, and the doctor's hands should be on the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of his hands towards its original place, or with a rod in the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front part, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, and striking the shoulder with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and movement.
And two servants should extend the arm, while another two hold it in place to prevent it from going back during extension.
And turn the arm around in all directions, since it is wrapped with long cloth or bandages around its hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint; and then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
Before the reduction of this joint, it should be stopped on a poultice that has astringent and healing properties with egg white, and it should be pressed with a tight bandage, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then unwrap it; and if the joint is formed in its place, you should remove the bandage from there.
And if the joint is not strengthened, you should apply another poultice and bandage for several days until it is tightened; and then remove that.
But if there is a risk of complications in the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, you should apply humectation in bathing and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place an oil-soaked cloth on the affected joint (something greasy); and tie it around the bone, leaving it for a day and night. Then remove the oil-soaked cloth and put it in a bath; when it dries, you should rub the joint with warm friction, and apply a warming poultice to it three times a day, the first time, the second time, and the third time. Corruption has occurred within the intestine, so it should be bound with a bandage until it is healed.
And if you wish, place a wet and warm cowhide poultice over the wound with plaster and pressure on it; do this several times, because it is moist and reduces it to its original position.
Chapter XXVIII.
Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the arm-shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint is sometimes dislocated and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, speed in reducing it at the time of dislocation is essential before the location becomes swollen or there is a visible swelling.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder on a table and have the servant extend the arm of the patient; then, the doctor places his hand or palm near the joint and pushes it forcefully until it returns to its original position.
However, it is essential to consider whether the palm has already been placed on the patient's abdomen; in this case, the patient should place his two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding (precedent), you should position the hand of the affected side intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be placed on the edge of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, you should strengthen it with a poultice allowing the swelling to subside and leave it; do not rub it, because it may not bear or endure on the reduction of this joint for more than several days.
However, the joint remains crooked in its shape; and you should not inform the patient of any cause, but only soften the arm so that it cannot strengthen any cause; in this case, you should know that the nerves are broken or severed, and you should not tamper with it unless it is tightened with a hot cautery to prevent further damage.
When the patient has recovered, place a plaster on it that we have recommended, let it rest and strengthen for five days; then remove it, let it rest again and exercise the affected hand.
If the condition of the area worsens and there is any serious complication, then soften it with warm water and massage it for several days until it improves.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes, the fingers are dislocated completely.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or the back of it, stretch the finger and push on the dislocation until it returns to its normal position.
Then support the knuckle of the finger and suspend the affected part from it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is properly aligned on that day.
And at night, follow this procedure, and do not remove the bandage during the day but exercise it with movement, and do so at night; continue this for several days until it becomes firm.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the back of the hand; align it with that part and perform the first treatment until it heals.
Perform the same procedure when it is dislocated in other places.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine (specifically the vertebrae).
When one of the vertebrae of the back or neck is completely dislocated and several vertebrae are moved from their places, then there is no treatment for it, because death is imminent for the patient.
The sign of this condition is that the patient's excretion is outside their control and they cannot hold it in; several members of the body or two legs or one arm, or a vertebra, are softened or dislocated in four places because several vertebrae are dislocated and several are moved.
Therefore, it has been dislocated in the rear parts and is called scoliosis.
However, the treatment of scoliosis depends on whether it occurs in childhood, as there is no treatment for it or cure in that case.
But in cases of scoliosis resulting from accident, injury, or similar causes, the ancient writers have described various treatment methods at length, the most effective of which will be discussed here; however, due to the brevity required for this presentation, I will summarize it and provide an explanation of the essential principles using instruments that will be explained and illustrated.
Only scoliosis occurring in the upper back can be treated with the method I recommend.
The patient should lie face down with the affected area near a wall and be extended slightly away from the wall to avoid putting pressure on the feet.
A straight stick should be placed under the head with its tip in the ground near the patient's feet, and another stick should be used to lift the feet on the other end of the plank.
The operator should hold the stick and it should not be fixed in a hole; another assistant should hold the other end as described above.
Wrap the head of the patient with a cloth and then pull on the string firmly; extend the end of the string to the stick that is under the patient's head, and hold it there; then tighten the other string around the patient's hips and shoulders, and hold the chest and feet; finally, adjust all the strings and hold them on the other stick.
The operator should then extend the string to the other stick and ensure that neither stick nor the strings attached to their respective locations are moved, but they should not be fixed in place as previously mentioned.
The doctor should place his hands on the affected vertebra with force until it returns to its normal position, or he should place a table under it and adjust his feet on the table until it returns to its normal position.
But if it does not return to its normal position in this manner, then take a table that is one and a half cubits long or wide (or both) and carve a hole in the wall near the patient's head into which you can insert the end of the table. Then place the mattress of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and press strongly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
If you want, turn the body that is turned towards your hand; and it is that you place your feet on the head of the patient at the end of his fists, whose length should be one arm's length, and place the head of him in the same way two fists away from your feet; and let the distance between each fist be a palm, and make a hole in each fist through which the body passes, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not bad.
Make a fist around the area where the turn is, and roll it between the two holes made in each fist.
At the end of him is a hole through which the fist is formed, whose length is one palm in diameter as it is rolled; and the other two fists are similar to that one.
Then pull the ligaments that you have tied around the patient's feet in the hole that is to be his head, and the ligaments that you have tied around his thighs in the hole that is to be his legs.
Then place each body part and have a servant turn it with his hand, and the doctor guides the spine as previously stated.
Once the spine has returned and the area is closed, it is necessary to apply a healing paste made of albumen of eggs and stopper; and place a wooden stick over the paste, whose width should be three fingers or slightly more than that, and the length should take up the area of the swelling, and above the division of the spine.
Then use the ligament we mentioned for nutrition until it is healed.
If there remains any danger in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth by long-term administration of a table, which we have recommended; and a sheet of lead has already been applied in that place.
Sometimes danger can occur in the end of the spines of the back, and it is due to dislocation; and that bone is already suspected of being weak, so it is not advisable to make an opening for it with this medicine, as strong pressure can lead to death.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not dislocate except by true dislocation, and it does not happen to those joints as it happens to other small joints with a slight displacement and concavity.
The joint of the pelvis is dislocated in four ways, as it can be dislocated at the internal divisions, or at the external divisions, or at the front divisions, or at the back divisions.
Moreover, it is more commonly dislocated at the internal divisions and less so at the front or back divisions.
The sign of the dislocation at the internal divisions is that when you adjust the thigh of the patient with the healthy one, it is longer and the inner edge is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg without twisting it, and the area where it bends is marked with a cauterized wound, so that the head of the thigh has already been reached here.
The sign of the one to which external dislocation happens is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this symptom.
The sign of the one to which front dislocation happens is that the thigh expands according to its form, but it does not bend without pain in the front, and if it is pressed, it cannot go forward towards the front; and the urine of him is retained and the wound of him is marked, and you should walk on tiptoe.
The sign of the one to which back dislocation happens is that the front does not expand or bend in front of the wound, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the wound is softened, and the head of the thigh is to be found there.
However, the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and long-standing, in which case it has already healed with your application of reduction and remains in its position; in that case, this treatment is not complete; therefore, no opening should be made.
In the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, then you must attempt to return the joint and extend it inwardly and outwardly at the joints inside and outside, moving it to the left and right. This will naturally return it without needing any other treatment.
If it does not return by this method, then you must prepare strong medication and extend the joint from the lower part, either with your hands or a lime that is tied onto the joint above the wound; another minister should extend his hand upwards in such a way that he places his hands below the tendons of the dislocated limb; and another minister should firmly pull the rope at the root of the affected area, and another minister should hold the end of the rope tight.
And the extension (of the joint) should be from the lower part to the ankle at the angle of the collarbone, or from the lower part at the back to the joint of the spine.
And the extension should be done in one go, while the patient is raised from the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is a common method for all four types.
Therefore, if the dislocation returns by what has been said, it will be good; otherwise, you must resort to whatever method of treatment that is specific for each case.
In the reduction (maneuver) for a dislocation, when the dislocation is inward at the joints, the patient should be laid on their back; and cushions should be placed on both sides of the affected area, from the root of the joint to where the thigh meets the groin. Then, extend the ropes outwards beyond the angle of the collarbone to the same level as the opposite shoulder joint.
And another strong minister should grasp the arms of the patient, and firmly pull the large part of the affected area outwards in the opposite direction using violent extension, as this will return it to its original position.
And this method is simpler for treating the affected limb and reducing it compared to other methods.
If it is excused from treatment using this method for any reason, then you must bind both of the patient's feet together with a strong and light rope, running it through both ankles and both wrists.
And the length of each part (of the rope) should be four fingers, while the affected limb should be extended more than the other by two fingers' width.
And the patient should be suspended over the top of the post, and at a height; and the distance from the ground to the patient should be two arm-lengths.
And command a strong young man to strike the head of the affected area and suspend another strong young man from the patient. The third young man should pull on the affected limb with force to push it back into its original position, as it will return quickly in this manner.
And in the reduction (maneuver), when the dislocation is outward at the joints, have the patient lie on his back as we have previously instructed; and tighten the ropes around the affected area and the feet of the patient.
And two posts should be placed, one under the feet and the other at the head; and adjust two more posts to the middle of the beam that is fixed on top of which moistened cloths should be wrapped, so that the patient is not discomforted by the post being between their legs. This prevents the extension at the affected joints from being too tight.
And each minister should extend his part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art.
When the dislocation is at the hips, then the leg should be gently extended, as described in this narrative; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected hip, holds it there with the left, and applies traction to the extended leg away from the hip on the opposite side.
If the dislocation is at the hips behind, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended on their back and lifted off the ground; instead, a hard object should be placed under the affected hip, as described earlier if the groin area is dislocated outside the body (as mentioned earlier, placing two hard objects beneath them will help with the positioning). The patient should lie on their face, and their limbs should be extended according to what was previously mentioned, as there seems to be no benefit in doing so.
A compress should be applied with a board to the joint area where the dislocation occurred.
So, as the reduction process is complex (and its sign is not hidden from you), it's essential that you extend both of the patient's legs and observe when their leg muscles relax and their affected limb extends with no hesitation; at this point, you should know which member needs to be returned (based on the situation). Then, you adjust two cushions and place a compress and bandage in such a way that the intestine is not injured in any of the areas; hold the patient down for three or four days.
Then remove the bandage and compress, and compare one leg with the other.
If you observe that the muscles have relaxed, it means the dislocation has been corrected, and at that point, let the patient rest.
If you notice any signs of swelling or inflammation, then return and compress the affected area, extend it according to your initial instructions, and let it rest for three days.
Then remove the bandage and make the patient wait to walk for several days until they feel comfortable.
Chapter 32.
On treating hip dislocation.
The hip can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outside the body, inside the body, or more commonly behind, but not in front.
The sign of hip dislocation is when you instruct the patient to apply pressure on their hip, and if they cannot, it indicates that the hip is dislocated.
The restoration of all three dislocation methods is to position the patient correctly so that they can extend their leg if possible; place your hands on either side of the affected hip, and hold their foot between yours; press the affected hip with both palms, holding it firmly while another assistant extends the patient's leg until the hip returns to its original position.
The sign of hip reduction is when the patient's hip adheres to the bed without any effort.
Then compress the affected area and hold the hip to the bed, bind it with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove the bandages.
Do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they have recovered and feel comfortable.
If the reduction is not successful for you, administer strong traction on the muscles that were mentioned in the treatment of the thigh (preceding narrative).
Chapter 33.
On treating ankle dislocation.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight manipulation and other times requires compression, and the dislocation of the ankle can occur internally or externally.
The sign of ankle dislocation is that you observe swelling originating from the side where the dislocation occurred.
The treatment for ankle manipulation is gentle reduction and ensuring that it is easily extended and repositioned.
In the treatment of ankle dislocation caused by compression, it is necessary to position the patient correctly and have a strong and capable assistant from the opposite side of the affected limb in the best possible position.
Then you place your right hand on the top of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the leg near the heel in the location of the cavity.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand, grasp it twice and extend it while pushing the shin away from the cavity without strain. Then use your right arm to push the leg towards the hip joint.
And you shall do it twice as they have counted.
Then you push the legs of the foot onto the bed on the third observation, and you are at the head.
If it returns within an observation or two in this manner, and if the foot is swollen, that is good; and if not, then you shall repeat the operation, for he will return.
But if the reduction of it is forbidden by what they have recommended, then you lay the patient on his bed on the ground, and make a small hole in the ground, and place him inside, and you already have wrapped him with cloth so that you do not hurt the patient.
Then let the minister hold his legs, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or tied to the neck of the foot; and let each minister extend it to the extent of their reach, and the hole remain between the patient's legs, holding him so that the body is not stretched too far to the sides, as you must control its extension.
And the doctor shall bind the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy limb to the sides, because the dislocation returns easily.
And therefore when the dislocation returns and is declared as your health of the reduction of it, then you pause plaster and place it firmly, and tie the foot to the bed.
And you must be careful or protect yourself from nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament over it is not too tight and hurt him strongly.
Then leave it for two or three days; and if the ligament becomes softened, remove it.
Then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if he must walk in front of that space, it is not assured that the dislocation will not be dissolved and spoiled, and therefore it does not receive treatment.
And if it turns into an abscess cauterized, then you must provide for its expulsion in the place described in our account, in another place of care and binding, until it has healed.
Capital. XXXIV. (Capitulum Sanitatis Pedum: On the Health of the Feet)
On the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It must be bound with little extension without labor; and that which is not difficult, it will advance easily.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then you must cause the patient to place his foot on a suitable surface such as the ground or a table, and be standing as if he were walking.
And you stand at the foot, and place your foot on something that is below the joints, and press it with your foot with force until it returns, and observe that it is bound and does not appear in a prominent position.
And you place the belly of the foot on a table that takes the entire foot, with two legs, and press it firmly and securely for three days; and then loosen it and make it rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Capital. XXXV. (Capitulum Cauteria: On Cautery)
On the species of dislocation that are made by wound or fracture, or all together.
When any cause of these occurs, and you immerse yourself in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many observations succeed death.
Therefore you must not presume over the cure of it, but one who is wise in the art, of long practice, compassionate and merciful, slow, neither reckless nor presumptuous; and that uses at the beginning of medicines that heal abscesses cauterized only, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but to him whom you hope for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and in which any hope appears. And therefore you must do the reduction at the beginning of the cause before the abscess becomes cauterized.
And if the limb returns as we desire, then you administer the regimen that will relieve the abscess cauterized and heal the wound with what is appropriate for drying the wounds.
And if dislocation is with fracture and it occurs in separated joints, then you perform the treatment of them, and do as we said in simple illnesses before those places.
And guard and avoid as your virtue the instrument in the paths of fear according to what you have been preceded by my preaching; because that is better for you, and more permanent to your glory, and more healthy for your true bodies at your times. Thus ends the words of Albuccassis with which may God be blessed. Amen.
