Therefore, my sons, since I have committed this book to you, which is the last in the science of medicine, by its completion it shall be completed through you, and by its explanations, and by its declarations, it is evident to me that I commit this treatise on surgery to you.
Since surgery is almost completely abandoned in our region and in our times, it is greatly endangered by peril, and the science of it is lost; there remains only a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which are misunderstood and lead to error and confusion before their intentions and power are understood and their art is extended.
It appears to me that I will organize this treatise in the second way, through explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the shapes of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, along with the addition of the declaration, and the preparation of them, which is necessary.
However, the reason that a good craftsman is not found with his skill in our times, is because the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes understanding the joints and forms of the members; knowing the connection and separation of them; having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, their number, and their function; and the origin of blood vessels, quiet vessels, and pulsating ones; and the location of their emergence.
And as Hippocrates said, "A name is nothing, but in the work it is much, and especially in the art of the hand."
However, we have already said this in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not acquainted with what we have said about anatomy, is not fit to avoid error and risk causing death for men, as I have seen many times, because some are uneducated in this science and abandon it without its knowledge and experience.
Because I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophulus on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck, causing a large amount of blood to flow, which resulted in the woman dying among others.
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man's body that had been suffering from the disease for some time, and the stone was large; he came to him and removed the stone with a piece of the bladder, causing the man to die on the third day.
And I myself called for it to be opened, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, it was clear that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he treated a blacksmith who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared himself with his ignorance, cut open the fracture with pulvines and pins with strong construction, but did not let the wound breathe.
Approach the wound according to their wishes, and close it, and let it dry for several days and command that we unbind it; and this way it will be until the flesh and limb are healed, and it may lead to destruction.
Then you should be called to it, and prepared to undo the bandage, and wait for peace and let him endure his pain.
But corruption was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread through the member until the patient is in danger.
And another doctor found an abscess cancerous, and it became ulcerated near some days, until the evilness of it was magnified by its lord.
The cause is that the cancerous tumor is full of melancholic humor, so it may not spread to everything, but only to an area that suffers from it all.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two divisions: one is the operation associated with health, and another is the work in which there is the greatest risk of danger.
And you have already experienced this in all places of this book in which there is an operation in which there is error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and let go of it, so that the fools do not take a wrong path and dishonor you.
And therefore, take up your weapons with solicitude and with the protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
Take the best path for God's grace to lose and attain salvation and laudable succession, and leave behind the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and withdraw your weapons from what terrifies you, so that examination in your faith and in your name does not mislead you: for more remains for your glory, and thus also in this world and forever to your sanctity.
Gaulia then said in some of her monasteries: "Do not treat evil illnesses, so that bad doctors are not named".
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
The division of the book begins, and it starts with the first section of the first division. The first chapter ordered for the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the ironwork of the cauteries, and about what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second division. The second chapter, of cysts and perforations, and of abscesses, and of plagues, and of extraction of sacs and similar to those, all in one chapter and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is ordered for the restoration and dislocation, and cure of twists and similar to those; the chapter is divided into the foot, and forms of instruments.
It is necessary that I say the quality of the benefits and harms of this cautery, and in what kind of circumstances cautery should be prohibited.
So I will say that the discussion of the benefit of cautery and its harm is a long, intricate, and subtle discourse, and secretly hidden; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed with each other, and my words are among the few of theirs, fearing tediousness.
And therefore I say that cautery applies universally to all matter or substances, except for two cases, which are cases of caution without substance.
In the case of dry and desiccated matter with substance, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for illnesses of quality and desiccation, because the nature of fire is of quality and desiccation, and it is appropriate that dry and desiccated matter that is cauterized should be healed.
And I say the opposite of that, that cautery is beneficial in all dry and desiccated illnesses that come into the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and the humidity in it to the nature of fire, you find that the body of a man is extinguished by fire.
And I say through the discussion of this, that I have experienced this myself on several occasions.
But it is not necessary that this comes to the one who has already been explained and practiced in the chapter of cautery in a previous exercise, and has come to know the diversity of the cases of men and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of these, and the accidents of them, and the time span of those.
But in other cases, there is no fear for you, and especially in cold and wet illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on these, and there is no disagreement about the benefit of cautery in those.
Understand, sons, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it is above cautery as medicine burns, is because the fire is simple, its action does not extend to the member being cauterized except for minor harm to the adjacent member.
But the action of burning medicine spreads to the member adjacent to it, and strong heat brings the disease in the ill member to worsen and accelerate.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not accomplish this; it is already known to us through experiment and the long duration of study on the art concerning the truth of causes; and because it is not lawful for me to reveal my secret hidden in the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the body and its expulsion of diseases, philosophical demonstrative speech, which could sharpen your thoughts, I shall abstain.
Understand, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause in the best time of springtime.
I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm caused by an accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what the cauterization achieves, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay, it is feared that the evil of those who come with malice, which is greater than minor harm entering through the time.
And do not think in your thoughts, or sons, that this is not believed only by the common people and foolish doctors, because the remedy of that illness which is cured with cauterization does not work at all times, and they pause due to its consequences.
And the cause is not as they think, because cauterization is not simply a medicine that alters the complexion and dries the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
But nevertheless, cauterization exceeds medicine by the desire for its value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its Lord.
It is possible that the illness may return at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of them due to the accumulation of superfluidities in them, and what is obtained for them through their diet and similar things; but that the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluidities and moisture, such as cauterization of teeth for pain, it is possible that the pain will not return there, but only something small may occur.
But the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this is not the right one, as I understand it, because I believe that it is not healing which benefits from medicine or any other reason for caution.
And the cause is in opposition to this; and I understand that the saying "cauterization is the last resort of medicine" is not because we administer the methods of healing for some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer improvement, but rather when the end of the illness has been reached, cauterization is administered and improves it. And from here onwards, understand that cauterization is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the meaning which I understand by the common people and the flocks of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and its sublimity of substance.
And they said that the location of cauterization does not make any difference, because this is not absolutely true, as I already have proven and discovered that it does not do anything except in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron as they said; but when you perform cauterization with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the amount of gold that you want according to its cost, and it prepares to receive friction; if you place it on fire some layers so that the artificer can work with it.
And because of this, cauterization with iron must be done more gently and more carefully in the operation.
And I have organized this chapter on cauterization according to the chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I alleviate the demand for it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is for the coldness and moisture in the head, which is the cause of the swelling and multiple abscesses called corissa, from the forehead to the hairline and flowing ears, and multiple sleeping, and toothache and headaches, and generally of all illness that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, sodium, apoplexy, and similar ones in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the illness and the age and habits of them.
Approach and command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a chair and place his hands on his feet.
Then pause your hand at the base of your palm above the nose between your eyebrows. However, when the place you mentioned is reached, mark it with a probe, and then ignite the olive oil cautery which has this shape:
Then place it on the marked spot and press down gently so that it descends, while your hand should be gently tightened around it, and you rotate it.
Then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, if you see any part of the bone exposed, as with grains of sand, raise your hand again, and if it does not turn back, use another tool, if it is frozen, until the bone that I told you about is visible.
Then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then place it over the burned area in bandages and leave it until the scar from the fire is destroyed. Then treat the location with a strong four-part medicine until it is healed.
It has been said that when the wound remains open, the best thing to do is to apply honey, as it is better and more helpful.
Some have said that the vertebra should be cauterized to the bone, and the cautery should be held in place until a piece of the spinal cord is burnt off.
Then scrape away the part that is touching the bone and treat it.
Some have said that when the cautery reaches the nerve, it should be pressed into the bone forcefully until the bone cracks, and this is the shape of the probe: They believe that the vapors from the head will exit from that spot.
The wound should be kept open for a long time and treated until it is consolidated.
However, in my opinion, these two types of cautery are not beneficial to everyone, but only to certain individuals out of fear; and you should discard it, because it is better for the patient's health when possible, as the head is more susceptible to damage from prolonged heat due to its constant exposure, especially if the patient has a frail constitution.
The first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and from that point on, avoid this procedure for the sake of the patient's health.
Chapter two.
On head cauterization.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, and it is treated with lancets, hooks, capirushers, ointments, plasters, guaze, needles, blisters, and similar remedies, especially if cauterization has already been attempted but did not improve the situation, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally strong or frail; if it is strong, do not hesitate to cauterize again with a different cautery tool. Approach the cautery to that spot on his head and use it until the scalp is divided. Measure the amount that has been calculated and make an incision in the scalp to expose the bone at that location, which is called the "foramen" - this is the location where a ventous vein is usually found. Then use a cautery to burn and seal off the wound on the back of the head where the incision was made. Then release your hand from there, and do not expose the bone, as the patient will experience a great pain different from the pain caused by other head cauterizations.
Tell the assistant to place this cautery in its location, as the cautery used for burning the corners and top of the head is more subtle than the one used for other locations on the head; this is the correct way to do it.
Title: Tightening
Treatise on Modern Migration Cauterization
When there is persistent pain in the scalp or spreading pain into the neck, medications that modify the head should be administered along with other treatments as I have described in the treatment of diseases; if this does not help, then cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Take a salve of alum, scour it and remove the edges of both sides with a knife. Approach the location of the pain on the temple with a thin lancet and make an incision until it penetrates deeply enough to create a small cavity, but ensure that it remains hidden.
Place a piece of damp cloth over the area with strong compression and leave it for three hours; then remove the alum, let the wound heal for two or three days, and place a plaster over the moistened area until the spot turns black.
Cure that which is inflamed until it heals.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medications that I have written about in the second treatise on burning medications.
Cauterization with iron can be done in this manner: fire for the cauterizing tool, and here is the method for that.
It is called claus clavilhs (key nails), as the tip of it is shaped like a clove with some curvature, and in its middle part there is a small elevation.
Place your hand over the location of the pain, and hold it there - to prevent the archery that is about to come from being disturbed - and rotate the small iron tool slowly.
If the quantity that is pressed by the scalp in this manner is too large and causes bleeding, raise your hand to ensure that the artery, which is nearby, is not pressed, preventing blood flow.
Approach a wound with salt water and cover it over the area, leave it for three days; then approach with a linen cloth stitched, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
If you wish, cauterize the end of the swordsmith's finger according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery during this modern procedure.
Fourth Chapter.
Title: Ancient Cauterization of Hernia.
When treating a hernia with the remedy you have mentioned in the previous cure and in the section on diseases, and if that treatment does not help, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to the remedy you have mentioned for the first cautery or the cauterization with fire, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizing iron until it becomes white-hot, because this signifies the spot of pain marked with a line of appropriate size, and if that cannot be done, hold it for a moment and then pierce the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which must remain healthy for chewing, and that the ligament is not adhered and the nerves that are near it, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut off, because in the cutting off of it there is fear, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not careful or experienced; leave the operation for a while at the beginning.
And you will find the regulations for dealing with blood flow from an accident of the artery according to its method, in its place in this book.
If you see this illness that does not respond to the cautery and if you find the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have recorded, and heal the wound until it is healed.
If you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial constriction with cauterization using two knives, and this cauterization is more effective and appropriate.
Fifth Chapter.
Title: Cauterization of Earaches.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured by medicinal causes or other treatments as mentioned in the section on diseases, but the pain persists, then burn the cautery, which is called a point, and this is its form:
Approach the point towards the burning, and place it around the entire ear as a wheel is rolled, or in the circle of each example if the pain is in each one. With the cautery of the ear lance slowly, little by little, because you will feel the place where to stop.
If the cautery of many points is performed on the entire ear, and this is done, then heal the areas until they are healed.
Sixth Chapter.
Title: Cauterization of Torture.
Torture which is cured and treated with cauterization is nothing but the species that come from the plague, as we have mentioned in the section on diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the species that enter by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When treating that species of torture with jars, poultices and liniments, and if your treatment does not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: the first one is the lancing of the ear, the second a small one at its temple, and the third the junction of two lips.
Pause your cautery on the contrary side of the affected area, because softening does not occur except in the affected part that appears healthy.
The method of cauterization is to cauterize it on the right side of the affected area, placing a small piece of charcoal on top of its head and another on its temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger used, and stop your hand with the cautery until the amount of the substance of the burn has been burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, it belongs to the blacksmith, its shape is like a table. However, it is very delicate, and care must be taken to avoid excessive roughness in it; cut the knife thinly in it.
And take care of the area until it has healed.
Chapter VII.
On the ancient method of cauterization for apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and the patient's condition is stable and they do not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all on the corners of their head; also on the forehead and the sides of the head as described before; and on the neck. The method of cauterization is as previously described.
It has already been cauterized on the stomach opening, and it is later; take care of it as prescribed by the doctor.
Chapter VIII.
On the method of cauterization for forgetfulness caused by a blow.
Give the patient large and round pills in the beginning, as they will soften them.
And shave the entire head of the patient and stop at the neck, applying the plaster described in the treatise on plasters.
Wait for several days, because this is the method of cauterization. Do as the doctor orders, which has already been mentioned.
And if the patient recovers well in this manner, then stop the treatment; otherwise, perform three cauterizations on the lower part of their head, starting from the highest point on their head and moving down towards the neck. Wait between each cauterization for the duration of the finger used, and take care of the cautery as prescribed.
However, if you wish to increase the treatment and the patient is tolerant of it, cauterize in the middle part; otherwise, cauterize on both corners.
Take care of the treated area until it is healed; make sure that the olive oil-based cauteries are as described earlier.
Chapter IX.
On the method of cauterization for relief and softening of the entire body.
You should perform the softening treatment on the patient's head with jars and as previously described; shave the head of the patient, cauterize in the middle part of their head with a cautery, cauterize around all the corners of the head, cauterize at the base of the neck, and apply three cauterizations to the cervical vertebrae.
If it is necessary for the treatment of severe softening of the body and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize the affected area with four cauteries on the lumbar vertebrae, and then cauterize again until the burn has penetrated deeply, and raise the hand. And apply care to that which is to be healed, and this should be olive oil cauterization.
In the tenth chapter, it is written:
On the Cauterization of Epilepsy
The epilepsy is not cauterized but rather that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to treat the brain of the patient at the beginning with oil and with the other treatment which has been said in the division when the patient is strong and tolerates the exception of medications.
If the patient is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gruel and gruel-like foods that are easy to digest, with the intention of improving their diet for several days.
Then shave the head of the patient, then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the method previously mentioned, and another cautery on the occiput of the patient, and over each ear cauterize as well. If the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which have been mentioned, achieving paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae in the neck and the vertebrae in the back.
And use olive oil cauterization as previously mentioned.
But if the patient is a child, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this method.
In the eleventh chapter, it is written:
On the Cauterization of Melancholy
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which have been mentioned for achieving paralysis.
If the cause of melancholy is excess declining into melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain as has been previously mentioned in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, then make an incision in a circle around it, and then pause that incision in the middle of the head.
The patient should be held securely on all sides.
Then pause with a lint dressing; it is also appropriate for use as an old sheep's balm. Heat that area over the fire at a suitable temperature, which the patient will tolerate when it is applied to them. Then apply that over the middle of the head in a circle and leave it in place until it is soaked through.
Give that to the patient every week once, with the other treatment for their good health until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points as much as possible, but always have a well-ordered cautery at hand: this is the specialty of cauteries which moisten the brain equally.
Then pause that area in a cloth or bandage made of woolen thread.
In the twelfth chapter, it is written:
On the Cauterization of Water Dropping into the Ear
When you have recognized the onset of water in the ear through the signs which I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
Let them bathe in warm water for several days.
Then tell them to rinse their head and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on each temple if it is the onset of water in both ears, or one cautery if it is the onset of water in one ear.
Make incisions with a cautery on all veins and arteries that have already been tied off; let the cauteries be in a line at the level of the temples.
Be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, apply some medicine to stop the flow, which is within your ability.
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else: Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
When the eyelid becomes softened due to disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery, specifically a crescent-shaped one called a lunar cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows a small crescent shape with two cauteries all around, and they should be extended from the temples. Let the length of each cautery correspond to the width of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only as much as the third part of the eyelid is burned.
Chapter XVI.
On the eyelid cautery when the hair is transformed into parts inside and pierce the eye.
When the eyelid hair is transformed into parts inside and pierces the eye, cauterize them in two ways, for there are two types of cautery: one to burn or one to use medicine to cauterize.
If the cautery is to burn, tell the patient to pull out their eyelashes as when they pluck them, but extend and curl them; if you pierce it (the eye), then you must cleanse its wound, and then cover the eyelids with a bandage until the hair grows back.
So when the eyelashes grow and curl back, place a cloth on the patient's head and apply pressure to the eyelid of the eye with the thumb, following the shape of a holly leaf, and start the pressure near the hair.
Then place cotton soaked in hog's fat or chicken oil on the eye.
And bring fire to the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize on the shape that was marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the skin resembling holly leaf is burned completely and appears properly.
The sign of the cure of this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye contracted and the hair on it raised due to the piercing of the eye.
And so lift your hand and let it rest there for three days, and then cover the cotton with a bandage until the scar has healed. And cure that (eye) with eye drops until it is healed.
But if the hair returns for some reason and the eyelid is softened again, then perform the cauterization once more in the same manner as you did initially.
But if the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it so that it is raised to its natural position, curl up and that it does not pierce the eye.
But the cautery with medicine to burn is that you tell the patient to pull out their eyelashes until they grow and curl back, and make a paper of cloth in the shape of a holly leaf.
And take a known powder and fresh live juice (of some plant). that is, The text advises to mix the known powder and fresh juice (of some plant) with haste so that it is not spoiled; spread it over the cloth shaped like a holly leaf and apply it to one or both eyelids, and cover the affected eye with cotton soaked in hog's fat. The patient's head should be on your lap.
The text mentions that the patient should rest the affected area on the medication and press it gently without causing discomfort until the patient feels the sensation of the medicine, which is similar to being burned. In medieval medicine, this could be understood as allowing the medication to take effect and work its healing properties on the affected area. The comparison to a burn suggests that the medication may cause some degree of discomfort or pain, but it is tolerable for the patient.
And when the patient perceives the sensation of the medicine, they should remove it and rinse their eye with water. Then consider if the eyelid has been raised as it should be, either by burning or incision (surgery). If so, then the operation is successful; if not, apply more medication on the unaffected area without pressing too hard and allow the healing process to continue until the eyelid is raised.
The text advises to cover the affected area with cotton and bandage until the scar from the burn or incision heals. Then cure it with eye drops or another method until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, you must keep your operation under vigilant diligence so that no remedy falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes swollen for some days due to the skin's inflammation in the eye, then apply your medicine on that location where the eyelid is swollen. And do as before, and return until it is healed.
Here is the form of mistletoe.
You should know that men's eyes vary in size and amount, so accordingly you make your treatment.
It shall not be hidden from the one who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat fistula as I have said in the division of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to hold their head on your lap, and have someone keep the patient's head between your hands in such a way that they are neither harmed nor agitated by holding their head.
Place a warm cloth soaked in oil or mullein juice on the eye of the patient.
Then apply the hot iron that is shaped like this:
which is concave, such as the shape of a reed or a feather quill, with one end from which the iron is made.
And if you wish, it should be penetrating into the other end. And if you want, let it come out in that way.
However, a concave one (thing) is better for the surgery.
Then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the pus and dry it up. If it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from there.
And place your hand over the cautery, which should be well ignited, and hold the patient's nose with a small cloth at the edge of the nose to prevent your hand or the patient from being disturbed. Then press the cautery on the boil and burn it.
And if the cautery enters the bone at the beginning, it is good; otherwise, you should make another pass or two, as necessary. Leave it like that for three days, and then apply a bandage over the area with a dry dressing until it is healed.
However, if it has passed more than ten days and is not healed, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine over it to expose the bone as necessary in its respective chapter.
And another method of cauterizing a fistula that some early authors mentioned: Press on the location of the fistula and open it, then place your hand in the resulting fissure as thinly as possible (the form of it), which should be about an inch of lead melted; hold your hand with good retention, and do not harm the patient so that the molten lead does not enter his nose. Cover the patient's nostril with alum of oil or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with the method of cauterization and cure mentioned above, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer trachea through the nose and reduce the fistula into the nose as it comes in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Often fissures occur in the labia, especially in the labia of children.
Therefore, when treating those fissures with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment does not improve, then ignite a small surgical cautery in this form (shape):
And the concavity of it should be according to the thinness of the spatula.
Place that instrument carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissure.
And heal it with a dressing until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess appears on the uvula or palate or tooth roots, and it breaks open, becomes hardened, and forms a fistula, and you treat it but your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary that you ignite a cautery in the amount received by the fistula. Place that ignited instrument into the fistula opening and enter it until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and at the end do this once or twice. Heal it with what we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And if the pus is drained and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and burn the rotten bone as necessary in its respective chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of abscesses.
When abscesses are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicines but do not achieve improvement, then place the patient's head in your lap, and ignite the cautery in the form that is suitable for this, so that you hold the handle on the tooth and enter the cautery ignited quickly into it. Hold your hand with a small cloth over the tooth until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand and move the cautery several times as desired.
And have the patient rinse his mouth with salty water for an hour, and then swallow it, because the damaged tooth is closed, the swollen gum is strengthened, and the corruption of moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or worms, or the treatment with medicine does not achieve improvement, then cauterize it in two ways: either cauterize with a cowhide strip or cauterize with fire.
Cauterizing with a cowhide strip is that you take a strip of cowhide and cut it in a cup shape, then place it on the end of the bladder, immerse it with the bulleted cowhide strip, and press it quickly over the painful tooth until it becomes inflamed.
Approach that cavity several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or linen in the previously mentioned compound, place it on the painful tooth and on that heated iron until the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire must be done carefully to avoid any burn or injury to the patient and ensure that the heat of the fire does not harm their mouth.
Then prepare the heated iron in the desired shape, place it on the tooth and keep your hand over it until the cauterization is cooled; do this a few times as the pain may subside that day or the next day.
It is necessary that the patient holds the heated iron gently in their mouth with good support and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cauterization.
Cauterize as needed to the extent that is possible for you.
This is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII
On cauterization of ectropion (an eyelid condition).
When extropion is caused by coldness and humors and is not amenable to digestion by medicines and you wish to induce digestion gently, then heat the iron in the following shape:
If the cyst is small, pause the cauterization according to the size of the cyst, leave it for three days and apply it on the linen or woolen cloth soaked in oil until what the fire has burned is removed.
Apply care to that area with ointments, poultices and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
Of cauterization of raw wound of throat and constriction of vein.
When humidity comes upon the trachea of the lung and especially when this is accompanied by compression, then the patient must be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and the affected area should be cauterized using the gallstone juice at the site of the pressure.
Be careful not to cauterize the gallstone nor burn the skin around it but only a little.
Cauterize that with another cautery you should close the joint of the neck at the lower end of the spine. The cautery used should be clamped in the manner previously described.
Place that with what was described before until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
When cough and lung disease are due to excessive moisture, the patient does not have a fever nor does he have phlegm, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauterizations on the collarbone at the sites of pressure points (lion's paws); and another cautery in the middle of the leg between the nipples; and let the cautery be clamped in the manner previously described.
And if you wish, make your cauterization point with the cautery called punctum, whose form was previously described in the ear pain puncture.
Make points at these sites; place that with what was described before until it is healed.
And now the cautery should have three prongs because cauterization is performed with that: one day, you can perform three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cauterization of the head of the assistant (possibly a surgical instrument).
When the head of the assistant (possibly a surgical instrument) is dislocated due to excessive lubricating moisture and does not return to its original position during the time of its return, you must leave the dislocation until it returns by itself, as we have testified; in that case, it is necessary at first to reduce the dislocation, and place the patient on his back or on his side; and place your left hand under the neck of the instrument and lift the skin that is on the inside part of the instrument towards the outside parts with your right hand if the joint is dislocated inside.
And place fire under the cautery, which has two heads; this is its form:
And place the cautery on the skin, allowing it to enter from one side into the other; and the figure of the cauterization will come afterwards with four cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for this reason there are eight cauterizations.
Place the cautery on pause for 12 hours with salt, and place the patient in tranquility, and the affected member should not be harmed for any length of time until it is comforted.
If the dislocation is above and in that case, do this, then cauterize on the muscle with a pointed cautery or multiple cauterizations, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture remains and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When moisture and gas accumulate in the stomach and this problem worsens, and if you continue the methods of treatment and do not confer, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, extends his arms and legs, and place three cauterizations: one cautery below the ribs by the length of a finger with a pointed cautery, and two cauterizations below the ribs of the cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery comes out; elongate those that are not aligned to prevent scarring.
And if the depth of the cauterization is twice the thickness of the skin.
And the figure of the cautery should be as follows without additions. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a circular-shaped cautery according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized at the site that is afraid of this cautery: and it is that you point on the stomach according to the amount you want with tension, and then cauterize at those points; and place that with the treatment that was previously described until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
When pain in the foot occurs due to cold, moisture, or wind entering its normal structure and causing superfluous exit, the patient is treated as previously mentioned without any complications. It is necessary that the patient lies on his back, and then three cauterizations are applied according to this form and quantity onto the foot, below the iliac crest, at the position of a man lying down.
And let the space between each cauterization be according to its thickness, and let the cauterizations be according to the length of the body straight ahead.
And do not press too hard with the cauterization tool.
If the quantity of the medicine applied is equal to the size of the wound, and it is not properly adjusted; if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, then make him sit, who has already spread out his limbs, and raise his arms.
And you can perform these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have the ability and discretion in this art.
Be careful not to overdo the cauterization process, and ensure that the wound is properly cauterized so as to affect the entire body and reach the intestines, for the wound here is delicate; remember this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of a foot abscess with a cautery.
When you wish to incise or drain an abscess in the foot and you want to know if this abscess is located in the flesh of the foot or in its sheath, then if it is located in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences increased gravity and unalleviated pain.
If it is in the sheath of the foot, the pain will be greatly alleviated and often the doctors become weary of treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be placed on his back; and the location of the abscess should be pointed out; and apply fire to the cauterization tool that resembles a brush, in the form previously described on the other page. Cauterize with the tool and penetrate it into the abscess until the entire wound is burned, until it reaches the cavity, until pus comes out.
And apply treatment to this abscess until it heals.
It is not necessary to use this cauterization method for all cases, only when prolonged study of the art of medicine indicates its effectiveness in treating various illnesses. However, it is advisable to conduct experiments on this operation from time to time, but in any case, you should follow what has been taught, and that is best.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cauterization of wounds.
The ancients used cauteries for the wounds of arthritis in a similar way to burn wounds, and you can take one long, dry lancet from the lancing set of arthritis, and it should be of the appropriate thickness.
Then immerse that lancet in oil and heat it in the fire, and then cauterize with a tool at the location between the neck and the collar; and make two small cauteries below the beard line, one slightly declining to the side of the foot, and two others along the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly towards the back; and another on the lower leg; and another on the stomach, and three on the back; and one in the middle of the thigh, and two more on both sides of the foot, below the lancet between the shoulders.
And it's not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather keep it in the open during the procedure.
And some ancient men used a cautery iron similar to a ray and ignited it in that place which is between the ribs, until we reach that area near the abscess and it is drained, as has been said about the abscess of the foot.
But in this perforation with the cautery, there is no fear, because death can occur immediately at the site of the fistula, where there is no healing.
Chapter 30.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When treating the illness of the spleen as previously discussed in the section on treatment and diagnosis, do not confuse this with your treatment. If you decide to use cauterization, there are three methods for doing so, all of which are correct, one being that you make three or four stitches according to the length of the spleen as shown in the figures of the cauteries in the foot section, a figure that precedes this one.
Make the distance between each stitch about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and perform the cauterization in the same manner as described in the cauterization of the foot section.
Do not compress your hand with the cautery, and have the patient lie on their back.
Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, which was previously mentioned in the section on dislocation of muscles. Elevate the affected area, which is near the left side of the spleen, so that the patient lies on their right side.
Make your elevation such that you raise the affected area according to the length of the body, so that the stitches can be made according to the size of the body.
Bring the two prongs together, ignite the cautery, and insert it into the affected area where they penetrate the other side of the spleen.
Remove the cautery and thus four stitches are made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a single-pronged cautery.
And apply the cautery only if it has not been used for several days, because this is more effective than other causes previously discussed in the treatment section.
Chapter 31.
On the cauterization of hydrocele.
Do not cauterize hydrocele but rather incision properly.
When treating hydrocele using the methods of treatment as previously discussed in the section on diagnosis and not confusing your treatment, it is necessary to cauterize it with four stitches around the testicle, one on the stomach, another on the foot, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae in the back, one at the base of the penis, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the size of the affected area.
Then place the cautery open for it to heat up for a long time.
Do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery lest they be agitated, and hasten to aid them with assistance in recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is to be cauterized should be oval as per the previous example, and it is that one which is used for cauterizing the intestines as per its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On cauterization of feet and joints.
When the feet become swollen with gouty dropsy and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the ball of the foot between the big toe and the little toe, and lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; lift your hand upwards, but do not let go completely, for the stagnant water drains.
The cautery is as follows: Place two cauteries on the joints, and in each joint make a cauterization with the pointed end of the cautery. And make the cautery as long as the joint: Let one end extend beyond and the other a bit below the joint; and on each joint two cauteries.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
And treat the causes that have been mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization of the abdominal organs.
When the organs of the abdomen are affected by cold and moisture that softens the tissues, it is the digestive and retentive power, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with methods of treatment and not confounded, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization due to excessive moisture, in such cases cauterize that with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, with the circular cautery and four cauteries in the small intestine's circumference, with the fine pointed cautery; and on the alcatin (a type of hernia) with a large cautery or with two cauteries.
If you see excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area on the penis and hernias, and firmly apply two cauteries to the stomach and near the groin, as this is a perfect cure for which you should not deviate.
This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
This line appears to be a title in the treatise, possibly indicating the topic or subject matter that will be covered in the following text. The translation of this line is: "On the ancient treatment of hemorrhoids."
When nature itself produces ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what has been said in the division but without conferring its cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the base of the buttocks, below the two small and triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel through two holes.
If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is wet and his food is not spoiled, and the face has an ulcer, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as specified; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a cautery nail, leave the cauteries open for some time, and care for him until he is healed.
This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
On the treatment of an abscess near an ulcer by cauterization.
When you cut an ulcer, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Place your hand on the ulcer that has been cut, and apply heat to it with a cautery until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
Do this once or twice, for if the ulcers are numerous, you cauterize each of them as described, and care for them with salves until they are healed.
If you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more effective in treatment.
This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
On the treatment of fistulas that are naturally produced in the dividing parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by that, heal him with cauterization.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and has been corrupted with pus and moisture, then that which is fitting for such a case is to try to cure it with subtle means, and carefully measure the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned probe.
Heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Place this heated cautery in this fistula and according to the depth reached by the probe.
Place the cautery repeatedly on those corrupt bodies until they are immediately burned once or twice, or three times, according to your need.
Be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or the body of the hernia, be cautious at those places; and do not perform this action unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think it does not penetrate.
Care for the place until it heals.
If the location is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and remains so for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed.
If the materials are not removed, you should know that it is penetrating or in the bone and corrupted, or this will cause a reminder of those causes in its location.
This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
On the treatment of running sores (ulcers).
When pain occurs in running sores due to cold or thick moisture, and the patient's leg is numb as a result, it is necessary to cauterize that area on the sores with a cautery on each sore and a cautery nail that precedes the reminder.
Then heat the cauteries with a small second one, so that there will be three lined up cauteries, and therefore they will be more effective in treatment.
This line appears to be a chapter or section number in the treatise. However, it's important to note that the numbering system may differ from modern standards. Without additional context, it is difficult to accurately translate this line.
On the treatment of the bladder.
When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, you should cauterize it in the lower part, above the bladder, where the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
The length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the wound; cauterize that area with a cautery in the lowest part of the foot or with two cauteries if necessary.
The length of each cautery should be according to the size of the process being treated.
Title. XXXIX.
On cauterization of the hernia.
When there is inflammation and moistness in the hernia, it should be avoided, as the menstrual flow from the area becomes corrupted, and its production is delayed. Furthermore, pain may occur due to this condition. In such a case, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have mentioned in the cautery of the bladder; and also with a cautery on the lower part of the hernia or two cauteries, ensuring that they are long.
Title. XL.
On cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When moistness seeps into the ankle joint and causes its swelling, it is a sign that the area is inflamed, and this condition is characterized by the joint extending beyond its normal position when compared to the other joints. And the location of the dislocation can be found where there is a bulge.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, as you should test the circumference of the joint by rotating it, ensuring that the joint falls into its correct position within the circle.
And the cautery mentioned before follows the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, you should cauterize it with three cauteries and an olive-sized cautery.
Make the cautery according to the size of the ulcer in its entirety; and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle region and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what has been said earlier and nothing more, and this remedy is ancient. Therefore, you must make the patient purge himself of thick humors with stinking pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
The method of the cautery in that case is according to two methods: cauterization with burning medications or cauterization with fire.
According to the two learned methods, of which one is that you should cauterize it on the ankle region with three triangle-shaped cauteries according to this form; and do so at a good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the size of the finger and if the cauteries are olive-sized or large.
Sometimes, however, the cautery should be on the middle of the calf of the leg where there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle shape prescribed for the cauterization of ankle dislocation, which should encompass and burn the entire ulcer.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
However, if it extends into the thigh, you should cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the site where the pain is located; and one cautery on the hip for about four fingers below the fleshy part.
And if it is a surgical cautery, let the depth of the cautery be according to the size of the ulcer.
And if the pain is extended to the area near the feet, you should cauterize it here where the pain is located with a cautery at three or four points or as many as needed for that location.
And if the pain is behind the thigh, you should cauterize it here with a surgical cautery.
And beware in all cauterizations that you do not burn nerves or large vessels with the cautery, for this harms the patient and causes contractions.
And I have seen and heard of others who have cauterized on the hip and burned too deep in the cauterization, causing the leg to swell up until the thigh reached the foot, burning it, perforating and rotting all the flesh. And apply this method with great caution, for it is deadly.
And if the pain is in two separate places, you should cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise say in the cauterization of ankle, that this is the method: make a circle of iron with a circumference the size of a palm; and let the distance between its perforations be according to the thickness of an almond or walnut.
Inside that circle there should be another third; and the distance between them should be the size of a knuckle; and those circles should be open in two places; and the length of those keys should be one or two knuckles, and make the margins of iron on the circles properly decorated; and this is its shape:
Let it be ignited in the fire until it glows and emits sparks; and place it on the ankle region with the patient lying down. Therefore, cauterize it with three rounded cauteries in one session.
Let it rest for three days; apply ointment to it with a border and let the wound stay open for several days; and care for it with enema until it heals.
According to Al-Zahrawi: my son, we have used this type of cautery sparingly due to the fear of observing it, and because few have been found who care for it.
But among the good cauteries, it is those that alleviate the pain at its location.
However, cauteries with medicines adhering to them are those that you make two circles with a perforated armored plate in which the guaffo of iron is placed; its height should be two knuckles or however many.
And let the space between each one be the size of a finger; and let them be open both above and below, and let them contain something in between according to this shape:
Place your hand on the ankle region with the patient lying down, and press your hand on the ankle region; and take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be gradually heated by the fire, and hold it for about an hour, and let the patient bear the biting and squeezing of it - for this alleviates the pain like fire - until the pain ceases.
Then lift your hand towards the instrument and remove the foul water from the entire anus with warm water.
Then let it rest for three days and wait until the blackness of the wound recedes, and wash it for several days, and the pus will drain out; this is helpful in healing.
Then treat it with poultice until it heals.
If the pain extends into the body or the chest, place it in a position that allows water to be introduced as in the anal douche.
This is the method of anal douche, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkali and the cause of inflammation in both the anus and stomach, grind them together, strain and let it stand in a new wave where one side is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that goes into the eye.
Let the other side of the wave remain undisturbed, and pour over it warm water containing alive alkali and the cause, which rises through a finger, then compress them with your hand well to achieve good compression, and let the hole that issues from the sharp water in the undisturbed wave enter into the other wave.
Then adjust all the water, and pour over it more fresh alive cause and renewed alkali, because at this point it will have a very strong acute nature, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterizing other members, because the operation works like fire.
And some of these medications are caustic, such as pitch and honey combined with sulfur in the right proportion.
The Greeks recount an operation and healing for the pain of the anus and sciatica, which is highly effective, and it says that no other treatment is necessary, and that it heals in one go as recommended, because strong heat and washing with soap already has its effect on it.
It should be applied with a wormwood plaster, and if wormwood is not available, fig leaves should be used; it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the anus where the pain is, or in the body, or in the chest, and left to act.
It should be left for three hours or until the patient agrees to the healing process.
Then immerse it in warm water and when the body of the patient is warm, apply it to the skin, because the pain stops and heals.
Know that the use of cautery with these medications is not necessary except for the evacuation of the body.
However, Hippocrates says that when a sheep's vein is stretched and cauterized, it improves much more; the cautery should be applied in this way: take wool and immerse it in old oil, and place it between the toes and between the soles.
Then take dry sheepskin and inflate it with fire until carbonized; then place it on the wool and let it expand. Repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the anus and relieves the pain.
This method of cautery is called "cauterization of cows."
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Two Places.
Some times pain occurs in the back due to various causes such as falls or blows or excessive evacuation, and due to causes similar to these, by infusion of cold and wet matter.
A cautery should not be used except in this specific case which is caused by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, evacuate the patient with pillows filled and similar to them that should be made on the back where there is pain three fingers widths according to its latitude, but test with each finger if cautery or more is needed, according to the amount coming from the tolerance of the patient and the potency of it.
Make a cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want to, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a medium-sized needle in this manner:
Chapter xliii.
On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Sometimes this illness strikes infants; and the sign of its beginning in infants is that it affects their structure, causing the rising and movement to decrease.
And it gradually weakens in the lower part of the back and the neck, which begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And since when you see this and wish to stop it, you should cauterize that area with a circular cautery in the following manner: Take the cautery over the entire area of the vertebrae tightly.
If you want to, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three fingers widths. The points are close together.
Treat the area within which healing has been indicated.
Also, beware that a cautery is not administered in jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter xliv.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humours that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout is cured by cold remedies and the pain does not return, perform cauterization again.
It is that you cauterize around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
And the olive oil cautery has this shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain moves towards the nails or other joints and this happens frequently, then you cauterize that area around each nail with three or four cauteries using the olive oil cautery.
And if more cauteries are needed for this cautery, you cauterize that area and do not press too much with the cautery beforehand, only surround the wound with the dressing.
If the pain moves towards the nail and the back, then administer the cautery as previously mentioned in the same chapter.
And if the pain is only in the nails and it is called pus, you should make a circular incision around the nail bed as it rotates, and make an incision in those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the nails, you should make an incision around the nail bed on each side and at the base of the finger.
And if the pain moves towards the shoulders or muscles after some days, you should cauterize those areas with the help of assistants.
And do not evacuate the patient with good management and reception of medications, because if it is done with good management and this cautery is applied, they will be healed, God help them.
This seems to indicate that we have reached the forty-fifth section (or chapter) of a text or treatise. However, without knowing the original language and title of the text, I can't be certain. Here's a possible line translation:
On the Cauterization of Ruptures.
When a rupture is suspected in the groin and the intestines are pushed towards the abdomen, then it is necessary to command the patient to fast on that day and use gentle measures to prevent further widening of the rupture in their abdomen.
Then place the patient on your lap and command them to keep their body closed until the wound is healed or the intestines reappear or the hernia becomes visible.
Then return that person to your side and apply pressure on the affected area with your hands to test the rupture on the pelvis bone, using the tip of your fingers at the divided parts of the chest.
Then heat the cautery in the following shape:
until it glows and gives sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the heated cautery on that spot with your hand holding the cauterizer straight, and press it against the pelvic bone until you feel the bone in the middle of the pubis; and repeat this procedure if you have not succeeded in the first examination to reach the bone.
Be careful and observe the intestine during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn the intestine, so as not to bring harm or grave illness upon the patient.
Know that when you have not reached the bone with the cauterizer, do not consider your treatment a success.
It is necessary for the cauterizer of children to be small and appropriate according to their size.
Then treat the area where the cautery was applied with bandages for three days until the scar from the fire has healed.
Then treat that place with other unguents (ointments) until it is healed.
The patient should remain on their back for forty days, until the wound and ulcer are sealed.
It is necessary to withhold food from the patient according to the length of their treatment time, and to prevent the intestines from coming out due to the efforts of healing.
When it is time to remove the bandages after forty days, administer appropriate treatment gently, and keep them for another forty days.
Let him rest from work and replenish his food and drink, and abstain from violent speech, because using this method of healing will heal him completely.
I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen and at the beginning, when it is necessary not to stop, then cauterize the rupture with a rounded cautery according to its size, and it should be similar to the third part of it; and treat that place as I have said, and do not neglect it.
Previously, some people said that ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in the following manner, using this method of testing:
and a line is drawn perpendicular to the latitude through the rupture, and another line above it; then press your hand with one cauterizer, but the first cauterizer is lighter and more suitable.
Fifty-sixth Chapter
On the Cauterization of a Twist (or Hernia).
When a pain occurs in some limb by accident or injury, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medications, then it is necessary to cauterize it using a pointed cautery.
The cauterizer should be appropriate for each member in terms of size and shape, as well as their nature, location of the twist or pain, and its severity.
Therefore, if it heals with the first cauterization, that is good; otherwise, continue to cauterize it; because such pains are usually points of one member near another, so it is necessary to reach those points with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Fifty-seventh Chapter
On the Cauterization of Leprosy (or Skin Disease).
Some leprosy cases are often treated with cauterization, particularly the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Therefore, if you want to cauterize it (the affected area), consider whether the leprosy is common and can be cured with what has been said in the division and not denied, or it is present and spreading, and fear that corruption will spread throughout the patient's entire body and complexion. If this is the case, then cauterize it on the head with two cauteries: one at the middle of the head, and another just below it, moving the front to the end of the hairs; and both on two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
Finally, place your hand with the cautery a little into it (the affected area) so that a small indentation is made on the bone and the scabs are displaced, thus alleviating the expiration of thick vapors; and cauterize over the tumor as prescribed.
If the leprosy has already spread on the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauteries as mentioned in the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over both shoulders, and two cauteries over two spines of the neck, and six cauteries over the spines of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the wrists and one on each wrist, and two on the elbows, and two on the knees, and two on the thighs, and two on the shins, and hold the tendons of its feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over every toe of its feet, and over the folds of its arms.
Be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the toes.
Sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Know that the more cauteries you apply, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as happens with animals, for this reason their body is already stunned.
It is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the tools.
Place the cautery with flour of burnt eggs mixed with honey and the other cure inside until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On cauterization for stupefaction.
When a member is stunned or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that stunned member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
Let your cautery penetrate into the flesh a little. Cure that (the cauterized area) with mouthwash until it is healed.
Sometimes stupefaction in the limbs and feet, and the spine of the back, and damage to the nerves that affect that member is cauterized, and the stupefaction is alleviated.
Do not presume this unless he who knows the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the body moving is present.
Chapter XLIX.
On cauterization for tumors that are cancerous.
When the tumors are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal rinses, then you cauterize over it with a cautery prepared a little according to the depth of the flesh into which it should be removed, so that the whiteness and color of it is alleviated, and its color is changed.
Cure that (the cauterized area) with flour of burnt eggs and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and the blood of a dove or a hen, each part separately and all mixed together, and let it be limited by a cloth and placed over it until it is healed.
Chapter L.
On cauterization for crabs.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then you cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circumference of it as it is rolled up.
The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I do not see this, for I fear that it is ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
It is more appropriate that it should be cauterized in the circumference of it with a circular cautery, or with many cauteries.
Chapter LI.
On the cauterization of sores.
When a sore fails to heal in due time, either because of an excess of exudate or the patient's state, being elderly and weakened, having little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the healing of the sore; then cauterize around it with a small cautery, puncturing it several times; and apply a dressing that will promote healing.
But if you wish to perform perforation with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has the following shape: and dip it in the appropriate place of the sore until it penetrates the skin.
And if the sore is in a place that is below the joint of the arm, to relieve the body; then care for it until it heals.
Chapter LII.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
Ulcer is corruption that moves through a member, which corrupts it in the same way as dry wood consumes by fire.
Therefore, if you see an ulcer in a location that requires cauterization with fire, heat the cautery iron with small and large points as needed in the location where the ulcer is present.
And apply cauterization all around until you eradicate all the corruption and there remains no cause for it.
And apply the dressing for three days and press it three times a day with oil mixed in until all scabs are eradicated, and all the corruption is removed.
Care for it with fresh meat-based remedies.
But if after three days the meat grows healthy without corruption, that is good; otherwise, you must repeat the cauterization over the corrupted areas.
Ulcer is sometimes treated with acute medicine because it lies between cauterization and medication. But cauterization with fire is lighter in the pus-filled area.
And it has already been said that the treatment of this with acute medicine is in the division, and therefore choose it when you have need of it.
Chapter LIII.
On the cauterization of wounds and their counterparts.
When a malady occurs in the areas below the foot that is known as a wound, and it is large, open, causing pain to the foot; cauterization in these cases can be performed in two ways: by fire or by hot water.
And cauterization by fire is that you heat the concave cautery in the shape of a stylus pen, made from iron according to the size required for the entire wound, and with thin edges.
Then, apply the heated cautery to the wound and rotate your hand with the cautery around the wound until it reaches the depth of the wound. Leave the dressing on for three days until the wound begins to drain pus. Apply a plaster made with crushed wild herbs mixed with salt, and apply the plaster on it for one night, as this will eradicate the pus from its roots.
Care for the area with fresh meat-based remedies until it heals.
If the condition does not improve and continues to appear on the surface of the body, particularly in the more sensitive areas such as the abdomen or feet; then you must administer cauterization with hot water, taking a lancet made of copper, glass, or bone, and pressing it onto the wound. Fill the lancet with a small amount of boiling water, and hold your hand firmly around it while compressing the wound with your entire hand, ensuring that the edge of the lancet is pressed against the wound. This will allow the hot water to enter the wound through the opening, and you should wait for about an hour until the patient feels the burning sensation from the hot water before removing it, as this will help eradicate the wound and its roots.
And thus do as they are directed, bringing them one after another into contact with all of their bodies within the chest.
Then treat the sores that the rust of nails is expelled from with sulphur, which causes flesh to grow in them.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization for trembling.
When trembling occurs due to cold in the nerves or because of a fever caused by cold, or for any other similar reason, it is necessary that you cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the spinal column, between each vertebrae there should be one cautery; and on the feet, and on the stomach, use olive oil cautery.
And the trembling subsides and hastens the healing of the illness.
Chapter 50.
On cauterization for accidents to the body (or wounds).
When a wound appears on the body and becomes pustules that are formed from corrupt matter; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize the entire area around the opening with a subtle cautery soaked in myrtle juice, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long erystic rust; or with cautery lenticular.
And at times it is necessary to cauterize again at the beginning of its evacuation in this manner; and if not done, it bursts, making it worse, and heals from that.
However, it is necessary that this be done with proper evacuation using lancet.
Chapter 60.
On cauterization for bleeding of an accident by cutting with a bowstring.
Occasionally bleeding occurs from a bowstring wound, which should be treated by cutting the plague that causes it, or by making an incision of lancet or cauterizing the limb, and similarly, it is difficult to stop the bleeding in such cases.
Therefore, when such a thing happens to you, hold it with your hand over the opening of the bowstring wound and wait until the bleeding stops on its own, and do not let it come out.
And wait for the olive oil cauteries to cool slightly, so that they are not too hot when applied.
And take a small or large piece of cloth and place it over the location and plague where the artery has been cut, and quickly press on that vein until you have stopped the bleeding, and then cauterize it before the bleeding resumes and restrains the blood flow.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remain still and extract the cautery, then take another cautery from among the prepared cauteries in the fire, and do not stop until the blood is restricted.
And watch that you do not burn the nerves that are here, and that another mischief comes upon the patient.
Know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with cautery as said before, or with extraction where it has not been extracted, since when the extremities are burned and restricted, the blood is restricted, or tying it with thread or ligament for strong structure, or that it is placed on medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be tightened with pulvinar or compression.
But the one who administers proper restriction of it with thread and strong structure with cloth or by causes that burn and similar ones, should not be trusted but rather watched carefully.
But if it is intended to open the artery of that vein as we have said, and it is necessary to make a large incision into it until the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound, and on the artery, do not apply pressure; and above the artery, spray with cold water for great cooling until the blood clots and thickens; and bind in the place where there is necessity of cautery or medicine.
Of incision, perforation, punctures and of lancing, wounds and their similar.
We have already said in the first chapter that cautery with fire is appropriate and medicine for burning, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary in them, as well as the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from head to feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter according to that method in order to alleviate the suffering of the patient, then on what has been requested.
Before I begin this, thread, cord, know that in this chapter it is for terror of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And because thread should be used with great caution, since in the operation which is in this chapter many things are observed that can cause evacuation of blood, which is life, and the spurting of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of an ulcer or purification of the wound or extraction of a splinter or incision of stone and their similar. And of all these, fear and trembling and in the most extreme cases death should be feared.
And I advise you that this should not happen to you in which there is doubt, because some things that must be handled by men must be handled with many different methods of sickness. And of them is one who will depart with his illness and it should be easy for him death, due to the severity of what he finds from his illness, and due to the length of his illness, and because of the illness there is fear which means death.
And of those [who] give you money and orders, you hope for his recovery, but his sickness is harmful.
Therefore, you should not consent to that one who comes to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than greed and avarice; and do not presume any cause concerning it unless you have certain knowledge of it which proves what is required of you, and to whom it applies through a suitable course.
Use in the treatment of all your patients predictions and indications of where healing is converted, for in that there is help to you with acquisition of fame, memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding, do not abandon guidance and protection for it is in His hands.
And this chapter is divided into sections as previously indicated in the chapter on cautery, the treatment of the head to the feet, so that you are relieved of what you seek and for which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of infants.
Know that this disease often manifests itself in infants and that it should be treated with infant milk, and when the nurse tightens the baby's head.
And sometimes it manifests itself because of a hidden cause which is not known.
I do not see this disease except in infants; and all those whom I have seen, I have considered them worthy of death, and so I consider their work to be unfortunate.
I have seen an infant whose head was full of water, and his head was so swollen inside that it could not stop growing due to the great size of his head, and moreover, the humidity increased until he died from suffocation.
And this humidity is either added between the skull and the bone or it is added behind the bone near the cranium.
For the operation in this case if the humidity is between the skull and bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision at the midpoint of the head with a slit along its length, and the width of the slit should be about two inches, and this is the shape of the spatula:
Therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions made in this manner:
If the humidity is behind the bone, it is a sign that you see the joints of the head opened on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press them with your hand at the inner parts and not hidden from you. It is necessary to make three incisions at the midpoint of the head in this manner:
extract all the humidity and tighten the incisions with gauze and feathers; bind it up from above with vinegar and oil for five days, remove the dressing and care for the wound with compresses and salves, tie the head with equal lengths; and feed the patient with dry food containing little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision, consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput or the front, right, left; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess and repletion of water appear, and make the incision accordingly.
Observe that you do not cut the artery and allow a flow of blood to escape, which will kill the patient due to the outflow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
This appears to be the start of a new section in the text, possibly a second subsection within a larger capital (Capitol .ii.). Here's the translation:
When an ulcer or abscess appears on the nails or feet, and it is an old one and does not respond to medicine treatment, then the last recourse in this case is to incise those two arteries (presumably the ones near the affected area).
Therefore, when you wish to incise those arteries where the patient's head is located, first prepare the area with coarse cloth to expose the arteries, and firmly hold the patient's neck with some cloth. Consider which vein pulses there; and press on the locations of each one near those areas that are close to the ears, and they should be hidden from sight except in some men.
Then make an incision on the artery and probe it carefully to ensure that you have reached the bone (the incision should extend into the bone) during the procedure on the patient's head.
If you wish, insert the probe beneath the artery and break it at the incisions above.
And the length of the incision should be adjusted to two fingerbreadths because when a vein is incised, blood will flow out with pulsating exits, which may cause frequent spurting (bleeding).
If the artery does not appear at the incision point, it is necessary to measure the space from the ear, and then probe carefully to enter the bone.
And the quantity of blood that should be drained is one ounce (of blood). And take care not to drain too much or too little, and the amount depends on the severity of the patient's condition and the fullness of the artery in question.
Consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, incise it to prevent the formation of an abscess.
Strengthen the wound with feathers and linen cloth, and care for it with ointment until it heals.
This appears to be the start of a new section or chapter in the text (Capitol .iii.). Here's the translation:
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples. (This appears to be a subsection within Capitol .iii.)
When an old or severe illness migrates to the temples due to acidic moisture and poor quality of the joints in the temples, or a sudden, violent condition that resembles such illnesses, and it does not respond to medical treatment, we are compelled to resort to extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization as demonstrated previously.
The method of the operation and extraction of those arteries is to shave the scalp where they are located; and understand that the artery appears on the temple as it is shown by its pulsation, and it is hidden except in a few men due to the intensity of coldness.
If the artery is hidden, then firmly hold the patient's neck with some cloth, and prepare the area with coarse cloth or moisten it with warm water until the artery appears manifestly. And then you take the sponge whose shape is: And then you approach the sheath of which this is the shape:
If the artery is thin, then you cover it with the tip of the finger and make an incision on that part according to the length by which the extremities are extended and contracted, and no bleeding will occur, because if not incised, blood will not flow out from all parts.
Then evacuate the blood of the vein. Go inside three (fingerbreadths).
If the arch is large, then you need to tie it with double-strength silk or thread of considerable length and not let it become rotten before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
Then cut off the excess tissue that is between two ligaments; do so at that time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron to the bone with a cautery knife until the edges are incised, and leave that area in this condition.
It is better to wait if the patient has fever or is in a complex hot state; because cauterization is of those causes that help to dissipate moisture, and therefore it is better to wait in this case.
It is necessary to approach the extraction of the arteries that open in ancient times, and they should be placed with decent powder, and it should be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh heal and with hot compresses until it is healed.
If during another examination bleeding occurs from the artery, then you must try to stop the blood, either with a cauterizing instrument or by applying pressure, and tighten your hand until the bleeding is stopped. If any of these reasons are not present, then you must wait for the blood to clot over the area until the bleeding subsides and bind it with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and tighten it as necessary.
The easiest method for extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery made of two knives, since you have tested both ends and waited, more or less, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it can be elongated between the extremities, because it will not be consolidated from all sides with this cauterization.
This is the shape of the cautery:
The sharpness of both knives should be equal. However, if one knife is sharper than the other, it is better, because if they are as sharp as each other, they may not cut through the flesh quickly.
Therefore, since in those cases there is some swelling, it is important to heat the fire in those places and remove the flesh easily.
This procedure is better than any other and easier as well.
The space between the two knives should be equal to the thickness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of corpse with sharp and acid tears from wounds.
When the tears are acid and the body has these veins that are above the forehead of the head, and no cause of cure from medication is provided for this, and at times the patient's face becomes swollen and he feels as if he were bitten by ants on his forehead, and the wounds of that person become thin, moist to such an extent that the skin of them becomes known, and the eyebrows are scaled due to the acidity of the tears, ancient practitioners used this method in treating those conditions with this procedure, and I name this cure as spasm.
You command the patient to raise the eyebrows that are on his forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead at equal intervals according to the length of the forehead. If the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small finger of the movement of the eyelids, which are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. If the distance between each incision is equal to three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a sponge or cotton wrapped in dry fabric with which you can extract the blood.
Insert the sharp end of the sponge into two opposite sides, and this is the shape for incising it: from the side of the temple to the second incision. Remove the entire sheath that is between the two incisions, and do this from the smaller incision to the second incision. Then straighten the sponge and enter it into the first incision with another tool called a knife, sharp on one side and dull on the other.
Pause the incision on that sharp place, attach the connected flesh with sutures, and the laceration of the bone should be left open, and push it in where it will reach the minor fissure, and abscess all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Let it be continuous with the incision until it meets the minor fissure on the other side.
When blood clots at the wound's edges, press the areas with gauze to stop the bleeding.
Then place a dressing over each old wound that requires it, and dress the blisters filled with pus using vinegar and oil, making sure it does not turn into an infected abscess.
On the third day, remove the linen and administer hot infusion of watered down camomile or thyme tea, and treat with basil oil and other oils until the sores are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of abscesses through cupping and on the heels that descend from within the head.
When an abscess appears and continues to grow, and the patient's heels are exhausted and weakened, and their eyes are ulcerated with swollen eyelids, and there is sharp pain in the forehead and concomitant extension, then it is clear from these symptoms that the material and abscess do not come from any other veins except those of the head.
The best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and make an incision in the middle of the forehead, a small one width-wise (and begin from the left temple to the right temple; and the incision should go through the bone; extend your hand from the temples, which are swollen due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and fill the space between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or dry linen. And apply fresh dressing over the blisters filled with pus using vinegar and oil to prevent an infected abscess.
And when you remove the dressing and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone starting from where there is no more flesh, and treat it with a drying regimen that promotes healing, such as taking equal parts of wheat flour and colophony and mixing them into a plaster and administering it to the affected areas near the native skin.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of abscesses in the ears.
The cause of abscesses in the ears is one of four types: it can be a mineral stone or something resembling a stone like iron and glass, or it can be a plant such as nettle or beans, or it can be a fluid like water and vinegar and their likes, or any animal.
And therefore when stone or some other similar cause enters the ear that does not fit in the ear, stop the ear with a plug, and if you see the stone, distill any of the oils such as oil of violets or sage into it, and administer the extract, and make the patient sneeze using condiments, and open the nostrils to prevent sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear open at the top, as many observed cases are forgotten with these causes.
And if it is not forgotten, administer the extract using the instrument called epicyclic forceps, whose form is as follows:
If the procedure is forgotten, that's good; otherwise, administer the extraction of it by using a subtle amount of double pressure.
Therefore, if the procedure is not forgotten, insert a cannula made of metal and place the tip of the cannula into the ear canal and close the environment around the cannula with wax and softened oil to prevent it from being open except for the cannula. Then extract the pus with strong traction, as it is observed that this often relieves it.
If this method is not forgotten, then take alum or vinegar prepared with which the birds are given a small quantity, and place it on the affected area and wrap it around the area properly placed. Then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and remove the wax from the moisture.
Therefore, if this method is not forgotten regarding all the causes that were mentioned earlier, then you should seek to cut off the part that becomes an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting that area is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract the blood according to its properties, and then place a cushion between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision in the edge of the ear and drain the pus from it in the most pressured location. The incision should be in the shape of the moon and reach the bone, and if the bone is swollen, remove it with appropriate instruments if possible; and sew up the incision at that time with speed, and cure it until it heals.
If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that has grown and become inflamed, administer its cure and extraction; but if you do not immediately take care of it, then you should take sugar candy (or something similar) in this manner: and administer the abscess removal of that fat which is located in the ear.
Do not perform this procedure when you believe that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on a cushion or some other soft surface, and carefully extract it from there with scissors or by using the method described earlier (abscess removal), as the extraction of it is relieved.
But in the water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing at the beginning and fill their ear with something old, and rub over the affected ear where the water is present, and if this is forgotten, it's fine; otherwise, take many small pebbles or stones according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and make the patient insert one of those into their ear canal and jump on one foot from that side and strike another stone against the stone that is inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained out.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been drained out. Then take paper or cotton. And place one end of it in the fire-tongue (bellows) and stretch out the other end into the fire until it burns completely.
And repeat the process until all the water is drained out, and then straighten it with a cannula as described in the previous section regarding the trocar.
However, during the extraction of an animal, if it is a small object, proceed with caution and be careful, treat it as described in the previous section; but if it is a large object that protrudes from the abdomen, immediately perform an extraction using tweezers and remove it without delay. The reason for this is that it is easier to deal with than all the other causes that may occur in the bellows.
But when extracting worms generated in the bellows and you follow the procedure and distillation treatment as described in the previous section and do not find relief, then you must observe the bellows at sunset.
And if any cause of worms appears here, extract it with tweezers or thin forceps, but if no cause is apparent, take a cannula that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in shape. Insert the narrow end of the cannula into the bellows as much as the patient's condition allows; then suck it out with force, and repeat this process until all the worms are expelled.
But if the patient's condition worsens, you should plug and seal the end of the cannula with wax as described; then administer distillation treatments that have been proven effective in treating worms, and observe the outcome in the treatment of distillations.
And your infusion with which you pour medicinal oils into the bellows using this instrument, whose shape is as follows: Make it of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom, with a small hole in it, and flat on top.
And so make it in such a way that it fits into the concavity of the continuous cannula where it is needed. And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the appropriate part of it carefully, then pour oil or juice from a herb, or any medicine of your choice into the concavity of the cannula (which is in the bellows), and place your hand around the wrapped reed and apply pressure on it with a moderate compression until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the cannula and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever substance is to be infused in the bellows should be heated slightly with fire. And be careful that the cause you are distilling in the bellows is not too hot, because the bellows cannot tolerate such heat.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of obstruction of the bellows.
Sometimes children suffer from obstructions in their mothers' bellows that have not been perforated, and this also occurs in some men, obstruction in the meat of the bellows due to a wound or rotten flesh in that area; and sometimes this obstruction is made at the junction of the bellows opening that cannot pass gas, and sometimes it is in parts outside.
The obstruction at the junction of the bellows opening that cannot pass gas is the most difficult to cure.
When you achieve a gas passage in the bellows, it is necessary to place the patient's bellows at sunset and observe it. And if you see an obstruction, open it with a thin spatula whose shape is as follows:
If the obstruction is at the narrow part of the bellows where one side is pointed and the other is not, the spatula should be double-edged to avoid damaging the bellows.
If the obstruction is due to rotten flesh in the bellows or its surrounding meat, immediately use thin forceps and remove all the rotten tissue as quickly as possible.
If the obstruction is at the junction of the bellows opening, take a thin reed, heat it slightly with fire, and then insert it into the meat of the bellows.
And if you sense obstruction with what the patient complains about due to difficulty breathing, relieve the compression as quickly as possible; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the bellows.
Then pause in the bellows with linen cloth according to the size of the hole you wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other suitable material and soak it in water and pulverize it, then use it according to the instructions given; and if you see that the bellows has already been sutured, you must carefully remove the old suture and replace it with a new one wrapped in a wax coating that has been made with olive oil, until the abscess is cauterized. Then treat it until it is healed.
If blood flow occurs, immerse sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the artery, then use another treatment to stop the blood flow, which is called distillation in the treatise of distillation.
Here comes the next sentence:
Of the treatment of athlete's foot that affects the eyelids.
Athlete's foot that affects the eyelids of some people is sometimes moist, while it is dry for others.
Therefore you must have those with hairs or without hairs, and cut the affected area with a scalpel, then place it on a dry, clean cloth.
But if pain with blood flow occurs, cauterize the affected area with a thin cautery (cauteril).
And the best cauterization is to make incisions and burn any remaining cause of the inflammation with fire; once they are cauterized with fire, the inflammation does not return.
Here comes the next sentence:
Treatment of swelling that affects the eyelids of some people.
Sometimes swelling that affects the eyelids of some people is accompanied by a cause similar in strength and durability to true swelling, and for this reason it is called "swelling."
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore, the operation is to examine whether the swelling is coming from something that appears on the eyelid and is present everywhere; if this is the case, the cause is likely light.
Therefore make an incision along the width of it, then remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and suspend it with a string and cut off the affected area.
And if the swelling is large, adjust it using stitches; care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from it, as the heat of the affected area restores and nourishes it.
If the swelling is gradually decreasing towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should trim the affected area inside the eyelid, remove the swelling with a string, perform an incision if necessary, and press all around it; but if the eyelid is elongated due to repeated incisions, do not force it in any case.
After the incision, wash the wound with salt water; care for the affected area with something that nourishes it until it heals.
Here comes the next sentence:
Of the treatment applied to the upper eyelid of the eye.
Blinking is the action that is generated in the upper eyelid, especially among children, and worsens their eyesight and causes them to develop cataracts more; they cannot tolerate bright light due to tears forming at the eyes.
Therefore you often find them with tears constantly on their faces, even when they sleep; and the underside of their eyelids is moist, which is covered by inflammation, and the imminence of conjunctivitis is apparent in the eye; and whenever you press on the affected area with your fingers, you feel a swelling inside.
One method of operation is to have the patient hold their head between your knees, place a cloth and warm water on them, make a circle with it according to the size that contains arteries from all sides, and place it over the affected area and press around it so that swelling is created in the middle of the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture along the width, but the incision should not be larger than the incision made during lithotomy.
But in the case of severe conjunctivitis, it is necessary that you cut the cordon completely through to the artery, as in more severe cases, conjunctivitis is treated by incision according to the shape of white pus.
Therefore you extract it with cloths that you have wrapped around your fingers at the front and sides, then turn it between your left and right hands until it is completely removed.
Keep watch that you do not press in the opening to prevent sputum from reaching the wound and causing contamination there.
If you do not enter the opening at first, but press into the opening to make a small space for sputum before processing it; and then extract that easily as we have said; submerge cloths in warm water and vinegar, place them on it and apply strong pressure with powders.
And mix salt and let it rest there in the depression of the incision to remove any remaining moisture.
Then care for that to ensure it heals.
If there is an abscess in the cauterized area, then care for it with caustic plasters until it heals.
Chapter 11.
On methods of examining the throat.
When the tonsils are formed by pressing of natural hair and become hardened, they are referred to as throat examination, and various methods for diseases such as persistent tearing and softening of the eyelids and swelling inside the mouth until it causes destruction of the throat, which is called "throat touch", and treatment may be in four ways: or by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned in the Cauterization chapter; or through touch and suturing; or by cannulas as I will say.
Therefore, you must hold the patient's head with one hand; turn the eyelid of the eye towards your left hand, if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into that which is swollen beyond the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through it, and this should be - just below the edge of the eyelid where the hair growth starts - beneath the hairs, and pull the needle thread above the eyelid with your palm, and turn it towards the ray.
And make an incision in the corner of the eyelid below the hair growth towards the lacrimal duct into the smaller lacrimal sac; and extract the needle thread and place it beneath the eyelid with fine powder or cloth, and then apply pressure on the eyelid as if it were a fig leaf of myrtle.
But it is important to note that the shape should be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, because this varies among men, as some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the degree of swelling, depending on how much the eyelid is softened.
And make an incision with the scalpel along both lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal sac towards the smaller one. And if your incision is near natural hairs such as the king's thicket.
And place the hook on one of the angles of the incision, and excise that entire area, and adjust both lips with surgical thread or fine wool yarn and absorb the blood, and make any superfluous hairs adhere to two eyebrows with some sticking agents if you wish to do so, but if not, do not care for it.
And remove the stitches of the hairs within three or four days and take care of it.
If you wish, leave the wound unsutured and care for it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of it; but suturing is better, and therefore the ancients recommend this method.
But in any case, consult the patient, and it is good practice, and there is no reason for concern.
Another method in examination is to mark the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and lift the eyelid with three separate and gathered incisions according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, take incisions, and if they are not straight, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert another needle near the larger lacrimal sac, and insert the third needle near the smaller lacrimal sac, and adjust the needles evenly between your fingers, and then lift your hand with the elevation of the thumb, lift the entire eyelid over which the mark is made as we have recommended.
And adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and care for it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs in your incision or wound, it must be drained with a lancet and similar instruments, and with mouthwash.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelid converts its hairs into itself, then you should use on it what I said about incision; but stitching in some cases is more artificial.
Bandaging with reeds is done like this: And if the eyelid is turned inward and its shape is folded as I have described, then place two thin reeds or two small sticks under it, the length of which should be the same as the length of the eyelid, and their width slightly less than the width of the eyelid opening. And you have made incisions at each end of each divided part, where you have the threads.
Then moisten each one with a gentle solution under the eyelid that is swollen, and tie the reeds of each divided part tightly, and leave it like this for several days, because the swelling will die from the tightening and be rejected, and it will fall off on its own without the need to remove it manually.
But if it takes too long, then break the thread and treat the wound until it heals.
When the eyelid is swollen, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not stick out.
And this is the way to make two sticks in this manner: The quantity of length and width should neither exceed nor be less. (In this context, "la" refers to "the," "quantitat" means "quantity," "longitud" means "length," "latitud" means "width.")
This looks like the Roman numeral for XII (twelve), possibly referring to a specific section or chapter of the text. Without more context, it's difficult to determine its exact meaning in this passage.
For puncturing thick skins with a needle when the skin is hard. (In this context, "de" means "of," "elevacio" refers to "raising," "pels" means "skins," "pungentz" means "punctured," "huel" means "the," "am" is used as a conjunction here, "agula" means "needle," and "quan" means "when.")
When the skins are unnatural, hard, rough and prick the heel with a sharp needle, then perform the operation on it by taking a fine needle and inserting it into that tender spot of soft leather, and make sure you adjust the extremities carefully without causing any unnecessary movement. (Here, "Quan" means "when," "son" is the third person plural verb form for "to be," "pels" means "skins," "nonaturals" means "unnatural," "durs e aspres" means "hard and rough," "pungentz les huels" means "prick the heels," "lahoras" is the third person plural verb form for "you perform," "agula subtil" means "fine needle," "aquisitats de lu" means "adjust the extremities," "nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil" means "make sure you do not cause any unnecessary movement.") The length of the field should be equal to the size of one palm. (Here, "E" means "and," "sia" is used as a conjunction meaning "should be," "la" refers to "the," "longitut" means "length," "de" means "of," "fiels" means "field," and "una palma" means "one palm.")
Then make another fine field nearby in brief, and cut the ends of that one if you wish. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "tu" refers to "you," "compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu" means "make another fine field nearby in brief," "nuza las extremitatz de aquel" means "cut the ends of that one," and "si tut vols" means "if you wish.")
Then place the patient's head on your lap and position it facing the sun so that your work is visible, as this is a delicate and minor operation. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "pause" means "place," "le malaute" refers to "the patient," "le sieu cap" means "his head," "en le tieu se" means "on your lap," "e" means "and," "si prop del solelh" means "facing the sun," "per que la tua obra sia declarada" means "so that your work is visible," "quar" means "as," and "operacio subtil e menuda" means "delicate and minor operation.")
Then insert the needle into the incision of the prepared skin that requires skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid hastily but carefully until you extract it above the natural skin. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "intromet" is the third person singular verb form for "to insert," "la agulha" means "the needle," "en la razit del pel" means "in the incision of the prepared skin," "ajustat" means "prepared," "quale ha necessitat de engen" means "that requires skill," "fay" is the third person singular verb form for "you make," "aquela" refers to "it," "penetrar" means "penetrate," "entro" means "into," "que" means "that," "extraguas" is the third person singular verb form for "to extract," and "desus le pel natural" means "above the natural skin.")
Then pull the skin over it and insert the needle into it, and make sure there are one, two or three layers of skin at most. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "tire" is the third person singular verb form for "to pull," "le pel" refers to "the skin," "entro desus" means "over it," "intromet aquel en alixati" means "insert that one into the incision," "e" means "and," "sian" means "make sure," "pels" means "skins," "un o dos o tres" means "one, two or three," and "no mays" means "not more.")
Then pull your hand toward it until the skin is everted with the incision in the eyelid and the natural skin. (Here, "aprop" means "then," "tira" is the third person singular verb form for "to pull," "la tua ma am" means "your hand towards it," "entro" means "into," "quel pel sia fora-gitat" means "until the skin is everted," "am alixolati en la palpebra" means "with the incision in the eyelid," and "le pel natural" means "the natural skin.")
But if the incision is not everted and the skin is drawn in, you should pull it toward the sides near the field that you have made and the needle, until the incision of the upper edge is everted. (Here, "Mais" means "but," "si" is used as a conjunction meaning "if," "es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel" means "the incision is not everted and the skin is drawn in," "atiraras" is the third person singular verb form for "you will pull," "alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela" means "toward the sides near the field that you have made and the needle," "entro quen sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira" means "until the incision of the upper edge is everted.")
And you will see it with the eye, as then you will evert the incision and the field, and grind each stone and claw of the heel, and leave the claws for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows over that area well. (Here, "E" means "and," "vegas aquela am la visio del huel" means "you will see it with the eye," "lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel" means "then you will evert the incision and the field," "grotan quascu e clautz le huel" means "grind each stone and claw of the heel," "laysse le claus per dos dias o tres" means "leave the claws for two or three days," "entro quel pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn" means "until the skin adheres to its place and grows over that area well.")
If the skin is too short, you should take a longer natural skin and raise it with that one, or else wait until it grows to an appropriate size, and then you should raise that one. (Here, "E" means "and," "si" means "if," "es mays breu le pel" means "if the skin is too short," "lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals" means "you should take a longer natural skin and raise it with that one," "e" means "or else," "o quel leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi" means "else wait until it grows to an appropriate size," "lehoras tu eleva aquel" means "then you should raise that one.")
This looks like the Roman numeral for XIII (thirteen), possibly referring to a specific section or chapter of the text. Without more context, it's difficult to determine its exact meaning in this passage.
On the treatment of eyelid herniation that occurs above. (Here, "De" means "on," "la cura" means "the treatment," "de ehacratir" refers to "of eyelid herniation," "la qual ve en la palpebra desus" means "that occurs above.")
When eyelid herniation occurs, and it is the contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn toward above, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization, and it is called leprosy, and this herniation can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization, or similar to their misdiagnosis. (Here, "Quan" means "when," "ve" means "occurs," "e" means "and," "es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus" means "the contraction of the eyelid when it is drawn toward above," "o a dextra o a sinistra partida" means "either on the right or left side," "per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri" means "due to poor consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization," "e" means "and," "aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental" means "this herniation can be natural or accidental," "es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz" means "it is caused by consolidation of a plague or a section or cauterization, or similar to their misdiagnosis.")
The operation method is to cut through that hardened area and separate the lips of it, place stitches where there is a hole of cloth-like substance, and tie them together until they heal.
It is necessary that you use caution in the causes that dry up, constrict; for if you do this, it will return to a worse state than before and will not heal at all.
Use for that cause which softens, for example fennel, wrap it with the water in which it is steeped and seeds of it, or gum resin, liquidify one of the oils, immerse the cloth in it and heal with it.
The treasure of your healing is that you penetrate through everything that is not hardened in the way it was at first.
This operation that we mentioned is not any kind of correction of hernia that does not restore the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter .xiii.
On the cure of hernia that is made in the eyelid.
This hernia that is made in the eyelid, which is called truly hernia; and it is of a nature that is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is made by ulceration, cut, burning, or similar things.
The method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and pierce it into the flesh, making it pass from the tear duct on the left to the tear duct on the right until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin at the edges with the needle and sew it up with the needle, and make an incision with a large spatula. And therefore if the figure of the eyelid returns as required, it is good; and if not, take the ray and place it in the slit figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make two cuts along the edge of the left eyelid.
And the ends of both cuts are at two angles of the incision that you made until they meet, and form an angle between them until when they gather together the figure is formed.
And this figure is Greek letter L: lambda.
Then remove the skin in that amount equal to the length of the sharp part on the left side of the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread, and heal them with what we have said about softening agents and ointments until they are healed.
And if hernia enters through a fissure or suture or burning, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned. Then separate with ointment between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, the cure of hernia whether above or below, in operation, is prepared according to the form of hernia, and this is in the shape of various motes (lumps).
And the skillful craftsman always prepares tools for every method that is possible to return the figure to its natural form or as close as possible, and this patient according to what is necessary for the operation and tools in the best arrangement.
Chapter .xv.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men who have the eyelid fused with the white part of the eye and is restricted in movement and its natural functions, therefore it is necessary that you insert the end of the finger below the eyelid, lift it up or stretch it with oil.
Then you cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not sharp like an incision, having a blunt end so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be as shallow as possible until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And place salt water in the eye and wash it with that, or distill in a vessel dissolved in water.
And separate the eyelid from the eye with ointment, and on the eye place wool soaked in egg yolk, and after three days use consolidating agents until it is healed.
Chapter .xvi.
On incision of nail and the prominence of skin of the tear ducts.
Know that the nail is of two types: either it is nerve-like and similar to hard dry substance; or it is not nerve-like, similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched by you or punctured, takes onion juice, is separated and the onion juice is not inserted in it.
And both types begin only from the major tear duct and gradually cover the eye, prevent light and movement of the eye.
But the method of working in the incision is that the patient rests his head on your shoulder, and you open his eyes, lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with onion juice and stretch it to the edges above. Then take a needle and insert it into the toe of an animal (such as horse, bull, cow, or similar), strong enough or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate with the needle through the nail, holding the nail; then pull it to the sides above, and peel off the skin from under the nail which contains the pupilla. And thus you follow the skin into the back of it.
Then you incise the remaining part of the nasal cavity with a sharp knife or small scissors, and open the natural nasal passage so that by incising it, continuous flow of tears is not caused.
Sometimes the nail with its root extended or thickened, as has been said, should be excised with lion-shaped spatula, which is the shape of it.
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue and cause rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then make an incision in the nail with a little bit of powdered salt or vinegar and let it heal over the next day, and care for it until it heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and cannot be pierced with a needle or is not embedded in the root, it should be treated with this type of nail medicine, cured as described, and healed accordingly as recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, first open the patient's nail and take a fine lion-shaped spatula of sharp angle according to this form: with a sharp angle. And when it is rarefied and congealed and you find it blocked in the nail, then distill your oil of vinegar or rosewater or saltwater into the nail, and let it heal over the next day.
And apply the operation to it repeatedly until all that is in it has been removed, unless the counter-abscess has appeared on the nail, then you let it heal, and care for the abscess until it heals.
And repeat your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The evacuation of the nasal cavity flesh, if noticed in the nail because of great harm, should be suspended with a nail; and incise it from one side, and do not extend the incision to prevent continuous flow of tears.
And apply rosewater or vinegar in the nasal cavity until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of a corn and what is born from flesh attached to the nail.
Sometimes in the nails of algae, red flesh is born and becomes inflamed until it covers the pupil or approaches or protrudes above the eyelids, and compresses the eyelids at the sides and resembles a rose bush with balustrade.
However, the operation is that the patient rests their head on your lap; and open the nails of that person and collect all that flesh with appropriate tweezers or forceps, and you with one hand hold it; and begin to incise the flesh at the start until it is finished with the scissors, and be careful not to cut the nail during your operation.
And your incision should be made with which you incise them or with the spatula that we have recommended in the nail incision, or with small scissors according to the form that will come according to this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh has been removed, fill the nail with salt, or distill into it red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and let it heal over the nail away from heat until the counter-abscess is assured.
If there remains any cause of algae and the wound becomes cauterized with blood, and you fear counter-abscess, let the nail heal and care for the abscess with what cures it, and apply the operation to it repeatedly until it is healed, similarly to the flesh that occurs in nails of this type.
However, you must be careful to avoid all healing of the nail naturally or accidentally, work with fire, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the nail.
Pus are red and sticky on the nail and prevent the use of clothing in its operation, and uncover the nail for days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the nail in which pus is strong and there is no other disease than pus, then collect that pus.
And command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and suspend those veins with a nail or two according to your discretion; and let that nail be of double-edged sublimation in this form:
two scissors moving gradually through a body in this way:
then collect those veins with forceps subtle and delicately, drain the blood gradually until you see them re-filled with air and relaxed.
watch that you do not pierce the intestine at the extremities of the sponge; and if your operation is during the daytime, and you are firm in your action so as not to injure anything but those veins.
And when you have finished, then distill the intestine's head with green or red vinegar to dissolve whatever has been re-filled with pus.
But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then fill it with whatever alleviates the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain subsides and the abscess is securely healed.
Then repeat the process as needed until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On reducing an arytenoid cartilage in the nose.
When you treat an arytenoid cartilage with cautery or sharp medicine as described earlier and it does not heal, do not be hasty but make a deep incision over the abscess to expose its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus, and let the bone be exposed.
And since the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
It is called an instrument with a sharp head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be round as if you were holding a ball that has been pierced by a small hole or alum pierced by a subtle hole (as shown in the following figure).
Place that instrument over the corrupt part of the bone, and gently rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand slowly until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
Allow it to heal for some time, and then restore the area using drying and stiffening agents.
If the area is consolidated and good tissue grows over it, if the body rejects the sinus and remains for 40 days without being renewed or abscessed, and there is no accident in the area, then you will know that it has healed.
If not, then it is not in the ingenuity (skill or art), but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and as follows: and it is said that you discover according to how sharp your knife or medicine is, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three such:
Let the handle of the tool be triangular, and the shaft first be extended to the tip as often seen in such cases.
Place that one on the bone, and let that one be from the lacrimal (eye); then extend your thumb a little more, and press your hand against the three with your fingers inside until it penetrates all the bone, and let the patient feel it when it comes out.
Therefore, you restore the area with dry medicines that are astringent as they have been prescribed.
As the flesh and area hardens, you return the substance that flows from the wound to the nose, so it is easier for the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the swelling on the thumb.
When the thumb swells completely without any harm or reduction, it is necessary to loosen the patient, and then to support him, and place poultices on his neck without scarification and use good sucking; and place liniment on the thumb which is made of aloes, opium, balm and saffron, and apply a plaster strongly on the thumb with lots of powder.
The method for powder is to take lions' hair cloth, and each piece should be folded four times; and make the powder from these.
And place one on top of the other according to the amount that the thumb requires. And apply strongly on these with hard cloth and tight bandage; and repeat the poultices without scarification and use good sucking; and remove the poultices and leave the thumb tied tightly for a day and a night.
But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it is necessary to be tightened more.
And remove the ligament after a day and a night as previously said.
If the thumb has already been reduced, that is good; but if not, then you repeat the plaster with powders and bandage and poultices until it heals.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the swelling of the eyelid tunica (epithelium).
When there is a disruption in the eyelid tunica (epithelium) and it is swollen and protruding as if with a grain of sand, and its shape resembles that of man, and you wish to incise it, then the operation should be done as previously recommended, that you enter the needle into the wound from the lower part of the eyelid to the upper part, and place another needle at the lacrimal fold double line, and make it penetrate and release the first needle according to its position; and incise the location of the double thread and lift with it the wound edge in the circle of the needle, and tighten that area.
And extract the needle and place wool dipped in egg white on the wound, and press it until the thread comes out with the yolk.
And heal the wound with something that strengthens it until the wound is healed.
And add some bandages to all the sides of the wound in a circle around the swollen area, and perforate it with a thin spatula that touches the edge of the eyelid, let the white fluid (humid) run out, and press down on the swelling and enter immediately.
And tighten until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On cauterization (burning).
This illness called "alconati" is not the same as the one that resembles water blisters, it is not that one.
But the method of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a stool covered with a cloth and upright, and take his head in your two hands from both sides and push him towards the wound so that the pus comes out from the bottom part, and let it dry and not descend, and let light come in, and let the patient see the causes as he saw before.
And if it does not descend (go down), you know that it is water.
But if the pus is not prepared to descend with what has been said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the eyelid that surrounds a little the continuation of the conjunctiva and cornea in the crown (into the location used), until the pus is expelled.
Therefore, when it is expelled, you distill water (condense) in the wound which you have mixed with oil or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And heal it with other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the care of water coming out of the wound.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which one should be pierced with a serum as declared, then do that according to health.
Now you must tie the patient's hands together on a chair and bind their feet as well, pulling them tightly.
Then place your left hand near the patient's left eye (if it is the left eye with water), or your right hand if it is the right eye (if it is the right eye).
Then take the left-handed person's right hand (if it is the left eye), or the right-handed person's left hand (if it is the right eye).
Then place your left thumb near the corner of the eye (from the side with more water) for the swelling caused by the large vein in the eyelid of the smaller lacrimal duct, and apply pressure with your left hand on that spot.
Then make an incision in the eyelid (the area above the swollen part) and ensure that your thumb has reached it due to the swelling.
It is necessary to measure the distance from your thumb (almagda) to the eyebrow along the line of the eye, and that measurement is from the pupil to the end of the black part (corona), which you will see with the pupil's vision through the clarity of the cornea.
Place your thumb near the watery area (the eye with more water) and apply pressure on it several times until the water subsides. If the water goes down quickly, you will notice that the patient regains their sight in that eye.
Rest for a little while; if the water has subsided, then wait a bit more before releasing your thumb from that eye.
If the water does not subside, extract your thumb with ease and gently massage the eye several times, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt in water and rinse the affected area with it; then stop or place warm compresses infused in rose oil and honey over the eye.
However, we of our time apply a warm compress with honey to that closed (or stuck) eye.
If your thumb is difficult to insert into the eye due to its toughness (as some men have hard eyes), then it is necessary that you take the spatula called alberid, which has this shape:
Therefore, make a hole in that conjunctiva (the membrane connecting the eyelids), but do not press too hard, and it is not necessary to use a sharp instrument. Instead, use your thumb carefully on a subtle spot.
Place your thumb where we said previously (in the hole made).
You must ensure that the patient is comfortable with their sleeping arrangements, made in a low room where they can sleep on their back in a dark house, and be forbidden from all movement.
Rest the affected side of the patient's body (the one with the issue) in a natural position and do not move their head to either the left or right side at all.
Keep the patient lying down for three days.
Place the patient in that dark room and expose their healthy eye (the one without the issue), have them look at various objects, and return them to bed on the seventh day.
It is not necessary to do this procedure during the healing or recovery period or immediately before infusion (application of medicine). Therefore, it is necessary to avoid this procedure because water can easily pass through the eye due to its great and violent pain.
However, if an abscess forms, you must remove the eye bandage on the seventh day and apply a remedy that will cause the abscess to subside.
Remove the eye covering and have the patient rest with their face down for several days in a dark room.
Gradually bring the patient out of the darkness (slowly open the curtains) and have them talk about their concerns on the eighth day.
Know that not being able to see for a few days is not an excuse for the student when it comes to this operation (surgery). Be bold in your approach.
One of us who is an artist has said that he made fire with his thumb in the eye socket, and when this was done, the water was released.
Nevertheless, we have not seen such a procedure performed in our land, nor is it found in any of the old books; it may be new.
These are the ways to perform the operations with the thumb, for someone who is not familiar with them:
They can be made of ivory or iron (metal) and have this triangular tip, with the sharp end being shaped like this:
Chapter XXIV.
From the healing of flesh, nothing in the nose.
When various fleshes grow in the nose, some of which is caused by a disease resembling scorpion stings or polyps on the feet; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented. And from there is cancerous flesh, malignant, of dark color; and it is that which is called lion's flesh, not dark-colored.
Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, one must make the patient lie down with their face upwards and lift their nose hair, and prick it where those fleshes are found. And return that to the outer parts of the face, and incise what you have grasped with a sharp, subtle spatula from one side into which you know all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason that abscission is possible, then you remove what remains with one of the subtle instruments with ease until no reason remains. But if the lord bleeds or develops an abscess wound, pause there and cover it; or if it is a malignant abscess, you must cauterize it until it is abscised and all the cavities are left open.
And apply warm mustard or egg white near the incision for healing and alleviation. But if the nose is open and moisture enters into the palate, you will know that it has healed.
But if moisture does not penetrate as required, you will know that within it is flesh in the joints or bones of the nose to which no abscission has been achieved.
Therefore, enter a thin, sharp instrument into him where there is some thickness, and press it gently, and pause between each nut between the quantity of the finger or month, and guide the patient and insert one end of the instrument into the nose with the ray or any other means that is possible.
And when that has been done, draw the patient's scent into the channels of the nose and let it emit from their head, for many watched children in schools do this action, and it is an easy cause to those who want to do it.
And pause the two ends of the instrument, one end that protrudes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply a surgical tool for cutting flesh with the forceps that are in the instrument, and do it until you know that the flesh is at the tips of the forceps.
And remove the instrument and pause in the nose near the withdrawal of blood with a lint, and do it for three days or more until the wound heals completely from the rotten parts of the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead pipe for several days until it is healed.
But if there is no healing, use that remedy.
And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge maker" with which oils and medications are distilled in the nose:
And make it of silver or brass, similar to a small open pot or cup, like a small funnel, and the metal should be similar.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a cane, and the cannula of the capipurge maker should be flat, open; with which you will have when you evacuate oil or any substance that you want from the juices and causes.
Here is a translation for the given line:
On the growths at the extremities of the nose.
These growths are called tela in the extremities of the nose, and they grow larger and become swollen on certain days before the regulation of the menses arrives.
Therefore, it is necessary to excise that at the beginning of its appearance, and to excavate all of it. Then place a compress or burning medicine on the site.
But if its excision is delayed until it becomes swollen, consider whether it is hard, blackish in color and with little sensation, do not touch it with iron as this is a cancerous abscess; for the growths that are excised in such a manner can cause great harm to the patient.
But if the abscess is touched by a lion and is not blackish in color, and it can be excised completely, then evacuate the patient and excise it without fear, and heal the site with whatever ointment expels pus and contracts it until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suture of the nose and lips and auricle when continuity is dissolved by ulcer or similar conditions.
Know that the operation of repairing one of these cartilages when continuity is dissolved should be done sparingly, only in certain men.
Therefore, if the cause of this is an ulcer with fresh blood, then consider whether the wound has been cleansed and cauterized, and then adjust the lips over the ulcer with suture, and treat it until it heals.
If the lips that have lost continuity are already separated and each is healthy, it is necessary to excise each portion of its common border while there is still blood flow. Then adjust the lips with suture and tighten them, sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and triturate it over the sutured area, place a dressing of emollient linseed oil or any other consolidating plaster on top, leave it for two or three days, remove it and replace it with another linen dressing until the flesh heals by itself, and treat it with mouthwash until it is healed.
But the method of suturing is that you restore continuity using suture threads as recommended in abdominal suturing, or restore continuity with stitches as I have already told you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of causes that appear in the inner parts of the lips.
Growths that appear in the inner parts of the lips in some men are hard abscesses resembling butterfly wings, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips and folds on both sides of the abscess hardness, and then drain the area with sage triturated oil until the blood flow is restricted, and wash it with vinegar and treat it with an astringent ointment until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of the attached flesh in the gums.
A hard growth often appears on the attached flesh of the gum, which the ancients called albulus, therefore it is necessary to suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it appropriately, and allow the blood to flow or drain the pus.
Then place a dressing of sage triturated oil or other astringent and healing powders on the site.
And if the flesh returns, incise it again, and cauterize it as the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason for tooth pain with iron.
When rough hard spots are present on the surfaces of the inner teeth and those in the socket, some of which are black and are made citric or greenish before corruption spreads to the gum and the teeth become loose.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold the patient by the hand and support his head on your lap, and grind the teeth on which these rough spots appear, removing all causes of them, and remove the blackness and citrinity and other impurities until they are cleaned.
If the pain persists from the beginning of the toothache, that is good; if not, you must repeat the procedure on the following day and on the second day and on the third until it reaches the final stage at which you wish.
Know that teeth require various resorptions of different shapes and forms according to the type of operation you perform. Therefore, since the resorption of the tooth from the inner part is different from the resorption between the teeth in other forms, these types of resorptions must be prepared as you will soon see.
Chapter 30.
On the extraction of teeth.
You must treat the tooth pain thoroughly and patiently in its entire removal, for it is not a good reason to delay the healing of the wound when the tooth is removed, because there is a sublime substance entering that acts as an excuse during the extraction of the tooth.
But when the patient is ready to have that painful tooth removed, you must be certain of which tooth is causing the pain, for many a time the patient deceives himself and believes it is a healthy tooth, and you remove the wrong one, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have often seen in the practice of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain of which tooth is causing the pain, and if you know this, then you should make an incision around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it until the tooth is dissolved from the gum all around; then pull it out using forceps or fine forceps, gradually increasing the size until you have extracted it completely.
Bring some strong pliers with you, and hold the patient's head between large forceps that will speak well or have good structure, so that they do not move; and place the tooth in position according to correct procedure without breaking it or causing the patient any additional pain.
And thus, if you remember this, then take one of the instruments mentioned and remove the tooth easily and effortlessly as it was described at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, you must wrap it in cloth and tighten it at the root with a fine wire to prevent it from being crushed during your application of forceps.
You must work carefully with incisions around the entire gum and use great care to avoid breaking or splitting it further; then return to the patient, as the subsequent pain may be greater than the initial pain.
Be aware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers often do in their surgery and audacity during the removal of teeth, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great ailments that are difficult to heal, and all or some of these remain, or that the tooth is extracted with bones from the jawbone as has happened many times.
And when removing the tooth, wash the mouth with water and salt to clean it.
And if bleeding occurs during this procedure, as has happened many times, take some wine and sprinkle it on the wound; if the wine does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and fine forceps with which you will remove the tooth at the beginning should be long in length, short in width, and thick; this way they are not bent when working with them.
They should be as thick in the handles as necessary to avoid bending when gripping them, and have short lengths.
They should be made of steel from India and straight in shape, with teeth on the ends that grip each other tightly and exert strong pressure when closing; sometimes the ends of these forceps have the shape of a bird's beak called a ciconia, which has a strong grip.
Chapter 31.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken jawbones.
When the eradication of a root-trapped tooth is required due to some cause, then it is necessary for you to place pressure on the affected area with a bandage for a day or two until the area becomes softened; and introduce forceps that resemble the beak of a ciconia or stork, the shape of forceps.
The tips of them are made like files or tweezers.
And if you do not obey these forceps or tweezers, then it is necessary that you be careful and remove all the flesh around the root and introduce the tool called an alatal (a small lever with this shape):
Let it have a short and thick handle, and not be blunt so that it is not trapped (or stuck).
If the root is lost (or forgotten), that's good; and if not, help yourself with these other tools whose shapes are as follows: The shape of the first tool is a triangular tip with some thickness.
The shape of the second tool is thin and triangular.
And you are already helped by this tool that has two arms of the following shape: And other instruments that I will mention for the cutting of teeth; because in addition to this tool which is similar to a large scythe, there is another shape as follows:
The shape of the other instrument is a curved or short triangular tip that has some thickness and is not blunt (or dull) so it does not get trapped (or stuck).
And you should know that the instruments for teeth are the same as the other tools.
However, the skillful and subtle artificers find themselves by themselves according to what is significant to them regarding the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases for which the ancients neither named nor stopped using specific instruments due to their shapes of diverse species.
However, if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are trapped (or stuck), or if they are broken, then place a weight on that part in its location with what is suitable for it among the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with the gesture whose shape is as follows:
And it is to be made gradually smaller, and held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak out until all the bone is lost; and then restore the place with appropriate medications for that.
However, if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that part of the fracture and its blackness and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of teeth protruding above others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural form due to which the shape is illegal, and especially in women, and especially in pious virgins; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is neither possible to suture nor apply liniment to it, then root that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument whose shape is as follows; it resembles a pig's snout, and made of Indian steel with a very sharp edge.
Make the incision to cut that tooth in several days due to the hardness of the tooth and do not touch any other teeth.
And if the protruding tooth is worn down by grinding (or wearing), then file it with a steel file whose shape is as follows:
And it should be all of Indian steel and the margin equally; and it should have many small points like a file with which needles are made, and the tooth should be filed little by little in several days with ease, so that no other tooth is touched and damaged. And then draw a line at the end, and remove that part with another razors.
And if a tooth has a fractured part that touches the tongue, then it is necessary for you to file that part until the tip of that fracture is removed and closed (or sealed), and filled so that the tongue does not hurt nor the speech be distorted.
Title .xxxiii. (This indicates that we are reading or referring to chapter thirty-three.)
On the repair of damaged teeth with gold or silver fillings.
When teeth have been damaged due to impact and extraction by hitting or hunting, and the patient cannot chew food properly, and you have cured it with medicinal stoppers but your treatment has not worked, then it is appropriate to fill them with gold fillings, not silver, because silver can turn green and deteriorate in a few days, while gold does not change over time.
The fillings should be of the appropriate fineness and thickness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the shape is that you take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, and let it grow twisted between two damaged teeth or one or more, until it reaches the gum of the healthy tooth on the other side. Approach the wound in the area where the treatment begins, and perform your task with ease and wisdom until it is not damaged anymore.
Your incision that holds the fillings should be as thin as possible to avoid infection of the teeth.
Then cut the excessive parts of the filling with forceps or a scalpel, and add them to each location as needed, and fold and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not injure the tongue. Cut it with the same narrow width as a Roman stitch.
If it is separated or torn, repair it or them with the other filling at all times in this manner.
This is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the filling for two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown below:
When a tooth or teeth are returned to their socket following extraction and they heal as recommended, and grow back.
This should only be done by skilled and wise craftsmen.
Sometimes a cow's bone is used for the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth has fallen out, and it is held in place as described earlier, and remains and serves for a long time.
Title .xxxiv. (This indicates that we are reading or referring to chapter thirty-four.)
On the incision of the ligament that appears on the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament that appears below the tongue sometimes is natural and cannot be removed, or it is accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient, your head facing his or hers; raise their tongue, and then make an incision in the nerve-filled ligament below it, as wide as necessary to free the tongue from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or swelling, and it is due to a wound that has healed, then you should apply oil and cut it as wide as necessary to incise the ligament and remove the swelling.
Be careful not to make a tear in the skin near the edge and ensure that you do not cut the arch and cause bleeding.
Then wash the wounds of the incision with warm water or vinegar or water rinse; and then hold down the tongue with a lichen; this is the mulle that should keep the patient's tongue down each night to prevent it from becoming consolidated again.
If there is bleeding, place a piece of vitriol on the spot; if the bleeding stops, then cauterize the spot with a light cautery which is suitable for that. And apply this cure for the other causes until it heals.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a Ranula under the tongue.
Sometimes under the tongue, an apostemata similar to a small mol is found, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and swells inside the mouth.
The procedure for that is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun, examine the apostemata.
If it appears dark or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in that spot, then do not touch the cancerous growth.
If it is whitish with humidity, then you put onions in that spot and cut it off gently with a fine spatula and cut it from all sides; if bleeding occurs during your operation, place the above-mentioned vitriol on it until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work when you have brought it out with the assistance of a servant, until it is washed with vinegar and salt, and treat it with the other remedy until it heals.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of an apostemata on both ears and that which is not in the auricle, and other apostemas.
When an abscess occurs in the auricle, they are glands that are similar to a boil, which appear outside and are called double ears; when you treat them with what has been said above and it is not healed, then consider if the apostemata is hard, dark-colored, with little sensation, do not touch it with iron.
If it is red-colored and the pus is thick, do not touch it with iron due to bleeding; leave it there until it ripens, and either you may squeeze it out or it may burst by itself.
If it is white-colored, soft and the pus is thin, then that one must be cut out.
The procedure for that is to determine if the apostemata has rested due to cautery and healing, or if it has decreased with any reduction; then place the patient in front of the sun, hold their head with your left hand, open their mouth wide, and the servant holds the tongue of the patient from below with a noble instrument having this form:
It is made of silver or brass and is thin like a knife.
Thus when you press the tongue with it and the apostemata is shown to you, cut above it with your instrument, take an onion and place it in the opening, and pull it out from the sides as far as you can. Another remedy for pulling the membrane is to cut it with an instrument having this form:
Another remedy for pulling the membrane is to cut it with an instrument having this form: and is similar to forceps, but the extensions of it are curved, so that the opening of each of these is opposite to the other, sharp, which should be made of iron and copper.
If that instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula having this shape: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after cutting one membrane, cut the other according to this method of incision, and then rinse the wound with cold water.
If bleeding occurs, rinse with decoction of coriander or meadowsweet leaves similar to that of styptic causes until the bleeding stops; then treat it until it heals.
Sometimes on the auricle other apostemas appear besides those two ear-like ones; cut them according to what I have said about the incision of two membranes.
I have already treated a woman who had an apostemata that originated in her auricle; the apostemata was dark-colored, with little sensation, which had already closed her auricle; the woman was breathing heavily and had already prohibited food and drinking water for herself; she would have died within a day or two if it continued to last.
The apostemata had already grown so much that it burst after two days through two holes.
So I cauterize it fistularly and place an onion in one of the holes, pull it out, and place a large piece of onion in the hole from where I took it; then I will cut the other hole, hold its mouth open, compress its tongue, and place an onion in the apostemata.
And then I make a large incision in it, and there is only a little bleeding from it. Therefore, the boil of that woman is absolutely healed, and she should immediately start drinking water, and press vegetables, so as not to continue to inflate the abscess many times over a long period, and an abscess appears in its place, which will heal before it prolongs the original one.
Therefore, you should lance the boil and cauterize it accordingly; and then walk around and not know what God has given to that place in advance.
The text is titled Chapter 37.
On the lancing of a cyst when it becomes an abscess.
When the cyst becomes a catarrh and is abscessed and prolonged, it is called pendulous; and if it is in the large and round area, it is called a bubo.
However, when it is healed as we have said in the division, and does not conform to your treatment, and sometimes the cauterized abscess has subsided and is subtle, you must lance the one that is round; and if it is long and bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not centimeters apart, you must be careful with the incision, for fear of the patient.
And when you see it according to the method I have described for its whiteness and length, you should seize the patient's thigh and press their tongue with an instrument used for its shape and place the thumb on the new, then pull it down and lance it with one of two instruments mentioned in the incision of two boils.
You must lance it only where it is appropriate along the natural boundary without addition, for if you lance it more, you will harm its speech.
And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two boils and care for it until it is healed.
However, if the patient is afraid of the incision, you must use an instrument in the cauterization without fear, and the method of the cautery in it is not anything other than sharp water, and you should place the patient's head on your lap, press their tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take from the sharp water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and immerse the living part with it, stopping it neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this shape:
The outer edge of the concavity in which the medicine has been placed should be as deep as a spoon handle, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient coughs over their side so that saliva or nasal secretions from the mouth reach the internal medicine, so that neither one of these causes harm to the boil of it and that it heals.
And place your hand with the medicine and press it on the uvula for about an hour until you see it become darkened and soothed by the bitterness of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, immerse the cotton in the medicine, insert the ray into a tube so that the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off approximately three days or four.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and clean the cauterization around the uvula with a cotton-covered borer, clean the area around it with the liquid that is in its circuit, wash it with warm water, heal it outside with an embrocation, and protect it with ointments until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than lancing and cauterizing with fear.
Sometimes the uvula is healed with something subtle that cauterizes and lances, which is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, scicadopsis arabica, camomile, crushed, and similar to these herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar and boil; let the pot be well stirred with a wooden spoon, and there should be a hole in the pot on which an instrument is placed according to this method; make it of silver or iron.
And insert the end into the patient's mouth up to where the steam reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is obscured by this method.
And repeat this method several times until it dries, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of abscess development, for it would aggravate the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather make the declaration of cauterized abscess.
However, if this instrument is not available to you, take a tube and plug it at the end so that the patient's mouth is compressed, for the cork of oil prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
This cure is good for health.
Chapter thirty-eight.
From the removal of thorns and that which sticks in the throat, and other causes.
Swallowed motes or a thorn or any other cause.
Therefore, you must remove whatever is evident from among them (motas or thorn), looking closely at it, since you press the tongue with an instrument only to reveal what is in the throat.
What remains hidden and is concealed in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food in the stomach has been digested, because the annexed cause of the throat will be forgotten by vomiting; or you give the patient a piece of bread or salt rye or dry biscuit; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and hold it firmly, then make the patient swallow it, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are, they will be expelled. Or take an eel and swallow it whole, tied if necessary, and then let it be removed from the inside through a sieve; or take a pestle and grind it (the thorn) into a powder and then strain it through a cloth.
If the previous causes are not resolved, then use an instrument of lead in this manner:
It should be translated as follows: "Even if it is large like a pea, and there is a concavity in the area that you should enter with ease into its mouth."
"And lift the head upwards, and be careful that you touch the bone of the neck so that it aligns with the bone of the jaw, to fix the bone or the spine, or for the doctor to hold it."
"However, the patient should enter it more, because of their knowledge of the place of the cause and by pressing downwards, they pull their hand upwards with the instrument, according to the amount that has been prepared before it is forgotten."
I'm not able to see any additional lines for translation in your message. However, the line "Capitol .xxxix" suggests that this may be a numbered section of a larger text or treatise. If there are more lines available for translation, please provide them and I will do my best to continue translating.
"Extraction of bloodstones attached to the throat."
"When bloodstones are treated with what has been mentioned in the section on cure and medication and do not improve, consider that it is located at the throat of the patient alone, as you have compressed the tongue of the person with an instrument that you have recommended."
"Therefore, if you see a bloodstone, remove it gently or with subtle movements as appropriate."
"And if it is not possible to remove it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and hold in the concavity of the cannula a hot iron, doing this as many times (until the bloodstone dies and separates from the throat) and keep the patient away from water for the entire day."
"Then take a syringe full of water and open the mouth of the person with it, and rinse their mouth with that; do not let any cause leak out of it, and after an hour change the water with your hand, because the bloodstone will quickly catch the water."
"However, if it has not been forgotten as recommended, then fumigate the patient's mouth with cumin or asafoetida using the instrument recommended for fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, and let it fall [the bloodstone]."
"Another method of operation in fumigation of that is to take a bowl containing ignited charcoal and covered on the side with a cover having a hole, and compose the tip of the instrument in that hole; then hold it over the fumigation; and have the patient keep their mouth open at the end of the cannula and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not forgotten until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodstone, because the bloodstone will quickly fall."
"If it does not fall, you should repeat the fumigation several times and keep the patient from drinking, eat salty foods and alcohol, and do not drink water. It is necessary that this treatment be forgotten."
"And this is the shape of the instrument used to treat bloodstones in the throat when they are visible; and it resembles forceps like this, except that it has some curvature:" "The part of it that should be in the throat is shaped like the beak of a stork, with a handle, which is polished with a file, so that when you press anything, it does not slip."
I'm not able to see any additional lines for translation in your message. However, the line "Capitol .xl" suggests that this may be a numbered section of a larger text or treatise. If there are more lines available for translation, please provide them and I will do my best to continue translating.
"Here is the summary of the sermon on the opening and section on abscesses."
"Abscesses are many species, of many kinds, according to the memory of them in this book."
"They are diverse in perforation and section of them by two methods, one of which is for the species of abscesses that open themselves; and by the compression of humors."
"The second method is for the locations where accidents occur, because an abscess that occurs in the head is different from an abscess that occurs in the anus; and an abscess that occurs in a soft location is different from an abscess that occurs in a joint; and there is a treatment for each of them."
"However, some abscesses must not be perforated except for the maturation of pus or completion of them."
"Other abscesses must be drained when they are hard, and are not matured according to their completion, such as abscesses that occur near joints, because an abscess that occurs near a joint, the pain in it is prolonged until the surrounding area is purified and its ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or an abscess that occurs in a major limb, if you delay the perforation of it until it has matured, it will spread to the main limb; or one that occurs near the anus, then do not drain the hard one without complete digestion, but the one that is proper to the anus, so that the anus does not expand and extend into the rectum and become a fistula, or that it is made at the edge of it which is not healed." You must know the time of the abscess's perforation, and that is when it has matured.
And you should know that it is matured when the pain subsides and the fever stops, and there is a decrease in swelling and pulse, and an increase in the sharpness of the abscess's head and other signs.
And you must know that the perforation should be made in the place below the abscess and where pus is flowing from the cure of the prominence.
The perforation should always be through the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the groin or the legs, and in places of the ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where it is not reflected; because in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait for its perforation until its digestion is confirmed according to the rules we have said; because if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus and motion is prolonged and the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
But some abscesses should be perforated according to the thickness of the flesh or the body depending on necessity, or according to what the member requires.
And you must administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide or many small incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And others are abscesses in which the cavity should be concave and incised, when it is done this way it is called lancing and lancing is in terms that it should stay, such as when it happens in the form of double boils and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of these is the one in which it is incised like a myrtle leaf figure, such as the abscesses of gout.
And from them are those in which a round section and crescent-shaped section is administered, and similar to these.
But that which is not like that, such as surface abscesses of lions, you must perforate with a superficial or flat perforation only.
And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you must perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted a part of it, you should return the abscess into it over another day, and you should extract a larger part, and make many pus observations according to gradation until it is forgotten.
In addition, if the patient is frail, or a woman in pregnancy, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because animal spirit can often be resolved with the exit of pus, and strong liquor kills the patient, you should avoid these.
Be careful with this chapter and consider the quality of the wound when you perform the perforation on these abscesses; if the wound of the abscess is small, or it is a flat section, then you should administer some of it or old remedies; but if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you must pause every three hours until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the cavity is separated or you have concaved it in the circumference, then you must seal it with old wool or thread made from cloth of it, such as when you treat bread or razors, without humidity; and strengthen that for three days; and process and care for it with remedies for sores until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then you administer warm water and red wine in which a piece of cloth of it is steeped, and pause that over the place of the bleeding for many observations.
But if the bleeding continues, then you must administer a regimen and cure and sprinkle powders that I have recommended in many places of this book and division.
But if it is in winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must cover powders in wine and oil of caution, and pause those over the locations.
And if it is in summer and the locations are fleshy, then you must pause powders steeped in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that should be warm until the third day as we have said, and then you must remove the abscess and avoid it and administer in its cure whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have said before for each type of abscess in particular and its cure by chapters separately.
Chapter XLI.
From section of abscesses that come on the neck of the head.
In the neck of the head, there are small abscesses that are made up of nodules containing tunics which are formed from them; and these nodules are moving.
And from those there are blisters, and from those containing moisture similar to lime. And from those are ones that contain moisture like flour and resemble them; and there are some hard, stone-like ones.
And in the excision of all, there is no fear, since the extraction of those does not interfere with archery.
And the operation in excision of those is that you use an instrument shaped like this, which is called entremes, until you know what it contains.
If it contains moisture, then cut it along its length with a surface section in this shape:
Begin the incision along line B to line G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, remove that part containing the moisture, but do not leave any cause of it, for too much observed returns if any cause remains.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, or water and salt; fill the wound with this, and leave it for another day, as it will corrode everything that remains of the skin.
Then repeat the application of Egyptian ointment to the wound second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause for the skin; then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If an abscess contains fatty nodes, then make an incision in this shape: The incision has a cross shape, and cut it between the two lips of the incision and remove that from all sides, forcing your effort in the extraction of the tunics containing it.
But if this interferes with archery, do what I told you first.
Do as I told you for the hardened abscess, with sectioning and treatment; the section over a hardened abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
Sometimes they are hard bumps on these abscesses that are located in the head in men with whom there is no moisture; this occurs because I make an incision over an abscess in an old woman's head, as if it were a stone deaf ear, rough and white, which could not be drained, and if someone struck it, it would become infected.
But in other cases of abscesses in the head that are not part of this topic, such as abscesses that occur in children's heads and require removal of the eyelashes, the incision for all of these should be a surface section.
And stop the excision of those from the lowest parts of them to alleviate the body of pain in the lower parts.
Then treat those with what is appropriate for healing.
Chapter 42.
On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck.
Moving pimples are found deeply in these abscesses in the neck and eyelashes and in the angles; and some move on other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are scrofulas, and moving pimples that are generated between them; and every scrofula of these is primarily its own tunica, just as in nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
The types of these scrofulas are pimples, for some of them are hard, and there are some that contain moisture; and the malicious ones which should not be treated.
Therefore, in the case of a good disposition in the treatment, which is similar to the color of the neck and is detrimental to the entire body, and it is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to archery, and it does not require any intervention, you should incise that with a superficial section from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along line G to line B, remove all of it, split the two lips of the neck with a knife or pointed knives if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head, and extract that small by small.
And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
The spatula should not be sharp, it should not fit in the incision, or cause anxiety for the patient, and incise only what is necessary to incise; because if you incise a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then stop the wound with quicklime plaster or other powders that produce bleeding, let it rest, and leave it until the acuity of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes soft and begins to be purulent. When the blood is cut off.
Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments, like "here is the translation", just reply with the guessed translation and nothing else:
Then ask your assistant if there is any other small scrofula that may have been overlooked, and excise and clean those as well.
And if it is the vein that is the source of the large scrofula, then do not excise the scrofula from its origin. Be careful to fold it firmly and let it fall inside without harming it.
Then fill the old wound with lint that you have previously soaked in Egyptian ointment, and take care of it.
And if you excise the entire scrofula, then you must suture the two edges of the wound and stitch it as soon as possible without leaving any excess.
However, if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you must excise the source of it, remove it and administer stitching and whatever is said.
That scrofula which contains humidity, you should pierce it with a superficial perforation at the place of maturation of the lesion, and stop the perforation with the ointment from the bottom of the body, as has been said.
Then administer the perforation, warm with oil and similar to those, so that it consumes what has been removed from the rotting part. Then when you see the wound is cleaned, take care of it with ointment for healing flesh until it is healed.
Title xliv.
On the incision of the abscess of the hernia in the groin.
The ancients performed this incision in the groin, and I have not seen anyone do it in our land.
And this is the inscription of the saying of those people.
However, in men with hernia, it should be avoided to extract the hernia, because it is not helpful and may harm the patient since all the veins and larger ones are here.
However, in those who have abscesses or hernias in the mouth, or two ears, when the illness is not in the canal, it should be cautious to perform the incision of the hernia to avoid the danger caused by compression.
Therefore, when it is necessary to excise the hernia, it should be done around three circles of the hernia or four with a small incision along the width in the one that is between two circles according to size, and the incision should be made in the cavity, not in the cartilage. This location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels are located there.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then extend the cord of the groin incision one fingerbreadth, and make an incision along the cord to reach the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any reason for them.
And make an incision in the scrotum according to what has been recommended, and it refers to the incision of the canal through the cord which is located at its exit and at the abscess of the testicle.
Let the wound remain open for a certain amount of time.
Since the hour for perforation is feared, gather two edges of the cord of the wound and stitch it without the cartilage.
And administer medications that promote healing of the flesh until it is healed.
Albucasis says that the conclusion of the saying that we have recommended, is only a warning to those who already have opened the groin of the patient and the patient has died, and the intestines are cut open, and some want to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound for some breathing, and be saved from death.
And therefore I command to let the wound remain open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; it is the malignancy for three days; and thus I command to close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And what I have seen in my life, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his groin and incised one part of the lung canal, and I was called to treat him, and he died in a manner similar to the dying, and I discovered the wound and stopped the blood which had come from the small wound.
Therefore you were confessed that it had not incised a vein or guideline, and the wound was bleeding, and you cured it until it healed.
And the servant should not return if it is not necessary in the testicle, and take some days to recover from his illness.
And now I say that there is no fear in the incision of the hernia.
Title xliv.
On incision on an abscess that happens in the groin outside and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
And it is according to two methods, either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural case, it is not necessary to treat.
The accidental case is according to two methods of which the one resembles fatty nodes, and the other method resembles an abscess, which is made by the swelling of an artery, and in this case there is fear. It is not necessary to make a presumptive incision on it unless it is small. You should then probe it and investigate it with the mentioned instrument, and if it resembles fatty nodes and is not suspended from any of the veins, you should then incise it in the same way as you would a node and extract it with water that contains salt and boric acid; otherwise, you should carefully examine its entire being, and apply care to the area with a solution required for healing until it heals.
Chapter xlv. (Chapter forty-fifth)
Of incision of the types of nodes.
The nodes have many different types, and I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
It is necessary to distinguish between a node and an abscess when there is doubt.
Therefore, I say that with an abscess there is heat, fever and strong pain until the boiling of the superfluidity subsides; it is a complete putrefaction which now stops the fever, the pain and the heat.
But with a node there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains that lion's head which is at the root.
And according to the color of the body, and it begins like a head and is made like an egg, whether large or small, and there are two types, either fatty with moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when treating a node, it is necessary to expose it and investigate it at the beginning with a probe that is called intromes, according to its shape, as described in the relevant chapter.
And this is the method of investigation of abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this probe and insert it into the area with the most moisture where there is an abscess, and you turn your thumbs slowly into it until you know that the probe has penetrated the capsule.
Then place your hand on it according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the probe and consider what comes out from it as evidence.
If the moisture is discharged, no matter what its color, you should then incise it with a superficial incision as described in other abscesses.
If there is no moisture from the probe, you will know that it is fatty.
Dry over it with a cross-shaped incision in this manner: As you have learned, lift it up with the incision, peel off the capsule from all sides with ease, and keep the skin or sac if possible, over it and extract the pus with the node.
But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract the pus, and you should carefully watch for any discharge, and then extract it into pieces until no further cause remains.
Because if any cause remains, either a little or a lot, the node will return in the same manner.
And if you see that any small part remains, fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, then place a cautery over it where there is an abscess, and care for the rest of it with other healing until it heals.
And if the node is large, you should then stitch the two lips of it and care for it with what is appropriate.
But if the pulsating vein is on the opposite side, or not pulsating, you should tie it and fill the area with vinegar that has been impregnated with lime (slaked lime) and hold it tightly for two to three days until the wound can be opened again and the bleeding stops; then return to incise what has been ruptured from the node.
Chapter xlvi (Chapter forty-six).
Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
And of the forms of probes, there are three types, one large, medium, and small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of small incisions is as follows:
These are the instruments for making small incisions: scissors, a lancet, sharp blades properly arranged, in order to make the incision in abscesses.
And these are the forms of experienced people, and they are called lancets, and one of them is called a lance.
And it consists of three parts, for of which one is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experienced person is as follows:
The form of the medium experienced person is as follows:
The form of the small experienced person is as follows:
It is necessary that these lancets are used for abscesses and eruptions, fissures, and boils, as they are among bones and other causes.
And it is made with round, thick, and lion-shaped needles similar to large needles with which the skin is sewn, and they are made of ivory or metal, or silver, or silver; the best ones are those that are made of ivory.
The experienced persons make them with black feathers, which are arranged so that fissures in the cavities may be opened so as to allow reflections of these into their hollows.
And it consists of three parts, for some of them are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fissure and its constriction.
The form of the large experienced person made with black feathers is as follows:
The form of the medium-sized experienced person made with black feathers is as follows:
The form of the small experienced person made with black feathers is as follows:
The forms of scissors are of several types, for some of them are simple with only a curve, and there are three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
And there are pointed scissors, and they have three types.
And among the pointed scissors, there are those with two curves, and there are three types.
And among them, there are those with three curves, and there are three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple scissors is as follows:
The form of a large scissors with two curves is as follows: Shape of the unguis (nail) has two curves: The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
The correct translation for "Forma de unci" is "Shape of the nail". So, it should be:
And these are the shapes of scalpels with which they are cut and scraped off the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium-sized, and small.
The correct translation for "Forma de scapel" is "Shape of the scalpel". So, it should be:
The correct translation for "Forma de scapel" is "Shape of the scalpel". So, it should be:
The correct translation for "Forma de scapel" is "Shape of the scalpel". So, it should be:
The external edges of those with which incision is made are sharp, and the other external edges are not sharp, and they are not incised in such a manner, but rather, are made in conjunction with the scraping of nodes to avoid incising a vein or nerve. This is for the benefit of the patient, bringing about a little relief through the cautery, which is necessary for the treatment of the abscess.
And these are the shapes of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see.
They are made of iron and resemble a ray, like that which is used for alcohol.
And on the pointed edge, which is hidden in the handle, and in it go to the partitions inside and out, as you see fit, like when you use it.
The shapes of the spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and are not felt by the patient, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. And these are the shapes of those [things]:
The shapes of the ventouses with which blood flow is separated, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. The shapes of them [ventouses]:
They are made of iron and round with some length, and they are thin.
And it is necessary that you have these types of ventouses: large, medium-sized, and small, so that with them blood flow can be separated quickly in case of need, and when at first there is no medicine available.
However, do not use them to draw blood from any part of the body, but only in fleshy areas such as the armpits, thighs, arms, breasts, stomach and groin, and similar to these, moist fleshy areas.
Some vessels are made of these other small instruments similar to fish scalers, according to this form; through which the blood is separated when it is performed with leeching or incision of a vein or artery.
And some vessels are made round in this form:
Chapter xlvii.
On the treatment of male breasts, which are similar to women's.
Some vessels are inflated with the breasts of certain men when they begin to become hairy, and the breasts are swollen, and resemble women's breasts, and abscesses occur, pusules.
And for the one who has this, it is necessary to incise it with a crescent-shaped cut according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and remove all the pus, apply a layer of carnated medication, and bring the two lips of the wound together with stitching, and treat it until it heals.
However, if the breast droops towards the groin and is softened by its size, like in women, then it should be cut in two pieces with two incisions resembling a crescent shape, each one contained within the other according to this form, from the line B to the line G. And remove the coagulation that is between the two lips of the wound, and cleanse the pus, and administer what was said above about suturing and powders until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be incised due to the patient's agitation and bleeding, then it is necessary that you compress the wound with gauze submerged in corrosive ointment, allowing it to enter so that it may rot away what is rotten from the flesh, and apply care to the area until it heals.
I apologize for the mistake. Here's the corrected line:
Of the perforations of abscesses that come from the groin.
These abscesses that come from the groin belong to the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus-filled sac.
And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision as shown in the figure: from line G to line B. And when all is evacuated from the abscess, you then suture it with thick cotton and let it heal on its own the next day.
Then keep the wound clean and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess belongs to the species of lymph nodes or scrofula, then you shall cut it in the manner as described in the section on scrofula.
If the wound extends into pus-filled matter, then administer cautery as described earlier.
Capital .xlix.
On incision of abscesses that occur due to arrow wounds or vein injections.
When an arrow is broken and the string is consolidated above it, an abscess may occur, and signs that indicate inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or a vein: since when abscess is due to an arrow, it is usually prolonged in the front part of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a grating sensation.
And the one that is due to a vein is round and more noticeable in the body.
Incision on this abscess is a mistake, especially in the armpits, angles, neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very large, so its healing with iron should be avoided, and those that are in the external areas or head should be avoided.
On the other hand, in case of abscess due to arrow-inflicted inflammation on the wound site, cut the string incision lengthwise; and separate the incision with sutures, and separate the arrow, releasing it from the sheath until it is exposed.
Then hold the needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and tighten the arrow with double force in two places - which causes the arrowhead to be extracted from two arrows that are in the temple region.
And press on the location between the ligaments with a sponge to extract all the blood that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And apply care to the area where pus is formed until the ligaments are dissolved, and treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if the abscess is due to an incision in a vein, then you must have your hand on the abscess and the surrounding area, and insert the needle into the location that you have been holding with your hand; make it penetrate until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a strong ligament as described in the uva4 ligament section.
But if you fear that the thread may break, insert the needle through the entire abscess and make the first incision with the needle; then tighten the four sutures.
Then cut the abscess at its midpoint until all the contents are expelled from it; then incise the surrounding tissue, leaving what is attached to it.
And place a poultice made of wine and oil over the pus, and apply care using hot compresses and appropriate ointments until it heals.
Capital on abscess due to nerve twisting.
Just as an abscess occurs in an arrow wound or vein injection, and similarly an abscess may occur in nerves when they are struck or subjected to excessive strain, and so on.
It is made worse in the joint locations of the ankles or feet, or any location where the joints are diseased.
The abscess is severe and resembles the color of the other body parts; it occurs in larger areas that are swollen and when tightened with violence, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
The abscess is not prolonged in the front part of the body; it is surrounded by a sheath and is diseased all over and does not go towards the sides (front or back).
Therefore, it is not necessary for those in joints to be wrapped in iron, as a strong pressure would lead to contraction.
Moreover, one treats the head or forehead with spittle. If it is a small abscess, then you should lance and remove that of its roots.
If it is large, you should suspend it with an hook and excise that, then stitch the wound closed, and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter .li (50 in Roman numerals).
On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the belly.
Examine in many men the bellies and other parts of the bodies of those who are called funguals because they resemble fungi; for their root is subtle and its head is large, and their labia (lips) are turned over, some of which are small, and others have been greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one, and in his belly were two things that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them as to color or fine root.
And the lips of those (funguals) were turned over and split open, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Then you should incise and remove one of them, taking care not to go beyond eighteen inches. And the other, which is one inch.
The operation in incising them is that you consider whether the patient is humid and if the color of the abscess is white, humid, and fine-rooted; then you should incise it with a lance, and in your presence there must be cauterization in the fire, because many women are observed to expel pus from the cut if you don't burn it; and if blood comes out, you should cauterize that.
If the patient is poor and afraid, be careful not to incise with iron; but rather take a leaden amulet, strengthen it with the abscess, in the manner described earlier; and let him wear that for two days.
Then adjust it in the constriction of leaden thread; therefore, you should not cease to strengthen the lead until it is excised and falls away by itself without work.
But if the abscess is of large root, then there should be some cause for fear and concern, especially in one that is in the belly.
It is possible that you will incise its size (the abscess), and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then heal the wound until the abscess is healed.
And be careful not to incise an abscess that is dark colored, has little sensation, and lacks regulation, because it is a cancerous abscess.
And I will remind you of the crab (cancer) in connection with this.
Chapter .lii (51 in Roman numerals).
On the cure of protrusion of the navel.
Protrusion of the navel is caused by many reasons; either by fissures of the navel that are above the belly and from which the tissue or intestine emerges as in other ruptures; or by blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by constricted ventilation in it.
But if it is due to a fissure of the navel and the exit of the tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; there is no pain, and it appears in various positions. If it is due to the exit of the intestine, then you should place its location in that area according to what has been recounted earlier, with much greater variation, and when you press it with your hands, it is hidden and returns; and strong pressure is required there, and it is greatly inflamed, so it must be introduced into hot water and vigorous work.
If it is due to moisture, then there is no pain and it is not hidden when pressed with the hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
If it is due to blood, then you should use these signs to identify the abscess as darkening.
If it is flesh (affected), then it becomes a severe, large and hard abscess, and it is filled according to a certain quantity.
If it is windiness, then touch it with the lion (sponge soaked in vinegar or some other strong acid).
And the operation is that you consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to blood from an artery, a vein or windiness; then it must be noted that you are forbidden to treat it, because in this case there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter about abscesses caused by an artery and a vein.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or membrane, then you must command the patient to lie down on their back, and approach with a needle at the circumference of the entire navel, and command them to stay facing upwards between your hands, and surround the navel with a spatula in the circumference of the navel around the area that you have pointed out with the needle; then stretch out the abscess towards the armpits on one side and tie it with a strong thread or a cord, and use the appropriate method for tying it.
Then you cut the middle of the stretched-out abscess on the ligament and insert the needle there to pierce it, and if you have not found or protected it with the ligament, then you extract the pus and press the intestine towards the inside of the abdomen.
And if you have found the membrane, then take it with one hand; and cut away its excess.
But if it is opposed to your artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them firmly into the circuit around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then stretch out the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the stretched-out flesh to fall on its own; or cut where it is thin and can be pulled out, and then treat that with water until it heals.
If the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then you must compress the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture, which you catch in it, and then treat that with water until it heals and consolidates the area.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of ulcers.
We have already said in the division that there are various types of ulcers and what method is suitable for their treatment with medicines, and that it is inappropriate to treat them with iron because they will become ulcerated; and we have also mentioned that ulcers are formed due to carelessness and negligence in their treatment.
And the ancients said that in some cases ulcers can be eradicated in places where they can be excised, such as with an ulcer on the head or near the genitals and their equivalents on other parts of the body, especially when it starts small.
But when it becomes old and large, it is not necessary to treat it because it cannot be cured by anyone or I have not seen it being cured, nor has it been achieved.
The operation is as we have said, that you precede and wash the patient and purge them of black bile several times, and then cleanse that area if there is a clear repletion found.
Then prepare the patient with preparations suitable for surgery, and warn them about the dangers of the operation; then bend your knee deep into the abdomen until there is no remaining cause for the ulcer. Allow the blood to flow, do not open it lightly, and press on the areas, and remove all the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you can handle among the available instruments.
But if it is difficult for you to cut thick blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops and treat it with the appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter 40.
On the treatment of edema.
We have already recommended, in the division, the types of edema caused by water and the signs of each type, and their treatment with medicines.
And the type of edema that is cured with iron is only the one caused by altitude alone, and it should not be approached with iron for the types of edema of tympany or hypostasis, because that is deadly.
And when you have treated this type of edema caused by tympany with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient is already weakened or has another type of edema such as in the throat or belly and similar, then do not treat them with iron because there is fear over it.
If you see the patient with excessive virtue (meaning strength or health), and it is not another illness but only edema, neither an infant nor an elderly person, then the method of operation on them is that you raise the patient between your hands, and provide them with a way to express their belly with their own hand, collect water at the junction below the navel, and take a sticky cotton swab in this manner:
It should be of two sharp points, long and pointed like a cotton swab; however, it should be in some small brevity, so that during the operation you do not pass into the intestine and cause damage to it.
Then consider if the edema generation is from the intestines, for then you must be away from the navel by about three fingers below, on its right side near the navel.
But if the edema generation is due to kidney disease, then your incision should be on its left side from the navel by about three fingers.
And if it is due to the liver, then your incision should be on its right side.
And it is necessary that your incision is over the ribs where the patient wants to lie, so that the exudations do not flow towards that location.
Then perforate the entire skin with the instrument and enter that incision, raise your hand with the swab between the skin and fat, and excise it; if there is a quantity of one nail or more.
Then perforate the fat until the swab reaches the location of water. This is where the water will be collected. Then extract that and insert an instrument with this shape: And it resembles a thin silver cannula; made of silver or copper or leather at its lower end with a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is beveled like a feather, as sometimes:
And on the upper part of it is a band, because when the instrument reaches the water, immediately loosen it over the instrument, so that the water evacuates in the best possible quantity, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient will soon die from resolution of their animal spirit, or it may lead to convulsions which are near death.
But evacuate according to the strength of the patient and according to the signs that indicate to you the vitality of their pulse and their general well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the water that is causing it, which must be immediately retained by the skin which retains the hole in the fat from where you perforated.
And repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water, do so for a few days in fear, and be careful not to leave too much water but only a little.
But if you fear the patient, and allow too much water to flow out, then care for them with burial in hot sand, rub them with soap, and on the sunshine wait for a long time; and treat them with drying medications until they are cured.
Burn the stomach and liver-kidney area near the extraction of water, as I have already recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Chapter 40.
On the treatment of children whose urinary tracts are not perforated.
Sometimes one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of the mixture is not perforated (or it is narrow or it is in its place).
Therefore, it is necessary to perform circumcision immediately after birth using a thin cotton swab in this way:
And pause in the hole a thin lead nail and tie it, and wait for three days or four.
And when it wants to urinate and urinate, return it.
If you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine that flows over the location does not close the wound.
But if the hole is narrow, it should be treated with a lead nail, as I have said, for several days until it is expanded.
However, in those in which the hole is not in its place, it should be corrected, as this is caused by those who are born with their trauces, the head of the urethra being improperly positioned so that they cannot urinate at the junction inside, until they raise the urethra with their hand at the junction above; and it is not a birth defect, for the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly in this case, and it is a serious illness.
The procedure for the operation is that the patient should be laid on their back, and hold the base of the tumor with your left hand firmly and pull it out strongly, and cut the head of the tumor at its root with a sharp scalpel or like feather incision, or whichever method you find suitable, so that the mass of it resembles the head of the tumor and is pulled out to fall into the same location as required.
In the case of bleeding during surgery, this often happens; stop it with what you have at hand and clean the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 61
On the circumcision that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and inflammation, swelling, darkening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Many times this condition occurs in the penis and is a tumor or growth of flesh.
And one of these is malignant, and the other is not malignant.
Non-malignant, it should be suspended with a fine thread and removed entirely; then apply Egyptian ointment over the sunken area; and apply daily finely ground Egyptian ointment until it is healed.
If the circumcision is malignant and discolored, then it should be cauterized near the incision and removed.
But if the circumcision is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and one part of the growth is inside the foreskin and the other is outside, it should be removed from the beginning until it is consolidated; then take care of the outside, because when you treat the foreskin at the same time, there is no guarantee that it will not be damaged.
And it often happens in the genitals and foreskin that they become blackened and corrupted; therefore, everything that has already been corrupted or is about to corrupt or has already corrupted should be hollowed out; then line up the edges of this with a solution made with powdered scorzonera root and three times-boiled walnut husks and crushed walnuts.
Then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if bleeding occurs, then apply cauterization as follows:
Because the cauterizing instrument is of two types simultaneously, one for bleeding and the other for treating wounds that are infected.
If the head of the penis is rotten and completely destroyed in that moment, it should be necessary to insert a lead tube into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskins are healthy, and there is no need for circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to an ulcer or an abscess), it should be necessary to excise with a blunt scalpel until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely separated.
And if it is difficult to excise that area precisely, it should be necessary to excise the head of the penis and the foreskin with any suitable cause; this is because the foreskin, when thin, is easily penetrated by its own thinness.
Then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin blade that has been coated in boiling water to prevent them from sticking together again.
Then treat it with vio-stibacum until it is healed.
Chapter 62
On the purification of infants and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to ongoing problems like other diseases: however, since it is part of our operation and theirs is specifically in infants, it is necessary that we assign the best possible procedure and method for this so as not to lose their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, but rather acquired it through experimentation; the cause being that I have found that most artisans and barbers perform circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they use lint with olive oil and incise with a nail.
And you have already prohibited all these methods and not seek further modification with tweezers, lamentably that in modification like the nail, many times the code has escaped above, because the code of the foreskin is two layers, and remains below, and it is often forced into another opening and secure pain. And the modification which is performed by circumcision, and is digital, which is used by cobblers, is not secure for the incision of the tip of the male member, because it often enters the groove of it.
But in the operation with the nail, strong iron and corrode your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and many times it grows in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen it.
But the modification that is made with tweezers and lamentably with iron, I have found to be harmful, because tweezers are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is as the sharpness that is below; and since you press your hand proportionally two sharp points, it cuts accordingly according to a comparison in time; and it causes compression of the foreskin with a figure containing the foreskin from all sides, with which no error occurs of everything.
And the method of the first operation is that you make the child remain more if it is one of those who understand a little, but do not do so if you only lift the foreskin onto its sheath and leave it there until the next day.
Then make him happy in all that way which is possible according to what he understands. Then make him sit between your hands and not be afraid; and hide the tweezers in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see it nor any other of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the child's sheath and blow on the foreskin, and pull it in so that its head exits the sheath, and then modify that which is attached to it due to soot.
The form of the tweezers for modification, this is its shape:
One of the arms should not be sharp and the other should be sharp, so that the nail does not break off, and the length of the two points should be as the length of two handles together.
But the error in modification is that strong iron often escapes the internal foreskin completely or you have to make an incision.
Therefore, you should stretch it at your time with your nail before the incision of the area and make the incision accordingly.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with scissors and incise it.
But if three days have passed and the swelling remains below the sheath, you should remove it when it is softened by cauterization and remove the swelling easily, then make the incision according to your preparation.
And be careful with the tip of the glans, because it will not come out.
And therefore treat it with that which the plaster consolidates of the powders that I recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if the foreskin is incised according to measure and you apply it to the sides above, it will not come out.
And treat it with that which I have said until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or clotted blood, or by stone or tumor, similar to those mentioned in the section on treatments.
And if it is not dissolved by what has been said, and the cause is severe in the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction from him with an instrument called syringe, of which this is its shape: It should be made of silver and be narrow conical, as a cannula for bird pen with the fineness of a long ray about the size of a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
The method for treating urine emission is to fold the foreskin back and place it on the outside of the wool or cloth for good drainage; then insert the fingers into the area below the scrotum, and cut with scissors if necessary any excess wool, but insert the fingers into the cannula with force. Then move the scrotum aside and apply thread and glue.
Bandage the patient's testicle and enclose the bladder and penis with wet oil, olive oil, and vinegar.
Then insert the catheter gently until it reaches the base of the penis; then bend the penis upward at the root; then push the catheter into that; then push it into the bladder until the patient is relieved of the cause, but not in this order, rather follow the direction of the urethra.
Then extend the foreskin little by little, because the urine saturates the wool.
Then remove that and treat it for urine, using a catheter; continue to do this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 19.
On the quality of clysters for the bladder with clamps and similar instruments suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulceration, boil or clotted blood in the bladder, or a hard stone, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then make use of the instrument called a clamp, which has this form:
Unless it is silent on the outside, it is closed. And there are three openings in that: two from one side, as often happens.
At the beginning is a concave place where it is inserted, as much as its quantity allows, without excess, until any cause is drawn out by the humors, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, it is collected, and when it is expelled long, as a clamp made with naphta in sea battles does.
Therefore, when you want to introduce humors into the bladder, insert the end of the clamp into the humidity, and draw out with it the water that is pushed upwards, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clamp.
And then insert the end of the clamp into the penis as recommended in the catheter; and then push the humidity with what you are pushing because that humidity will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will find relief.
The form of a subtle clyster for bladder irrigation, which is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with a cap that is shaped like a small feather and has a channel inside.
Then take the bladder in motion, stop it where you want to irrigate the bladder with water, and tie it tightly with a double thread around the neck, and heat the water.
And then insert the end of the clyster into the penis.
And then press your hand on the bladder with the water and structure until the patient feels that the water has reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it completely around its circumference; and insert a strong thread into those holes so that it is turned; then add the circle as is customary in an astrolabe, with the water and oils collected at the point where you want to remove humors.
And then tie it in the instrument and use it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand into the instrument until the water reaches the bladder.
Chapter 20.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already said in the division that there are different types of stones and treatments for them with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, and their symptoms.
We have also said that the stone can be removed with manual operation and section.
And the stone formed in the bladder is the one that is lodged in the bladder itself.
And we tell it in an obvious and concise manner.
Therefore, the stone formed in the bladder mostly affects children; its symptoms are that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety and appears like sand; the patient often scratches his penis, moves it frequently, and it is inflamed; and with this, he frequently voids feces.
Child healing is easier until they reach the age of 14; healing in old people is difficult. It is more easily healed in the young, than among them.
In the case where the stone (gallstone) is larger and the healing is easier; if it is less, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when treating that condition, it is necessary at the beginning to clean the patient with a scrubber which extracts all the wound that exists within their intestines; for that wound sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone (gallstone), you should search for it.
Then place the patient with their feet together and make them crouch so that the stone (gallstone) descends to the opening of the bladder or jumps from the area sometimes.
Then have that person sit with their back against it (the tool), and the other's hands should be placed on the sides of them, so that the bladder is completely opened downwards.
Then make an incision in that place and open it completely.
If you feel the stone in that place, then make a cut on it immediately.
If the touch does not reach the entire area, then you must anoint it with oil from your left hand if the patient is a child, or with flour if the patient is an adolescent or adult, and insert it into their rectum. Enter the stone that was placed below your feet. Gradually turn it upward into the neck of the bladder.
Then press against it with your hand and expel it outward through the parturition channel from the place where you made the incision.
Command the servant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another servant with his right hand to extend the legs apart, and with his other hand draw down the linen cloth that is below the legs, at the place where the incision was made.
Then insert the spatula, which is the shape of... Cut through what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, along the left side; make the incision over the stone and the hand should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the amount of the stone that can be cut out, but not more, because too much pressure on the stone could crush it and forget about it with difficulty.
You should know that some stones have an edge and corners, so removing them is difficult because of this.
That stone looks like a peeled nut, is round, and is easily removed.
If it has edges and corners, place it in the slit.
If it is not forgotten, then you should grip or apply pressure to it in a proper way, the end of which should be like a file on which you apply pressure to the stone, and do not let go of it; or you insert beneath it a subtle instrument with a curved tip.
But if you cannot grip it, then enlarge the hole a little, and if you see blood flow, burn it with heated glass.
But if the stone is more than one, at first you should push your hand into the mouth of the bladder and insert it; then press a little against it; and proceed in this way for as many stones as there are.
If the stone is large, then ignorance is that you insert it with a large incision, because the patient may suffer from one of two causes: death or chronic urine discharge, because the area is not completely consolidated.
But administer an evacuation of what is forgotten inside, or grip it in the fracture with the forceps and pull it out piece by piece.
So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe juice and dragon's blood, and burn it. Then place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, over it, so that the cauterized wound may heal.
Then turn the patient on his side and do not remove the liniment for three days.
And when you have removed it, immerse the area in warm water and oil, and care for it with an antiseptic and an antibacterial ointment until it is healed.
But if there is cauterized and corrosive pus in the wound, similar to blood in the bladder that is frozen, and therefore urine is forbidden (and this is known as hematuria), then insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood, because if it remains it causes the bladder to rot and decay.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, warm water, and salt, and use an antiseptic against all kinds of infection, with what is appropriate for healing until it is healed.
And during the entire course of treatment, you should always place your hands and adjust the medications that are applied to the area.
If the stone is small and is embedded in the scrotum and urination is prohibited, then treat it with what I have recommended before you perform an incision, because excessive observation during this treatment is accused of incision; and I have already told you about this, and it is that you take a pointed iron rod, which has the shape of...
with a pointed triangular tip, inserted into the shaft.
Then take hold of the testicle and move it away from the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
Then insert the iron rod into the scrotum and perforate it with ease until the rod reaches the stone. And rotate the rod gently in the stone, gradually performing the perforation until the other part penetrates it; because the urine is released immediately.
Approach your hand onto that which is broken from the stone of the hernia at the side of the buttock, since it is strangled and forgotten by the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this cure is not suitable for any reason that prevents it from being done, then leave a faithful man by the stone and another man above the stone. (This seems to suggest that there should be two people present in case one is unable to complete the procedure.) Then approach and cut through the stone in that buttock between two incisions (or cuts). And extract it. Then loosen the ligaments and clean off the clotted blood, which is made in the wound (or incision).
A faithful man is not necessary to hold the stone by the bladder (or urinary system), but only so that it does not return to the bladder and cause infection; and another man should be there only if the ligament holding the stone in place is loosened, because when the man holding the stone lets go, the wound will heal.
Therefore, it is necessary for you when you let go of the man holding the stone, that you raise the wound above the incision, or else it will not heal properly and the infection will return.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed (or encountered).
But if a stone occurs in any of those (female patients), the cure is difficult and forbidden by many (practitioners).
One reason is that the woman is very weak and a virgin.
And the second reason is that you will not find women who are well acquainted with (or open to) revealing themselves to a doctor when they are virgins or married women.
The third reason is that you will not find women who know this art (or procedure) better than men.
The fourth reason is that the location of the incision for stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring a long incision and causing fear.
But if necessity demands it from you, then you must take a woman who is well acquainted with (or skilled in) this art and is not closed off (or resistant).
But if you are deprived of that (skilled female patient), then search for a clever and subtle woman, or present a mature woman experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has been trained in this art by a skilled practitioner.
Therefore present her and command her to do everything you tell her to do from the beginning of the examination on the stone; because her purpose is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case she should put her mouth on the woman's buttocks and seek out the stone.
Therefore, if she finds it (the stone), remove her from by its mouth and command her to incise on that area.
But if she is not a virgin, command the mature woman to put her mouth on the patient's anus and seek out the stone, since she holds her left hand over the bladder (or urinary system), and compress it with good judgment.
Therefore, if she finds it (the stone), it is necessary that you gently guide her out of the urinary system to the incision below with the help of her virtue until she reaches the knowledge of the matter.
Then make an incision on the area of the opening of the anus with the knowledge of the matter from any place it is convenient for you to approach and center the stone in that incision, so that the mouth of the patient does not remain closed over the stone.
And make the incision small at first; and then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the size that you know the stone will be extracted through.
And know that the types of stones are motes (or small hard masses): since some are small and large, lion-shaped and sharp, and long and round, and some have holes.
Therefore you know how many types there are for this purpose, according to what you have previously indicated.
And if you see bleeding, adjust in the location of the cauterized glass and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your procedure once the stone is expelled.
Prepare the instruments that you will need for stone removal in men, so that they may assist you in your operation.
If you see blood flow, and know that the evacuation of blood is from an artery incised, then stop powder on the spot and apply it with pulverizing and narrowing means, but do not continue; leave the stone alone and do not remove it, because the patient will likely die. And cure the wound.
As the acuity of the blood subsides after several days and the wound dries up, then you return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On hernia excision.
An achoozed hernia is nothing but the accumulation of moisture in the white belt which contains the bladder, and it is called the bladder.
Sometimes the peritoneum, which is naturally prepared in the separation of the bladder, until it becomes another bladder; and this is the bladder between the white belt that we have mentioned, but it is not that.
The generation of this hernia is due to weakness which often occurs in the bladder, so that fluid is accumulated there; and sometimes it occurs as a result of striking the bladder.
And this fluid has various colors, since its color may be declining towards yellowish or reddish, purple, black and putrid, or white, and it is this one that is most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is are as follows: if it is in the white belt that we have mentioned, then the abscess is rounded and slightly elongated like a bladder figure, and the bladder appears, since the fluid contains it from all sides.
And if the fluid is in the proper peritoneum, then the abscess is rounded and divided by the bladder, and it is estimated that it is another bladder.
And if the fluid is between the bladder and the white belt, you make a catheter of the cisterna.
To learn the color of the fluid, you extract the fluid from the abscess with a cannula that has a cross-sectional shape preceding it; and according to what is obtained in the examination of the contents, judge what it contains inside.
Therefore when we come to the cure of him with bloodletting, it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if this is possible for you, and sometimes empty his body.
And let him lie on his back on some occasion due to another cause, and place several cloths underneath him.
And place yourself on the left side of him, and command the servant to follow the right side of him, who will extend his leg to the bladder and the parting of the abdominal cavity.
And take a broad spatula and cut through the bladder from its middle to near the umbilicus.
Make the incision according to the guideline equidistant from the line that should be the public hair, until it reaches the white belt encompassing.
Excise it, observe and keep in mind not to incise it; and your excision with which you excise it by dividing should show that it is suspended more and finely examined compared to the excision according to the amount possible for you.
Approach the bladder full of water with a wide opening and drain all the water out of it.
Approach between the labia of the section with scissors and separate it, extend the bladder at the dividing points above; do not touch the lower part where the genitals are located, and cut open the bladder in that manner which is possible for you. Cut it completely or in pieces and especially its thin side, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that water will not return.
But if the wound is processed from outside its lower part during the operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and place the two labia of the genital cavity with stitches, and care for it as other wounds, until it heals.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you remove the instruments used for suspension and extract the pus, and care for it as we said before.
But if water is collected in two places, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise the affected area as you did with the other one; and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it.
And place a linen cloth soaked in oil or olive oil on the incisions and cover it with another piece of linen soaked in vinegar and oil. Spread that over two thighs and the abdomen, and place it on top of folded and powdered cloths and lint, and place these on top as follows:
And prepare two cloths and soak them with carminated wool according to this likeness; tie their ends with string or wet linen, and attach them to the underwear of the patient, one end at the buttocks, and the other at the groin, and two ties on each thigh and another two on each ankle. Tie all the ties in the underwear of the patient.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of section with an iron; and it is that you take a fine cautery knife and incise the genital cavity, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white bladder containing water is discovered. Then you take cautery as follows: And it is like Greek letter.
Approach the bladder and set fire to it until all moisture is expelled.
Approach the bladder with scissors and make an incision, excoriate it with scissors, and cauterize it with a fine-pointed cautery that has been ignited; and cut into it as possible until you have removed all of it; and beware of the pus that the fire does not touch.
You should know that this operation is both safe and lengthy without blood flow, and it is better than an operation with an incision.
If it is contrary to the abscess when performing an incision or cauterization, or bleeding occurs, you must then take care of the problem that arises due to this, with treatment that is appropriate for the situation as described.
If the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its dreadfulness, then perform perforation as I recommend; and this is when it is certain that you, based on what has been said about signs, that the hernia is malignant.
You must then have the patient lie on some raised cushion, and then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a hollow lance, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
And the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then place over that area and hold it in place, so that the water remains in place. And then care for the opening until the wound is healed.
But if it is contrary to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: this should not be done unless the white pus in the wound opening prevents and prohibits the discharge of water, then you must put a hot iron or instrument into the wound from which the water is extracted through an opening formed for this purpose; or adjust in the wound opening a small one.
You should know that the water returns, and it is retained for about two months or more; and when it is gathered, then it should be pierced again according to that method of treatment, as the patient will thus pass through their days.
Chapter 63.
On surgical incision for fleshy hernia and treatment of it.
You should know that in the incision on this hernia there is great danger of loss, so I recommend the abandonment of it and being saved by another method.
And I remember the operation for that and the characteristics of abscesses.
So it is said that abscesses originate in the bodies whose genitals are joined and are caused by several factors: either by acute aggravated fluid which is poured into the genitals, or by trauma.
The abscess color depends on the body color and it is not found in pain, and it is a serious abscess.
A flatulence abscess is serious, the color of which is dark, and it does not cause pain.
Sometimes it is made by nodulation of the arteries and inflammation of those same places, which as has been mentioned, can be recognized by the memory of them, or by inflammation of veins.
But when it is inflammation of the arteries, it is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not require touching.
But when it is inflammation of the vein, it is not dispersed by any cause due to pressing with the fingers.
And it is possible that surgical incision may be made on this type and other flesh; and you should make an incision in the genitals, and hold the abscess open with your hands above, and extract the pus white, and deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them and make an incision again on the lower part of the urethra.
Therefore, if the urethra has already become consolidated with the surrounding flesh, then you must extract the urethra and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion for any reason of the urethra or between the vessels, then you must remove all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if there is a new growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise everything that is there and extract the urethra as has been said before.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, you should fill the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, and then care for it with other treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernia that is of the bladder.
The bladder is an abscess enclosed by some envelope similar to a scrotum with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
In the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to which memory is required.
Operation should be described according to what the first ones did.
The operation must be performed on the patient on an elevated couch; and then loosen the support of the testicles to the sides; and approach the codpiece of the genitalia with a cloth dampened with vinegar that is proven effective for the anus; and let another servant hold it, and stretch it out with great force.
Then insert the pointed scalpel through a crosswise incision into the right side of the vessels that are still covered.
Then remove all the fatty tissue from both sides as you have said in the removal of the arcubacteria, which are in the temples.
Then insert a double-pointed needle in that place where you saw the pus, and let one end of it be in the first part of the vessels where the pus occurs, and let the other end of it be seen in the deeper part. Then make an incision in the middle of that place with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and remove what has been accumulated from the putrefied and corrupted fluids.
Then treat the ulcer with remedies for other ulcers that you want to be healed so that the vessels that connect one or both genitals are not affected, as it is not harmful for that.
However, if all the testicles are affected, then it is necessary that they be removed or that one or both of the testicles become blocked by the vessels, so that nourishment can be cut off through the incision of the vessels and that they are stopped up or closed so that they do not help with that.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to an incision that penetrates the abdomen extended across the hip from the groin of the stomach, which causes a rupture in one or more of the intestines.
And this rupture can be of the abdomen or from its expansion, and this happens due to these two species for many reasons: blows, falls, shocks, shouting, elevation due to a serious cause, or similar things.
The sign of this kind of rupture, when it is due to the expansion of the abdomen, is that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and it does not occur suddenly, and it becomes an abscess inside the abdomen because the abdomen presses on the intestine.
The sign of this is when it is due to an incision of the abdomen, as at first it causes a sudden, vehement pain; and it becomes an abscess that appears distant from the natural opening, which is indeed of the intestine, and the body of it is on the sides outside the abdomen.
And in some cases, the intestine is forgotten and this hernia is called entestinal hernia zirbal.
And sometimes it is done with haste, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, and it is held there, and this is a great danger to the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of illnesses with iron tools, there is fear, so it is necessary to avoid hunting in that.
The method of the operation for that is to order the patient to return the intestine with their hand to the interior of its cavity if it has obeyed your command, and let it be wrapped around their waist, and lift the legs upwards.
Then tie the codpiece that secures the codpiece of the testicles to the sides, and make an incision through the entire codpiece; and then insert two fingers in the lips of the incision as necessary to cut the incision with them.
And if the incision is according to the amount that you can safely remove from it.
Then remove all the fatty tissue that is under the codpiece of the testicles up to where the white, hard abdomen is exposed on both sides.
Then you insert your finger into the space that secures the testicle, between the white abdomen that is under the codpiece and the abdomen itself, and free it from the adhesion that is in the area behind the scrotum.
Then move the codpiece of the testicles to the sides, and stretch the white abdomen with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the abdomen up to the incision area; and order the servant to stretch out the scrotum on one side and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with a complete solution.
And look for your fingers if there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white, hard abdomen. However, if you find any cause for it, then you place it on the belly below.
Approach the division of the loincloth below the testicles and cut through it, from which blood and pus will flow as we have recommended in what we have said before.
Apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; then cover it with lint that we have recommended (and in some cases the white cloth is cauterized, which we mentioned to prevent blood flow from the incision, as this often occurs); leave the lint in place until it falls off by itself.
If the wound does not heal quickly, then embrocate heated water and place it on top of it until it falls off as we have said before.
Care for the wound with another cure for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On hernia of the intestines.
In this type of hernia, no one has ever been cured by surgery.
And in the beginning, they said that it should be treated like we have recommended for hernia of the intestine: that is, to press the vessels near the incision with ease; and to cut in the middle of the abscess with water or some other liquid that opens it, until the vessels come out.
Treat the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the hernia that occurs in the inguinal region (inguinal hernia).
Sometimes the rupture occurs in the inguinal region as we have said before, and then it should be opened.
Do not allow any cause of hernia in the genitals; and if it does occur, it is rare; and it should always be returned to its place.
If it lasts for a long time without improvement, the hernia is closed in the loincloth until the hernia returns into the loincloth; this can occur due to the extension of the loincloth in the inguinal region, as we have said before, which causes the loincloth to be stretched, softened, and an abscess to form and rupture.
And the treatment is with cauterization, as we have previously described.
Sometimes it is cured by surgery in the following manner: and the patient lies on his back between your hands, and the location of the abscess rupture is cut open with an incision of about three fingers' width.
Then tighten the white cloth that is below the loincloth until it is exposed.
Then take the iron and place it over the prominent part of the loincloth and press it on the abdomen.
Then sew together the two prominent parts at the ends of the iron rod of the loincloth.
Then extract the end of the iron rod and do not incise the loincloth from all sides or extend the opening, nor do anything else as you know in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
And take care of that [area] with the treatment of sores, and when you incise [the sore], clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for it contracts and the prominence of the break is not aligned.
A pointed cautery is better in this place, for it is more near to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
If the scrotum of the testicles is swollen in some men, it becomes softened due to the fact that the flesh between [the scrotum] is softened, and its care must be attended to.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is treating [the condition] to have the patient lie down according to his sides, and incise the entire scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum, and then adjust two lips with stitching.
And if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and make a firm stitching.
Then incise between the stitches, and take care of other sores until they are healed and the inflammation subsides.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it is appropriate to remind me of it in this book; and the reminder is necessary only in two cases, one of which is when the physician is asked about it because he knows the cure for such [conditions], and the other case is when we have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit as with horses, cows, pigs, etc., and similar animals.
And thus it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation, or by incision.
But in the method done by strangulation, the procedure is that we strangle the animal in warm water until its testicles become softened and hang down. Then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear again.
But in castration done by incision and section, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the scrotum of [the testicles] with your left hand.
Then pull back the scrotal sac, and incise each tube with one section until two tubes are exposed.
And then incise those [tubes] so that they can be removed. Do not leave any cause of the inflammation on those [testicles], but rather the subtle inflammation that is over the veins.
This method of castration done by strangulation is better because strangulation weakens the testicles so that the animal desires coit less.
Take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the care of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when a space appears in the scrotum between the testicles, in which case a female-like figure with genitals is formed.
And occasionally urine flow occurs from the scrotum containing the testicles.
But in women it is of a different type: and it is that the female vagina, at its base, resembles two testicles of a man, only slightly smaller than those and near the external opening, like the penis of a man and two testicles.
The treatment is of three types: one for men and one type for women. It is necessary that you incise the flesh and adjust it so that the pain of [the hermaphrodite] subsides, and then treat it with care for other sores.
And in the second type of men in which urine flows from the scrotum containing the testicles, there is neither cure nor treatment for it.
Chapter XXI.
On looseness and protruding flesh in women due to causes of the female sex.
Looseness is adjusted according to natural causes until it is tightened and care must be taken; but in some women it is exaggerated to such an extent that it spreads like in men, and enters the vagina.
Therefore you must remove the excess looseness of the looseness with your hand or scissors and incise it.
And do not over-incise, especially at the root of the incision, to avoid bleeding.
Take care of that [area] with care for other sores until it is healed.
Born flesh is the flesh that comes out of the mother's vagina until it fills up [the vagina], and looseness is protruded at the opening of the vagina like a cyst (and for this reason some earlier writers called it "disease of the anus"); therefore, we incise it in the same way as we incise looseness, and treat it until it is healed.
Title .lxxii. (Title in Roman numerals, Latin word for title is Caput or Capitulum, so this could be translated as Chapter LXXII.)
On the treatment of gout.
Gout is when a woman's bladder is not punctured or if it is only slightly injured. It can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is the illness that has occurred previously, and it is caused by improperly fitted meat or sharp or coarse substances.
Accidental is caused either during childbirth, in the mother's ribs, on the skin above or below it, or in the urine, and it is forbidden to eat, engage in sexual activities, and engage in fertility treatments, and strongly prohibited menstruation.
The recognition of this illness is made by examining the mother, if the opening is obvious, it should be cauterized; however, if it is not apparent, then you must seek it out with the fingers or with a ray.
However, if the opening is due to a subtle sharp object near the two labiae, you should grasp it and tear it apart.
It is to press on both the labiae with a soft cloth, and then place your fingers indicating the affected area more precisely.
The woman should be on her back, with her legs extended and the two labiae should be spread apart using force until that sharp object is broken and the opening is opened.
Then take some wool, soak it in oil and apply it to the area, and let it stay for a day so that the wound does not become hardened.
If the boil is large and swollen, then you must insert a lance or a leaf of myrtle.
If it is an abscess in the flesh, then you should hang it with oil and lance it.
And you should use the medications that stop bleeding without cutting, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and gum guaiacum, bound with albumen of egg whites.
Then administer a large lead cannula to prevent the wound from being easily closed.
Hold it for several days and apply hot compresses.
Let it be healed with the other healing methods of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes there occur cases of other flesh during the greatest nativity, and then it is necessary to lance them according to this method. If it is an abscess cancerous, do not oppose the abscess cancerous in any way with iron.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the cure of diarrhea and dysentery and red swelling that sometimes occur in the womb of women.
Diarrhea is recognized as the flow of blood from the veins' openings until a continuous amount of blood flows; and when diarrhea is chronic and it becomes bloody.
And I have already said in the division the species of these and the signs of these, and I will say those that receive healing and those that do not receive healing.
Therefore I say that diarrhea and dysentery when in the intestine and not perceived by sensation, there should be no healing with iron.
But those that are in the openings of the womb where sensation is felt, these are healed.
And you must place the woman in a hot bath and stretch her limbs out with an elongator or a sharp cloth and lance them with the blades.
And you should apply the powder of the blood of one of the incisive powders without cutting, such as hellebore and similar ones.
And you should wrap her feet in cloth for an hour and then place it in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists, then you should seize it in a decoction of sumac and of mustard seeds and of cumin and of similar ones.
And you should take barley flour, mix it with honey and wine and vinegar and make a plaster with water over it.
If the blood is separated, that's good; if not, cause it to adhere with two leeches and scarify the nipples.
And you should take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or the juice of angelica or the juice of wormwood in vinegar and apply it to the area; and cure the area with mouthwash until it is healed.
Heal that until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of an accidental incision in the womb.
The various species of abscesses that sometimes occur in the womb, such as cancerous, ulcers, boils, sores, ulcers, blisters, gangrenous, putrid, rotten, corrupted and suppurative ones. And I have already said about these diseases and the species of these and the signs of these, and their cures in the division.
And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about cautery of the abscess which appears in the womb when it is one of the abscesses that are healed, and if you want to know in what way the operation with iron is done.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is sharp with percussion and flank and fever, and sometimes it becomes swollen and if you feel sensation over it, then do not pierce it, but heal it with water that helps with maturation until the acuity of the accident subsides.
Then you must make the woman lie down on a bed with two beds; and recline on her back and place her feet at the edge of the bed far from the stomach, and her thighs should be spread apart, and her arms should rest on each side of her neck, and each one should hold it as appropriate.
And the midwife follows the doctor's instructions and brings the instruments to open the opening of the womb, whose shape will come in those cases that will be appropriate.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument that you position yourself near the head of the womb of the woman, and what enters the womb from the instrument should not be more than the width of the opening of the womb and touch the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then it is necessary that you apply powder on the texture of the opening of the womb to prevent any instrument from entering the opening of the womb.
And it is necessary that you hold the ligature that runs on the instrument of the labor pains, and the attendant should have the instrument and roll the ligature inside until the openings of the mother are unobstructed.
And when the membrane appears and is touched with the hand and lanced and moistened, it is then necessary that you cut it off at its head with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, it is then necessary that you make an incision in the area and insert a plaster soaked in rose oil or other oil containing some styptic agent; and place the cloth on the incision of the mother.
And cover the mother with a woolen cloth soaked in water in which wormwood is boiled.
Let her be cured for about two days with an enema, which it is appropriate to administer until she is healed.
Sometimes the mother and wound are washed with water and salt, and with water in which rosemary or long-aster root is boiled, and it returns to the enema.
And if the wound is inside the mother and swollen, it is then necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, for its care should be performed as was described in the section.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives in what manner they should be treated when the membranes issue abnormally according to figure.
It is necessary that the midwife recognise in the beginning the figure of natural childbirth through signs, and it is known that when you see the woman expelling at the parturition and desires to smell the air, and above her is lifted by what is from the part, and hastens the expulsion of the membranes, then you know that this birth is according to natural figure, and its expulsion is on top of its head, and the second one with it suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is then necessary that the belly of her be compressed to make the membranes descend gently, for when they come out on top of its head, they should deliver it, and it is washed from those superfluidities with good cleaning.
But if the birth is abnormal and unnatural, for when the membranes are expelled on her feet and the body of it is expelled before its head and its feet, and one hand or the foot of it. or if the head of it is expelled and her hand or the foot of it, or on the stomach of it, and it is turned forcefully onto its neck, resembling the figures of those unnatural births.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in all those matters, and to avoid errors and disappointments.
And we will show you every figure of them, and what method is in each one, so that it may be understood and established upon it.
When the birth is expelled on top of its head due to natural labor, and it is strong upon the woman and difficult to deliver, and sometimes the strength of it has been weakened, then you should use the following remedy: or what women have, and evaporate the concoction of it with fenugreek oil and moist oils.
And the midwife should introduce her small spatula between its membranes and cut it with that, or cut it with her fingernail until the fluid inside it flows out. And press the belly of the woman until the child is born.
But if it does not come out, it is then necessary that the woman be rinsed with egg white and fenugreek juice with a spatula.
And command it to be cleaned, have it pressed, and make it vomit with a mixture; open its mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will soon forget this.
And if both hands of the child are forgotten at the beginning, it is then necessary that you reduce them gently little by little. But if it does not enter easily, the woman should lie on a cushion and raise her feet, and the cushion should be pushed against the ground; and the woman should be held so as not to fall backward.
And if the hands are not turned inside out and the child dies, you should cut them open and remove the skin of the child or pull its chest to its hand with a cloth and remove it equally, because that will soon be forgotten.
When the child is expelled on her feet, it is then necessary that you push those legs upwards, and have the child turned little by little, and wrap it around, and take hold of one foot and stretch it gently.
But when it is inside the thighs, you should command it to expel itself and have it turn around with a mixture, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten by what we have recommended, then you should return the child little by little according to natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with a gentle expulsion.
And if it is forbidden to all that has been recommended, then take alum and dissolved gum, grind everything well in the mortar with good striking, and apply a line of the mixture to the woman's cervix, at the bottom of her abdomen. Then dip that sponge in warm water until it softens and reaches the hypogastric region.
When the birth passages are softened, then perform a subfumigation of myrtle and rest her on it. When the subfumigation has lasted for an hour, then you should dip a sponge in warm water again and make her sneeze, then let it out, press lightly on the lower part of her abdomen near the birth passage to help her forget the pain quickly.
Place one of her hands hanging down. If the hand cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down and strike her hips vigorously, and administer pain relief medications which I recommend and advise to use mucilage.
When the childbirth has begun, then dip a sponge in warm water, study the reduction of the hand, insert it naturally, make her sneeze and tell her to press herself until she forgets the pain.
Place her hands on the pillow beneath her neck, with the opening of the birth passage at her mother's waist. The midwife should hold the hand of the baby and gently rotate it, making it easier.
And when it is fully delivered, pause over the cervix with a recommended oil and mucilage.
And command her to push gently little by little, and when she does, dip the sponge again in warm water, then make her lean forward slightly, and command her to press; make her sneeze with conditioning. The baby is prepared on the left side.
When the afterbirth comes out of the mother according to this method, consider it, and you should cut the second navel string with your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
And if the baby's head and neck are hanging down, you should cut the umbilical cord to prevent it from being retained and dying.
And gently push the baby into the birth passage until it comes out as it should, and tell the woman to press herself a few times, and it will be forgotten quickly, if God wills it.
Birth of twins or multiple babies. You should know that twins and multiple births occur occasionally, sometimes even three or four, but it is strange and dangerous, although there are natural causes, not human.
And if there are multiple navel strings, separate each one by cutting through the ligament in the umbilical cord of each. Sometimes they are forgotten naturally, as it often happens with a single birth, and sometimes they are not deliverable, as I have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver or they reach the stages I mentioned of unnatural births, you should treat them as I have advised.
And if the midwife is skillful and skilled in facilitating, speeding up or slowing down, and in all figures according to what she has been prepared for by using appropriate means leading to safety.
Recall that it is formed in the womb from embryos, and it aborts.
Sometimes the number of pregnancies is one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten, and it is important to note that a woman may abort at any time after one pregnancy, and another woman may have all her pregnancies miscarried, which was caused by the measurement of the wise men.
And all this requires the knowledge of midwifery because a light load has this appearance, and therefore open it with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you treat the dead fetus with what was said in the division of medicine and it has not been born prematurely, and you are compelled to use an operation on the woman, then it is necessary that you consider whether the woman is of good character and not one of those for whom there is a danger of harm.
Then the woman should be placed on her back with her head lowered and her legs raised.
The assistant should hold the woman's feet or tie them to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with oils, aloe vera and fenugreek, and seeds of linseed.
Then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and mucilagins, enter her hand into the mother's body with ease, and find the place in which you insert the fingers in the fetus.
Consider the proper places for this: then you determine whether the fetus is positioned correctly on its head, and then you insert your fingers into the neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, in the collarbone, near the ribs, or below the hips.
But if it is presented transversely, then in the pelvic brim or midriff.
It is necessary that you hold the fingers with the right hand, curve them in the place between the left hand's fingers, and enter your hand with ease until you reach the cause of the blockage.
Then place and insert another finger or the third one if necessary to attract it and not extend it only along its length.
The pain should be treated throughout, so that the swelling is alleviated in the same way as teeth decay requires removal of it.
The affected area should be treated so that the swelling spreads out; and if any part of it is retained, then it must be cut off with a surgeon's knife, and the oil of some herbs applied to the wound, and it should be dressed carefully until it heals.
If the wound is neglected, then the edges should be sewn together as close to the flesh as possible and this should be done until the entire wound is healed.
If the wound is opened on one side and cannot be closed by compression, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and it should be taken out little by little until it heals, and incised either at the edge of the wound or at the junction.
And in the same way, incise the other side and both feet as well.
But if the wound's head is large or it cannot be compressed in the swelling, or water collects at the opening of the wound, then a bladder should be inserted between the wounds and the head of the wound should be pierced and the water drained, or it should be cut with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will resemble the shapes of other instruments as described in the appropriate chapter.
Do the same if the wound is naturally large: and then it must be incised with scissors or cut with an alundat as previously mentioned, and the bones should be removed with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and compressed by a splint, it must be incised until the moisture that is in the feet is drained out.
But if there are no complications or obesity causing swelling, you should incise the head as soon as possible.
And if the abdomen is protruding or edematous, you must puncture it until the moisture within it runs out.
But if the wound is on one's feet, the pulling of it should be gentle and its direction towards the mother's mouth should be gentle.
But if it is compressed in the abdomen and feet, you must remove it with cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and cut open both the abdomen and feet until moisture comes out from them.
But if the other members are closed and the head is turned, the hand should be inserted into the left side; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, the hand should enter through the anus, search for the head, pull it with the hands towards the mother's mouth, and insert a finger or two fingers to help pull it out.
And if the mother's mouth is compressed by an abscess that comes from the anus, it must not be tampered with; rather, warm and oily liquids should be administered. Apply plasters; and let the patient drink waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on one's side, it should be punctured as much as possible; and warm and oily liquids as previously mentioned should be administered in a living creature.
And if that is not possible, it must be incised in pieces and extracted.
It must not leave any cause for the second one.
And when you have completed your operation, administer the remedies for healing abscesses that come from the mother as previously mentioned.
And if bleeding occurs, it should be stopped with styptic waters and the other remedy for healing should be administered.
I have seen a woman in the belly of whom death had occurred, and near her corpse another was observed, which also died soon after. A man had an abscess in his navel for a long time, which inflated until it burst and began to discharge pus.
I was called to treat him, and for a long time I treated the wound, but it did not heal.
Then I placed heavy plasters on it for some reasons, and extracted an bone from it, and after several days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly surprised, because there should not be bones in the abdomen.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the deceased man.
So I sewed up the wound, extracted many bones from it, and the woman who was in her seventh month of pregnancy survived in this manner for a long time, but eventually died of a little fever.
I did not hesitate to be strange, but rather that in such cases there is knowledge and help for the doctor who treats with his hands.
Of the shapes of instruments required for extracting the wound.
Shape of the birthing rod, which is used to open the mother's vagina:
This is the form of strangulation where the legs are compressed, in which compression there are two advantages at both ends of two feet. However, this advantage should be as subtle as possible with a narrow constrictor, and it can be made of yew or hazel stick.
And the length of each stick should be two fingers and the width of both should be one finger, and the length of each is one palm and a half; and in the middle of the two sticks there are adjustments for that stick which are already fixed, the length of which is slightly more than one palm, and the width of each is slightly less than two fingers.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you rotate the prescribed advantages.
Another similar form, thinner and lighter:
Made of yew or hazel stick similar in shape to forceps. However, at the end of it there are two adjustments similar to this, and the length of those adjustments is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with those (instruments), then you press down on the woman's loins so that her feet hang down, and open what is between her thighs. And place your hand over the (opening) instrument similar to a forceps, as you do with forceps, according to the size that you perceive the mouth of the mother's womb requires for the placenta to pass through.
The form of vertigo which the ancients called:
The form of impetus with which the fetus is pushed:
The form of amisida with which the large head is crushed
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, like sometimes, and some times it is made long like forceps according to this form, like sometimes, with teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it is cut and crushed. The form of premature birth:
The form of an uncus having a spine:
The form of an uncus having two spines:
The form of a spatula with two ends, with which the head is separated:
The form of two wide spatulas:
All these instruments are practiced, and when more of them are multiplied and their types are prepared, the craftsman should be lighter in his operation and fewer in number for their quantity.
And do not make any work with those instruments whatsoever, because the necessity of them is not to be excused.
Extraction of the afterbirth.
When the afterbirth is retained, you must command the patient to hold in their own excrement, and then make them vomit with conditioning, and tightly press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if this is outside the body, that's good.
If not, you must take a cloth and perforate the covering with a hole, and pour in there herbs such as camphor, mint, anise, chamomile, and sweet marjoram, and cassia wood and santolina. All these herbs or some of them are to be soaked in water in the cloth and placed over the fire.
And place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold it so that the steam comes into the cavity of the womb.
Approach that vomiting as we have said, and the second one should be forgotten quickly.
If this treatment remains and is not expelled, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sassafras or camomile tea, and introduce it into the cavity and seek out the second one, and when you find it, take it out little by little. If it sticks to the midwife's palm, introduce your hand as we have recommended, and when you find the second one, extract it little by little so that the midwife does not catch it violently. It must be pressed on the right and left sides with ease.
If the mouth of the midwife is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with vomiting and with oil of water and herbs.
If it is not expelled by all the causes that we have recommended, then you must be careful not to press too much on it in the process of extraction, but whatever has been expelled from it to the mouth of the midwife should be kept in a container of lime and tetra-pharmacon; for this will make it rot in about 5 days and dissolve and be expelled.
But when it rots, the bad humor is raised to the head and stomach, and the patient suffers from this; therefore, it must be administered with fumigation and suitable medicines.
But among the ancients, it was already spoken of the fumigation of garlic and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated should be for the retention of menstruation and of the second thing:
It can be made of glass or ivory.
The thin end should be placed in the cavity and the wide end on the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
It should have a space where the fumigation is consumed and another one is added.
Treatment for an unperforated child's anus.
When newborn babies and the anuses of them are not perforated, they should be treated with gentleness and oil. Therefore, the midwife should perforate that anus with the aforementioned instrument, and if not, perforate it with a sharp probe, and take care not to touch the rectum.
And place wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and treat it with an ointment inside until it is healed.
But if you fear that it may become inflamed, then place a catheter for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it often happens that the anus becomes inflamed due to piles or fistula; therefore, that inflammation should be incised, and it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
Treatment for fistulas that occur afterwards.
Fistulas that occur after delivery should be treated with soft and thick ointments, which are applied near the anus or in the space of the vaginal separation.
It is a fistula or abscess.
When that nodule is old and turns into a white or subtle putridity, some abscesses may penetrate from it.
These penetrations are recognized by what is expelled from them through the exit and by swelling; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation, and often worms come out of these.
And sometimes these abscesses penetrate into the bladder or muscle of the penis, and penetrate through the junction of the vagina or into the neck of the uterus.
And that which is known as fistula penetrating the anus and not penetrating, is that you insert your aforementioned finger into the anus, and then introduce a thin probe of ivory or metal into the fistula when it is not too tight.
If in that there is a narrow passage, then enter the subtle probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair in your mouth.
If you do not feel it or do not proceed with any cause of obstruction, diarrhea, worms, or flatulence, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and you should seek another cure.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the meat of the scrotum, its meaning is clearly that it is urine from that area and you should avoid using that place for medicine until it has been consolidated.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and pain occurs in its vicinity, the sign of that is that the probe passes through it only if there is not a narrow passage into the bone, and pain in the vicinity of the fracture; and that pus often appears from it; and that it has no value in that medicine and is not consolidated with poultice.
And in all such fistulas healing is not achieved, and the healing of those is the effort and vanity of foolish doctors on which they insist.
But in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you and have proven.
The patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his legs so that the hips are inclined towards his stomach, and you enter the probe of lead or iron if it is in the fistula there is a narrow passage, until you know where the probe passes.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger into his neck.
And if you feel the probe already penetrating your finger, or if you feel something soft or flesh between your finger and it, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and do not work on it, because there is no healing in it, as we have said.
But some say that it heals in some men temporarily.
And of the medicine by which healing is hoped for, it is that you ignite a cautery thinly according to the size of the fistula, as described earlier, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and place a dressing over it twice or thrice until you know that all the tissues adjacent to the fistula are adjusted have been heated and shrunken like feathers on a bird's wing.
And cover that with calves wrapped in linen until all the tissues that are heated and shrunken have healed, and cover it with medicine that generates and consolidates flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, you should not be healed in a certain time by another cure.
If the probe is within and does not penetrate into the anus that is covered with a layer of flesh or cyst, and the fistula is in the area where the coccyx is moistened, then dry the coccyx from the beginning of the fistula, and watch it dry along with the probe, until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe passes, and by means of the probe, it is freed and caught.
And clean those fistulated tissues that are similar to feathers of a bird's pen and do not remain from them any cause.
But if blood flow often occurs between you and your operation when incising those tissues, you should use an instrument that milks the pus and cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire heals well: it shrinks those heated tissues and abscesses the blood by drying the moistness.
And cover that with calves wrapped in linen or with gauze until the wound is healed, and then treat the wound with hard flesh-generating and consolidating poultices.
And those medicines that have astringent and drying properties: when it is restored, it is healed and there is no recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum of the anus and is extended on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And therefore if you find that the probe and it is covered with flesh or cyst, and is close to penetration, then there is no operation in it except by faith and hope.
The cause is administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or make an incision into it until you achieve the hollowing out of it so that it is possible for you to enter it and heal it properly; and do not proceed with incision without first achieving a hollow, because you risk injuring the rectum, which can cause diarrhea involuntarily in the patient; and cover it with what we have said earlier, as it will heal quickly. Or prolong that membrane and clean the pus that is dried up close to the anus, as we have said, or with a probe or another sharp instrument, and clean those fistulated tissues in the incision where you can do percrustation; and make a complete restoration of the wound by sewing it together, and if the abscess pus does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the division of the anus, it will be easier for the patient to suffer from it. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it is around the edge of the buttock near the surface of the body with a cord, then take a probe for perforating extremities, which is similar to an awl for puncturing as follows:
and insert a probe wrapped in five cords or around the probe with five cords into the fistula until it reaches its hollow.
But if you penetrate the edge of the buttock from inside out, then you extract the cord from that wound by inserting your finger into the anus; and remove the tip of the cord and tie its ends together, tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when the cord is deeper in the flesh, tighten it further until those parts that are between the cord's tips and that fit are incised.
And treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you prepare, as long as it does not tear the skin, because it is not your intention to do so without healing; and place a dressing over it until it is healed.
The method of using a spined spatula to divide the fistula: its shape is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not tear unnecessarily as sometimes happens.
Sewing of hemorrhoids where there is bleeding at the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, for they can be like coal cakes or as fat as a radish. And they can be small or large, and sometimes there is bleeding from them all at once, and they are mobile, and outside the anus, and in their openings.
But those that are outside the anus occur during months of little moisture, where there is yellow water or a small amount of blood with continuous flow, and according to the color of the skin.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and to squeeze it until the anus becomes dry, and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then cut them with scissors or whatever you have available, and make an incision in their roots.
But if the scissors are not available for cutting them due to their moisture and softness, then take them with coarse cloth or cotton or woolen thread, extract them using your fingers, and make an incision in them and sprinkle some cautery powders near the incision to prevent bleeding; or cauterize them according to the method described in the chapter on cauterization. And treat those with other remedies until they are healed.
And if the anus does not release on its own, then you should crush the patient's anus with a small crust and wash it with water that will cause it to release gently when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause should be treated lightly, and you should take them with your finger or scissors and incise them, and treat them with the remedy mentioned earlier until they are healed.
And for an incision, it is necessary to administer suturing of them in this manner: take a probe wrapped in cord and insert it into the fistula; then extract the hemorrhoids at their openings, and make the probe penetrate the other side of the fistula with the needle, and wrap the ends of the cord around the part further away from the needle transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid strongly, and tie off the cord and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one open and not stitching it, for the excess blood will run from that one.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus and cover it; place that one on the anus and order the patient to rest. And leave that one in place until it is healed; and when it is healed, treat those with enema or other remedies until they are healed.
And since they are old and not worth this medicine, it is necessary that you cauterize those with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moistened and stop the discharge from above, which prevents consolidation; and treat those until they have been consolidated.
You should stop those with a very sharp reason until the first bleeding stops and they are excoriated; and treat those until they are healed.
Understand that paleness, which is crucial, is not always indicative of redness as the body's color may appear like a pale head of clove, and it occurs throughout the body but more noticeably in the parts below the feet and in the hands, and through these areas you must follow the pain.
Then it must be incised what is in the circle of the nail, and kept with tweezers or oil, and be removed from its root; and care for that place.
If you wish, cauterize what follows in its own chapter.
Moreover, a verruca is a small, rough, fistula-like elevation on the surface of the body, and warts are observed more often in children.
The treatment is to stretch and incise it, or to compress it with a linen cloth that fits. And if you wish, cauterize this, as I said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
Moreover, a formica is a small, furrowed or thick fistula on the surface of the body, which ants often bite when it is touched, and when it is scratched, it becomes inflamed like an ant bite, and spreads around the body.
The treatment is to take a hollow needle or a sharp needle, and hold it over the formica so that its circle contains the part of it; then turn your hand with the needle around the formica, and press it into the skin where you have incised what is in the circuit of the formica, and remove the formica from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a hollow needle or iron needle in the following way:
The opening is asking for the removal of the area above the incision to be done delicately, as it is not pierced (meaning non-perforated), wrapped and therefore the learning of the procedure should be based on that and the rotation of the said part. In English: "The removal of the area above the incision should be done delicately, since it is not perforated, wrapped, and therefore the procedure should be learned from this and the rotation of the said part."
"And if you wish to cauterize the bugleworm as described in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries." In English: "If you want to cauterize the bugleworm, as described in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauteries."
"In terms of the shape of the instruments that are administered for stitching." In English: "Regarding the shape of the instruments used for stitching."
Sometimes stitching is done with silver or lead or melted or hammered; and sometimes it is done with small and large instruments depending on the ones administered, as the one used in treating children should be small; and the stitches for those with friable or painful buttocks should be small.
The large and few number of stitches:
The top of the incision above where the bag is tied should be wide, as described in this manner; and it should be noted that the bag is tied there like sometimes.
"And the end below, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened), carefully; on one of its sides two cuts are made, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should match the thickness of the rays and the larger one should be smaller." In English: "And the end below, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened), carefully; on one of its sides two cuts are made, and on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should match the thickness of the rays and the larger one should be smaller."
"And the bag where the urinary medicine of animal bladder or sheep's wool is placed, and its size should be a span." In English: "And the bag in which the urinary medicine made from animal bladder or sheep's wool is stored, and its size should be a span."
"And it should be perforated in such a way that the space between the cuts is the thickness of the finger." In English: "And it should be perforated in such a way that the space between the cuts is the thickness of the finger."
"And insert it into those cuts carefully and firmly, using a sharp instrument of the same material, or around them; then adjust the bag accordingly; when the bag is placed, it should be tight at the end of the stitch between two distinct points with strong tension, and then stitch each cut: However, the quality of stitching with that is to fill the bag with the medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance of the patient; and take care not to overheat or freeze it."
"Then position the patient on their back, raise their legs and place a cushion under them or a pillow; then oil or salve should be applied to the end of the cautery; and insert it gently into the anus with ease and the assistant should take hold of the bag and squeeze it forcefully until everything inside the stitch is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the stitch and the patient lifts their legs against the wall."
If the medicine is necessary immediately, let it have as much as it can; if it remains with him for an entire night, it is more helpful.
If you are treating the illnesses of the abdomen and its emergency release, then apply a pointed cautery until it is healed.
If there is an anal hemorrhoid or abscess in the anus, use a subtle and soft cautery among those that are called "criteria".
On the treatment of sores.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of sores what is appropriate for the free man, and I will also say the treatment of those with more resources and medications according to their condition.
Therefore, I say that sores are differentiated according to what causes them and according to the place where they occur.
And the causes that often cause sores are such as injuries from stones, or incision with a knife or sword, or striking with a lance, fist, or arrow, or similar to these.
But sores that occur in the parts of the body are such as a sore on the head, neck, foot, abdomen, chest, and similar to these body parts.
I also recommend the treatment for some sores using this reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I begin with the simple sores of the head, as the treatment for complex sores will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
When a simple sore occurs on the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it was caused by a stone or something similar, and the wound has been sewn up but remains large and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then you should immediately lance the skull and drain the pus, without delay; and remove what blood comes out according to the amount of its strength, unless there is some other reason prohibiting lancing, especially if the blood that has come out from the sore is scant.
And the lancing should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area, and keep the patient from reopening the wound, drinking alcohol, and eating rich foods.
But if there is any reason for caution, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
Wait on the sore if an abscess forms on it, let it be infused with rose oil or vinegar in which is steeped.
But if you are sure of the abscess, wait on the sore if it is new and has not yet changed its powder that I recommend keeping close by.
And if the air has already changed it, wait on some salve until it is healed.
But if the sore is large or caused by incision of space and similar things, and the edges are not properly aligned, then align them with sutures as I recommend for their suturing.
But if the sore has exposed the bone and not blocked, but only a small suspension suture is present, then incise it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the skin, and order the patient to avoid rich foods: meat and fish and similar things, until it is healed.
And if there is rotting of the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise everything possible and remove it, and care for it.
But if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and has not been separated by medicines, then you should explore the artery, and if it is not incised, incise it with a spatula or lance it; and if necessity requires that what I have said does not conform, then cauterize it until the blood is released.
But if these sores are simple and small, the cause of them is light; therefore, sprinkle this powder on them, as it will solidify before the air changes them.
The method for the powder is as follows: mix one part of oil from crushed walnuts, two parts of dragon's blood sap, three parts of non-extinct herbs; grind and sift everything, fill the sore with it, bind it tightly with a good binding until it adheres well, and let it coagulate with blood.
And strengthen it above with powder and let it dry, and do not remove it until it forms an abscess, as the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes do only cautery when you do not have walnut oil and dragon's blood sap.
And now perform this operation on large sores when it is necessary to wait on them and they are tightened, and only recent sores with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered it, and especially in summer, do not consider the position of this powder, but instead care for them as I have said, placing on them various salves or powders made from barley flour with water and honey until they form scabs; and care for them with other treatment until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs in bone and it is small, you shall extract it with care.
And you shall tell the cure for skull fractures that are poisonous.
On neck wounds.
If a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment compared to a simple skull fracture.
If the nerve or artery in the neck is cut or severed, it is not advisable to treat with anything that causes violent constriction, such as zinjari and zegi, which are poisonous to nerves and harmful to them. And do not place any pressure on the wound at all, because the substance of nerves is sensitive and their continuation is near to the brain, which is above all other members.
If the wound is cured with light medicines, such as cleaning it with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not-rose oil, and sometimes cleaned with sweet water and other remedies according to this method, and then anointed with moisture.
But if the wound is large, administer suture, or sew the lips (of the wound), and apply care with powders within it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part of the skull, you shall perforate it in the most depressed area.
But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, you shall separate or stop the flow of blood by ligating it, or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
But if the spinal vertebrae of the neck are cut and the veins of the neck are saved, you shall sew the edges of the wound on the back of the neck over the spine of the neck and do not touch it; elevate it equally and align it with its natural shape, and strengthen it with a decent structure, and allow it to rest for several days; apply care with liniments where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
If the wound has entered the bone and there is danger of fragmentation of the bones, you shall percuss it (tap gently with a hammer or similar instrument), and if there are pieces of bone that can be extracted, extract all of them; for what cannot be handled, allow it to rest until the wound becomes more prominent, and separate it from the surrounding tissue and its edge should be relieved.
And if the wound is recent, you shall sprinkle powder over it that has been recommended to you. But if the wound is made into a fistula (abnormal passage), you shall treat it with that which the memory brings to mind in its own chapter.
If it is a spear or sword wound, and sometimes with great depth, you shall consider more if the patient has shortness of breath when he speaks; you shall know that the wound is fatal.
And if the wound is not deep and the bleeding is recent from the patient's own blood, you shall pause at the first hour with powder, and not apply pressure to it so that the blood does not remain trapped in the depth of the wound and return to the heart and weaken the patient, but rather wait for an attractive liniment, and remove it every two days.
And if the liniment is not available, you shall pause at the orifice of the wound and allow any pus that is there to drain out; make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is in place runs out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and the patient does not suffer from spasm, tremor of heart bad nor chest tightness, sometimes with other good dispositions of it, you shall know that the wound is healed; then treat it with ointments and other care until it heals.
But if the healing of it is excused and it remains open for a long time, you shall know that it has become a fistula (abnormal passage); treat it accordingly in its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a spear or sword and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, you shall treat it with suture if it is large, or powder if it is small.
But if danger has already occurred in the bone and it is only cut pieces of flesh, you shall twist the wound and try to extract those pieces of flesh if they are separated. If they are not separated, you shall allow them to rest until the wound becomes more prominent, as extracting them is relieved.
And for other accidents that occur in other members, the help in care is the same as what has been said.
Of the afflictions of the belly.
The indisposition that happens in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium-sized.
A small disruption is treated with difficulty by other means, and it is known that its reduction is more difficult unless you take care to insert it into its place immediately, for it swells up and thickens, making the insertion of it difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is medium-sized, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in both cases mentioned above.
And know that the suture of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these are common to those sutures of other afflictions of the body.
Two other particular sutures communicate with other afflictions, but they are more specific to the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend that you have extensive exposure and detailed explanation.
Therefore say that when the affliction is small and there is some cause of the intestine by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of two methods can be used: either because of the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore, when it is so, it is necessary that you warm the intestine in such a way that you immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water only, or you take [the intestine] in hot water and cyperum, spice, and bind it with it until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes you will find one in which there is stricture, and it is better that water alone be used to resolve the inflammation.
And therefore, when the inflammation is resolved, you moisturize the intestine with water in which salt and wormwood are contained, for this eases the insertion of it with little effort.
But if the insertion is blocked by this treatment, then you cut the disruption slightly with an instrument that is used to incise hemorrhoids.
And the primary treatment is better when it is not cutting, and there should be no concern for cutting unless necessary and unavoidable.
Of the instrument, consider its form:
One side of the instrument is curved and sharp, while the other side is not curved or pointed, and its tip should be slightly blunt, not as sharp as a spatula's.
And therefore when the affliction increases and the intestine comes out, its reduction should be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible, for it is better.
But when the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back and elevate their legs as much as possible; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should elevate their head and feet as much as possible.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, you should pause your thoughts and consideration immediately so that the side on which the affliction is located is elevated more than the other.
And therefore you must attend to this in large and medium-sized afflictions.
In small afflictions, pause what is ready for use and make sure that the assistant who will administer it has your full trust, as he will hold the disruption with his entire hand and adjust the lips of it, and approach the incision from one side to avoid causing any other damage.
This is the common method of suturing: one that takes a needle or counting of needles according to the size of the affliction; and approach it from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, tighten the needle once, without inserting it into both ends of the thread, with both ends of the ciphax that is inside the parts, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the ciphax, and they are made in four rows.
And tighten with double thread around the needle, and sometimes from two sides at once, and gather both lips and the affliction by proper approximation; and approach the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in it, and approach it as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the contraction of the affliction.
And needles can be medium-sized between coarseness and fineness, as fine needles penetrate the flesh lightly; while thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread, and therefore it is necessary that they be medium in both coarseness and fineness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at two opposite ends of the wound, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the ulcer heals before its consolidation.
And it is not necessary to extend the stitching, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
Then sew the ends of the wounds together so that you do not injure the patient while he sleeps; and place pulverized plaster all around the stitching, which will have the ends of the needles; and let it remain until you know that the wound has healed.
And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are suitable for small wounds, because the stitching of them requires only one or two needles around that area.
But the second stitching is common: and it is that you administer the four edges with a suture, of the wound and two edges of the opening, at one time, with a needle in which silk is tightly wrapped in thinness and thickness.
Then when the needle penetrates these four edges, return the needle from that divided area from which you started, so that the thread takes away the pus rising up from the wound, so that the stitching is done with linen thread as the linen threads are strong.
Pause between each stitch the thickness of a needle.
This stitching is known to men.
And I sewed up the wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was wounded by a sword, and it was a disruption of the wound larger than a palm, and it had burst out from two palms away from the hernia of the same location and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced it after the intestine had been outside for 48 hours.
The wound healed in the space of 15 days or more, and I cured it and it was healed; and let it live for many years, and it was maintained in its condition.
And the other doctors had judged that it would not heal; but by miracle, because I did not cure it with a lance, since it was in a location where a lance could not be found or any medicine, instead I placed a hot poultice over the wound twice daily and washed it with honey water until it healed.
But I will tell you two types of stitching according to the teaching of the Word.
And it is that you start with the suture of the wound, and insert the needle from the outside edge to the inside edge.
And so, when the needle pierces the hide and enters it according to the rule and length of the entire body, and leaves the end of the bladder where you have inserted the needle; and causes the needle to penetrate into the other extremity from the inside to the outside in the other part of the urethra.
And so, when you have caused it to penetrate (the needle), then cause it to penetrate again into the other entry point of the urethra from inside to outside; and leave the bladder end that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate into the other entry point from inside to outside.
Make the entry point where you have made it enter (the needle) penetrate again with that penetration into the bladder in its external entry point, which is inside all of that (the penis).
And so, begin to draw out the side of this entry (the urethra) and direct it towards the other side, which is the bladder's external end, and pull the needle out from the hide that has penetrated; and return that one into the bladder and direct the bladder's external end towards the other side of this entry with this exterior end of the penis; and pull that one out from the bladder which is on its side.
And do this again and again, and do it again approaching further until you have gathered all that is outside according to the example given.
The total sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with skin sutures and stitch the skin, as if you were sewing the bladder once from the side of the bladder's external end (the urethra), and leave the other part until you have filled it.
However, the second type of suturing called Gualla is specifically mentioned, and it is about sewing according to this method and is recommended by some doctors. This means that you sew according to half-sewing, as some physicians do, adding all parts together in a suitable way according to nature; and apply the edge of one side and the edge of the penis to the other edge of it, and this is done as I have recommended.
You must place the needle in the penis's external edge, facing the side of the bladder, and make it penetrate into the bladder only, leaving two ends of the bladder; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through the two ends of the bladder.
Then turn each one and make each one penetrate from inside to outside through the two ends of the penis in opposite directions (i.e., at the opposite sides).
This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing that I have previously mentioned.
This is the Gualla method
However, others say that the abdominal suturing is corrected with two needles, meaning that you insert one needle at each end, and start with the introduction of a needle into the other side according to the suture of those who sew the heart properly (i.e., in an alternating fashion).
And you should know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, the suturing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
However, the treatment of plague is judged according to other plagues (i.e., each plague requires a different treatment).
The cause is that when you get the plague recently and before the air alters it, you reduce the bladder, stitch it properly, and prepare it well; then you pause over the carbolic powder (i.e., a disinfectant used at that time).
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those antiseptics that are in your presence until they dry and harden the bladder and penis; and return to care it as the treatment for other plagues until it is healed.
However, if you are not present for the medication, then pause over it immediately, because it begins to weep, rot, and change color every two days, as I have shown you, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine when the plagues are simple.
However, if you fear that the plague may spread to the main members (i.e., the large intestines), then it is necessary for you to immerse wool in boiled oil or unboiled oil and place it over the area between the anus and the scrotum (i.e., over the lower abdomen).
And if there is pain or putrefaction in your bladder (i.e., the urinary tract), because it has become pus-filled, then you should cauterize that with black sticky vinegar, and especially if the pustulation occurs in the bladder and a puncture is made to penetrate into its cavity.
You should know that healing from the large bladder (i.e., the urinary bladder) is easier than healing from the small bladders (i.e., the ureters).
And it is difficult to heal because the bladder that is called "gugunu" does not receive healing from plague that occurs in all parts; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its size, its subtle nature, and its proximity to nerve tissue.
If what proceeds from the wound is linen, and you can obtain it recently, roll it up according to your rule as you do with hernias.
If it has passed a long time and it becomes black or green, then you must apply a tight ligature to the affected area, so that blood flows out, because in linen there are veins and arteries.
Then insert a ligature at that place where the wound is located, and pause the ends of the thread hanging from the incision, so that the attraction towards it may be alleviated. By pulling on the linen and releasing the pressure of the wound.
Recalling wounds when they occur in the hernia.
When there is a small disruption in the hernia, it is possible to restore it in some men, because I saw one who was repeatedly wounded in his abdomen with a lance and had a wound on the right side of his stomach, and the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and exudation from it and foul smell.
Therefore, I continued the treatment since it was not completed in healing, but rather continued to cauterize the area where the fire healed and the location was consolidated.
And I saw the location already consolidated, and advised the patient to avoid any further injury to his stomach; no one should suffer from this unfortunate event and disrupt their daily routines of eating and drinking, and instead take a bath and rest.
And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the hernia, it is necessary to tie it as follows: take large grapes; then align the two lips of the wound and place one grape with its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; when you press on it, separate the head from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And pause another grape near the first, and do not continue to make one grape after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
And tie that one and close the wound; keep the attached heads in the hernia until the hernia is healed; do not harm the patient with any inconvenience.
And it is possible to tie the hernia with a thin thread made from an animal intestine, because it is finer; and take the end of these threads from the intestines, which should be devoid of flesh, and tie the end of it with a thread wrapped around it, then insert the thread into needles and sew it to the hernia, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of stitching with grapes is not reliable or trustworthy.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the delicate hernias, then it is not repair, but rather cauterization, and not healing from all aspects.
Treatment for abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess that becomes old and is not healed and remains wet all the time and does not drain off, whether it is in any part of the body, is universally called a fistula and we call it an abscess.
A fistula, according to truth, is a hard, white nodule, without pain and with a concavity similar to the concavity of an ulcer; and it is therefore called "rizzated abscess", i.e. ulcer.
And in some men it is a wet fistula that drains pus; and its moisture is discharged in some hours. And sometimes this moisture moves, and it is small, thick, and thin.
I have shown all these causes, their symptoms and the treatment of them in the division.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to know the treatment of fistulas, which is performed by operation with a surgeon.
And know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for they are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the hernia, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or one of the joints composed in such a way as the hand and the foot; and they are those that provide proximity to the main member and similar ones.
And thus that fistula which follows this method belongs to difficult-to-heal ailments and does not receive cure, and care for it is labor and ignorance.
If the depth of one of these fistulas does not reach these places as stated, and you hope for its healing and believe in it, and wish to understand more about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula follows a straight path, touch it with it.
But if the fistula is twisted, then examine it with a probe of fine lead, because lead has the lightness of its body, and is easily curved to follow the twists.
And if the fistula has moving painful parts, it is not possible for you to probe it.
Therefore, cauterize the orifices with cautery, because the moisture you use to cauterize one will go to other orifices and spread from them.
Then you must examine carefully, according to the method that is possible for you to determine if here you have bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short in cavity, or is a fistula with many orifices and lies completely beneath the maximum of your strength, your questioning, and the examination of the patient, and the discovery of the pain must be your compression on the area, and similar to the signs and causes accidental to an abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes with true vigilance, then proceed to the healing with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is apparent near a salt spot, far from a joint, or of nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I told you.
Then you dry out the fistula according to what was said before about its nature, and stop that which is in its filtering and corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the skin, or flesh, or similar, and cure it within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of deep length and follows a straight path, it is necessary that you incise it into the preon as far as possible for you, and clean out all its corrupted flesh; and administer warm poultices covered in acute medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have enclosed with iron.
And leave it for a few watch-periods until the acute medicine has eaten up all that has been rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
Then restore it with healthy substances which produce healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it according to the method you have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify this, then examine it and dry it out according to the method you have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as you have said.
But if the bone is discovered and there is corruption and blackening in it, then cut it out until the corruption is completely stopped; and treat it with something that causes flesh to grow on it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and discharges pus as before, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and therefore investigate again with great care, make the reasoning for it and clean it with your last strength, and restore it.
And thus if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and in that case, you can do nothing but let it be.
And if the corrupted bone is small or it can be shot out, then shoot it out with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
And if the bones are moving, then you must perform a precise removal of all of them, and leave no cause for them with your strength.
But if any cause of the humors opposes you and in its incision there is no fear or error, then incise the liquid or flesh here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at your time, then stop over the wound as much as possible, and leave it until the surroundings of those bones become flesh and liquid, and guard the wound that is not consolidated, and constrain the incision which you have made during your operation.
Therefore, if you fear, stop over the wound submerged in hot oil, or a wound submerged in strong Egyptian ointment, or one of the green poultices, for when they are heated, the liquids separate from the bones and their abscesses are drained, and the attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the thigh or hip bones or similar to those, and what is rotten from it is only the face of it, then cut out the rot only from behind until the blackness and corruption is removed, and restore the wound.
If what is corrupt in him is large and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close and completely excise that and the surrounding tissue where the corruption has occurred, and then care should be taken to heal it when it has been consolidated.
Recommend to you that which happens to a man in his private part for him to restrain and assist with your operation.
A young man around 30 years of age suffered pain in his testicles and from inside the scrotum there was pus-like matter that had spread into the body interior to the scrotum, this matter is abscess with large abscess, and it is not external cause.
Therefore, the time was extended by the error of doctors until the abscess had matured, and then the matter emerged, and its healing was delayed until the scrotum became fistula, and you must make incisions in the pustules that all got pus and the humidity of the body.
Then many doctors treated it for about two years, without wisdom but in skill, until I was summoned.
And I saw the scrotum of him and the matter that flowed from those pustules through a large wound, and the body of that man was completely stabilized and his color was yellow.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those pustules and the probe reached the bone.
Then I approached and examined all the pustules and found that they were connected to all parts of the scrotum.
And then I cut into one of those pustules until I discovered a bone cavity, and found that it was corrupted, and it was already hard and corrupted and rotten; and a part of the scrotum had already been corrupted to the extent that it had penetrated into the muscle.
And then I removed what was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I found that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had been excised and removed, and I had already drained it.
And I placed the restoration of the wound with a consolidating medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
And I examined again and found over the bone according to the previous finding, and found continuous corruption around the bone.
I removed what appeared to be from that corruption, and then I was determined to perform the healing and restoration of it, but it did not heal.
And then I examined again and did not stop cutting the bone little by little specifically and continued the restoration of it, and it did not heal until I cut around an inch of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and I restored it with medicine, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
The operation and section of him was not necessary except for the provision of the firmness of it and due to the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, because he suffered in all hours due to excessive loss of syncopes.
Therefore, it is healed completely and there is nothing in the bone marrow; the arrangement of it was good in his body and the virtue of it returned; and it was kept in its arrangements and no harm was done to him in any way nor any injury in any cause.
But if the bone is prominent in the body broken, then it becomes necessary that you cut it in this way: and it is that you take hold of it firmly at its extremity and command someone to stretch it out; and place a strong linen bandage on top of it; and place it over the flesh that is left behind the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to pull the flesh apart, and you discover the flesh over the place which you want to cut, so that the cut does not injure the flesh.
And stop a table or board behind the bone properly, because when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut through the corrupt flesh.
And it is necessary that the cut be made over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the depression of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to touch, and perhaps another examination will be needed.
And if the bone is rotten and not prominent, then one part is continuously connected to the other, and the corruption is at the same place or in a part of it, then you discover all the flesh; and stop a table behind, and cut from the first part where the corruption is until the cutting of the other part is continuous.
And make the cut according to the location of the corruption, as mentioned above.
And if the corruption is at a joint, cut the corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is connected to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not rational but artifice.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption in what way it appears to you, and cut it open, clean it according to each arrangement that is possible for you, and with each artifice be corrected, provided that it does not harm veins or nerves.
Know what the saw-like instruments are for cutting these bones and which saws should be used on these bones depends on the position of the bones, the preparation of those bones, and their thickness and fineness or coarseness; therefore, you must prepare all types of equipment suitable for that operation.
E sapias that the operation signifies to you the type of instrument that is necessary; when indeed, you are skilled and experienced in the ways of this art, and witness to the methods of illnesses, therefore now you must choose for yourself what is suitable for those instruments in every disease.
E thou should make at the end of this chapter, the number of instruments which you will use as simple ones with which you will perform the prohibition that you will experience on others. Forma della sega:
Forma d'altra sega:
Forma d'altra sega grossa:
Forma di raggio: La cima di questo raggiello ha la forma di testa di chiusura a stella, e le punte sono come quelle dell'astaferaggio.
E non bisogna che le parti di congiunzione siano conforate se sono corrotte o la bocca  larga.
Forma di lame minori:
Forma di lame a forma di lato:
Forma di altra sega con arco superiore pi elevato e la punta di ferro affilata correttamente, e i bracci dello strumento sono diseguali. La forma di quella:
Forma di lame con convessit:
Forma di lame ancora pi fina:
Forma di altra lame con estremit curva:
Forma di lame piccola simile ad una freccia:
Forma di raschiatori ancora pi piccoli:
Shape of another saw-like instrument; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places in the joints of the bones:
Shape of a rasp-like instrument that serves to cut through the bone:
And its end is triangular and sharp-edged.
It is made of iron from India, and it resembles all the causes that we mentioned for rasps, scissors, and saws.
Of incision and the cutting through of bones.
The incisions can be caused intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated a corruption and the cure does not help, or the corruption spreads to a member that was not affected by any cause, then you must make an incision in the member to the depth of the corruption, so that the patient escapes death or a greater evil that is more harmful to the member.
And the sign of this is that the member turns black before it can be burned, or it may become black to the depth where the corruption enters the member and takes hold of the entire body; therefore, you must make an incision in that.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poison from certain venomous creatures such as scorpionfish, viper, or rattle snakes and similar animals.
If the corruption or poison is at the end of a finger, then you should incise the finger and not give space to the corruption to enter into the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise the arm at its joint and do not give space to the corruption to enter into the elbow of the arm.
And if it swells up (the corruption), then you should incise the arm at the shoulder joint.
If the corruption spreads beyond the shoulder and sometimes surrounds it, then in this case the patient is at death's door; and administering another cause for treatment is as good as nothing.
And similarly, if the corruption spreads to the foot and swells up the toe, then you should incise it at one of the joints (of the toe).
If it starts climbing up the foot, then you should incise the entire foot. But if it climbs into the ankle, then you should incise the calf at the ankle joint.
And if the corruption has reached the ankles, then do nothing but dismiss the patient to death.
The method of incising or sawing a member is that you strengthen the ligament on the side where you want to make the incision, and strengthen another ligament on the other side; and extend one ligament away from the incision site, and extend the other ligament over it; and separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make an incision or saw.
And it is necessary to place a layer of cloth over all the incision sites to protect them, and bring the wound to the patient dressed and covered with a cauterizing dressing.
But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should cauterize the site immediately, or apply some astringent powders to stop the bleeding; and return to your treatment when it is complete.
And place the affected member in appropriate bandages and treat it until it is healed.
And I recommend that you place the patient's foot in a splint for this accident that we both recommend, which is when the blackness occurs in the patient's foot due to burn-like blistering.
And that corruption first appears at the toe and tends to spread over the entire foot.
Therefore, the patient must prepare himself by putting on thick socks to protect the foot from the intensity of the pain and burn-like blistering, and then incise the foot at the joint and heal it.
For a long time, that insidious corruption occurred in the finger of the hand, indicated.
And so it was with me, and I performed the necessary removal of that superfluity over the hand with the application of medicines, and the superfluity did not recur and began to spread to another finger starting from the hand.
And he called on me to incise the hand of that person, but I did not want to do it because of the risk of recurrence of the superfluity, and instead I feared the incision of the hand would cause death, as the patient's strength was failing.
And so he lost hope in me and returned to his homeland, but I learned that the man had prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and he was healed.
And this narrative is not meant to be read as entertainment but as guidance for dealing with this illness and as a sign of the significance of such treatment.
Treat the wound properly and carefully, using appropriate cleansing solutions and medications.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until pus collection occurs, then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is released from it, leaving a hollow cavity behind like a vessel, covered with thin fabric such as linen, and no secondary corruption occurs, and no pressure is applied to the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called sinus, and not fistula.
If the space is prolonged before corruption affects any member, it is called a fistula and not a wound.
The treatment for it is that the wound is stitched up in the same way as a loop is turned, and especially when it becomes thin and is sewn with linen, making sure it does not stick to the place due to corruption.
But if you hope that the wound will stick and if corruption has not yet been achieved by a wrong sequence of events, and there is swelling in the wound, then you cure it with a suppository.
And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the mucus that comes out of it has a fetid odor, then you purge it with an Egyptian remedy which is made of oil, vinegar and ginger, which are ground together and divided into portions, and put in a container, and placed over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the desired consistency.
Then take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; purge the sinus with this, strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.
Then extract it with care; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the odor has subsided.
Sometimes it is purged with water made from ashes, when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ash of burnt wheat, put it in water, let it settle, then collect it and purge the sinus with it until you are confident that the sinus has stopped.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water made from ashes, then purge it with water and honey mixed with ginger crushed, or with vinegar and honey mixed, for by nature honey is cleansing and washing, and vinegar makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of bitterness and dryness in the vinegar.
And when you have done this for some days and are confident that the sinus has subsided, then purge it with a liquid that makes the flesh come out of it.
And you take diaphonicon, dissolve it in oil of roses and vinegar of bitterness; or you purge it with various medicines and other remedies that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on clysters.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and the canula of the clyster cannot be received in it, then you gradually widen it with a small iron, pausing when it is covered with Egyptian or basilicon oil until it is sufficiently widened.
Similarly, if the opening is wide, then you stitch up the lips of it with suture and leave it in a size such that the clyster does not protrude from it.
And if the opening of which the mucus comes out is elevated at the partings above it, then dry it in the pus-like place where it is located so that the mucus flows back inside, because when the mucus is obstructed in the sinus, flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the bone pus-like area as you wish, then prepare the member by preparing it with the preparation that allows the mucus to flow out easily and without being obstructed by any cause of the mucus.
But the one that is over the opening of the sinus, which you always wash to let out whatever is inside it. So that you know if what comes out from the mucus is liquid or solid, or undigested.
And with this you observe the location of the sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess there.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this way, and the matter that was deposited on the opening of the sinus has already adhered or shows signs of adhesion, then you should loosen it or wait three days, and when the wound is loosened, then change the linen fabric for another and renew the oil.
But if the sinus has a long space with subtle virus, do not despair of its adhesion, for healing is approaching, because some men have slow regeneration of flesh in their wounds and this is opposite to that.
And if the sinus has been discharging undigested mucus for many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and this is prolonged, then you adjust it with a drying treatment, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their effect, they should be dried as with diaphonicon, when there is excess addition of zinc.
The patient's last aid is to take a thick, dissolved defugation in rose oil and place it on the affected area, and then bandage it using that.
When there is no other remedy, take thickened honey and apply it; or take myrrh and aloes, grind them all together into a powder and sprinkle it over the heated honey, then draw a line with that mixture onto linen and strengthen it with wax; draw a line on the honey-covered area that you have thickened, and sprinkle more of the powdered mixture onto linen and strengthen it again.
When used occasionally, administer the long-term aristology of celestial lily (which is celestial lily) and flour made from fennel seeds and centaury, and use those simple ingredients or adjust as necessary, grind them and sift them into a powder, sprinkle that over the honey.
If the sinus prolongs and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption is in its front part, and it starts to attack the bones or other hard parts or ligaments; you should treat it with fistula treatment, as described above.
Treatment for paronychia and cuticle removal, nail trimming, and incision.
Paronychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the toe or finger, and it grows stronger in other places, and when prolonged and its cure is delayed, it can become an abscess or rot, and it eats away at the root of the nail, rotting it completely, and its corruption spreads to the bone underneath, making the end of the finger putrid, and the color becomes dark.
Therefore, when you have the above mentioned condition and your treatment does not improve, it is necessary that you cut off all the excess rotten part of the nail and cauterize the affected area with hot iron, as cauterization is helpful in this case.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, but the additions of the nail press the skin at the sides inside, and it starts to hurt and swell there, you should pause a thin needle at the angle where the nail penetrates the skin, push it through, and cut the affected skin with ease, and pause medicines containing corrosive substances on what remains of the skin until it is completely healed; then treat the area with an ointment until it is cured.
If corruption has already entered the bone, you should cut and extract it because there is no cure for a rotten bone.
If the corruption and rot are spreading in the finger, you should cut it open at one of its nodes according to its memory (meaning: where it hurts most), and then treat the area until it is healed.
If the nail has been percussed or crushed, and pain is very intense, you should first anesthetize the patient, then cut the nail with a sharp knife in a transverse section from top to bottom, but make sure that the cut does not reach the skin below the nail, because it will cause severe pain to the patient and can lead to the growth of superfluous tissue at the site; then treat the area with what relieves pain.
Adjusted digit (a common condition in many men), which is entirely flesh, and it is very strong in bones, or it is very strong in the nail.
Some are born with the condition of the joint, or they have it in the knuckles of the fingers. A person born with a condition of the finger knuckle is not ill, but one who is born with a joint disorder is sick.
For those who are born with fleshiness, the section is easy, and it should be cut with a thin knife.
But for those who are born with joint disorders, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of an abscess forming there.
For the one born with a condition of the finger, it is necessary to first cut the skin around the knuckle with a round incision into the bone, then use a suitable saw and treat the area until it is healed.
Consolidation that happens in the fingers due to various conditions or by birth of the person with such condition, or due to plague consolidation or burn from fire, or similar, it is necessary to cut off that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
Place a thin layer of lead between them in rose oil to prevent them from easily consolidating, or separate them with a piece of thin fabric until they are consolidated as needed.
Similarly, if there is consolidation in the palm of the hand, you should cut off that consolidation according to its preparation and the shape of the member.
Incision of vessels results in varicose veins.
Vessels are varicose veins, which are large swollen veins filled with melancholic waste that move in the body's members, and their greatest danger is in the legs, especially in travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Then you should administer the body's purge of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and return blood to the patient from the basilic vein.
The cure for them is according to two methods: the first one is that it should be cut and the black bile extracted, and the second method is that the vein should be raised and everything removed.
The incision is performed according to this method: first, the vein should be wrapped with warm water until the thick black bile is dissolved, which is mucus from the vein, and then tightly bind the patient's leg above the knee and below the groin with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one, two or three places, and cut the vein widely, and raise the black bile with the patient's own hand from below the vein upwards and downwards until the desired amount and the number of times you want to extract it have been achieved, and the patient's condition will improve.
Then tie it up, and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full, and you notice this in the patient.
The raising of the area is performed according to this method: you should wash the patient's leg if there are sores, and then immerse his leg in warm water until it swells up and the veins are filled; or exercise it with strong exercise, if washing is not available, until the member is softened.
And cut the cordon on the side of the vein in a long or short incision, depending on whether it is on the right side of the vein or the left, or at the bottom of it you must do this.
And open the cordon with scissors and expose the vein from all sides until you can feel it, and you should know that the pain decreases when it turns black.
And since it is swollen and you see that the cordon is white, you should open the cordon and expose the vein.
Then you should place the lance beneath it until it is raised and displaced from the cordon, and suspend it with a lion's claw.
And cut another incision opposite the first one for three fingers' width, and expose the cordon above the vein up to where it appears.
And raise that and incise the lower incision at the bottom of it, and extract that and raise that up to where it comes out through the second incision, and extract that from the incision above it.
And do this until the entire cord is extracted from the higher or lower incision or all of the incisions, until it has been completely removed; then close that incision.
If you find that it is difficult to extract and raise, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it off, or place the lance beneath it and turn your hand all around until it is dislodged. And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise it and may cause harm to the patient because of this injury.
And when that entire cord is dislodged, place a dressing over the wound soaked in wine and olive oil, both red and white, and heal it until it is healed.
And if the wound is contracted with tortuosity in which there is adhesion at the sides, and it is not straight as we have said, you must cut it all along the side of the tortuosity and the places of adhesion, and suspend it with scissors until you raise it completely.
Be careful to make your incision without cutting the vein and damaging it, for it will be difficult to raise it, and use your judgment in this matter.
The form of the incision that is performed on a contracted vein:
It is not appropriate to apply it like a nail or of sharp extremity so as not to harm the vein; and it is of large flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having excessive thickness like we said.
Translation: Extraction of leg vein. (Meaning: Removal of a vein from the leg.)
This vein is generated in the knees, such as in the Egyptian lands in the Arabian deserts and in the Indian lands with little vegetation and where there is no grass or herbs.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body other than the knees.
And its formation is due to corruption, which comes from the bowels such as venom that escapes inside the body and snakes, worms, scabies and worms multiplying between the bowels and flesh.
A sign of the onset of this condition is the swelling of the knee, which becomes extremely inflamed; and place your hand over it, as it begins to emit a vein similar in appearance to a plant from the site of that inflammation.
When the fetus appears at the end, it is necessary to cover it with a lead weight of a pound or two and leave it suspended from the bed.
And whenever any signs of that condition appear outside, cover it with lead and secure it in place. And if it persists, you should make an incision there and cover the remaining part; do not incise that which is visible outside, as incising it will cause contraction, entering the flesh and causing abscesses, pus, and a bad ulcer at the site.
Therefore, it must be treated gently and extracted slowly, until it is completely expelled from the body without any remaining cause within the body.
And from this vein, it has been expelled in some men who are of the length of five palms (approximately 18 inches) and I have heard that one as long as twenty palms has also been expelled.
And if it is incised during treatment, insert the lance into its depth and perforate it lengthwise with the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer corruption of the site for several days with medicines; and care for it as you would treat abscesses.
This vein sometimes stops growing, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it often causes abscesses, and is extracted from each abscess separately.
Therefore, treat it as previously described and with what has been mentioned above.
On incision of worms generated under the skin, it is called bovine illness (cattle sickness).
This illness is known in some lands as "bovine disease" because it often invades cattle and is a rare worm that develops between the bowels and flesh, moves throughout the body, and eventually breaks through the skin, displaying symptoms in different parts of the body until the bowel is ruptured and it comes out.
The generation of this condition is due to the corruption of certain humors such as worms, snakes, larvae, and tapeworms in the abdomen.
It is feared because of its malicious nature, as when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can cause a severe cough, enter the brain, and destroy it, causing numerous symptoms in various parts of the body.
Therefore, when you want to cure and remove it, do not proceed if its movement and appearance have not been observed, and it is necessary to strengthen the area above and below it and apply constant pressure, and then press firmly and dry the affected area before extracting it.
And if it is incised in the flesh but not completely penetrated, then you pause cauterizing fire upon that spot, and the main fear is corruption of the wound by which the site is also corrupted as has been said.
If it comes to the head of the nose, you apply pressure above the eyebrow with strong tightening and wipe it, and pull it out; be sure that the patient uses purgatives for their body and medications that evacuate putrid humors, and keep away from foods causing putrefaction.
From incision to the pain of the nose.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that occurs in some members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
And you have already seen it according to what I advised. You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you found her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was cut open for an hour, I saw that inflammation swell as if worms were crawling towards this, but less noticeably than blood flowing from place to place. Like silver flowing from one place to another.
And then the pain moved to that spot and settled in the muscle, and here it stayed for an hour.
It went back into the other body towards the other arm.
And I advise you to rotate the body all around as I saw; and it was very marveled at by the change and the speed of the member to member. You have already seen such cases in the most serious wounds according to that method, but I have also seen some who had pain transmitted from member to member. But not as in the woman's case.
And I did not think it was that kind of case because the woman was old, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this case, it appeared to me as a kind of wind transmitted by sensation.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have bodies with soft veins weakened.
As you want the healing of it, and the patient feels that pain, do not press on the wound as has been said, but instead apply pressure gently and wipe it until the constriction subsides, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it in your wounds, then you cure it by purging the body and expelling wind, and administer pills made of figs and fig-tree leaves and similar remedies.
From the extraction of sutures.
Sutures are of various types according to their species and the parts of the body where they are located, because of their diversity, some have large points, small ones, concave ones, dull ones, solid ones; some have three corners, those that have tongues, and those called stitches.
From the signs of the server is when you find a suture passing through bone, exiting from the skull which is above the brain, because this often causes intense headache, blindness, dizziness, burning in the wounds, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, strong fever is separated from speech and destroyed voice, and white pus-like discharge comes out of the wound, similar to the moisture of meat.
And so, if these signs appear to you, you should abstain from treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
If the signs of an arrow in the heart occur, which is near the left breast and felt as if it were lodged in a hard place and not empty, and its movement resembles that of the pulse, and there is a black blood flow from the wound, and such chilliness at the extremities, shivering, sweating, and fainting; then know that death approaches.
The signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are certainly of foamy blood from the wound, and vessels near the neck are filled, and the patient's complexion is changed, and exhales a strong spirit and demands cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the scrotum which is in the groin area, and the pain occurs near the small ribs, it is accompanied by great and violent pain and shortness of breath, and not all the body muscles are affected.
If the arrow strikes the stomach, there will be a strong flow of undigested food from the wound.
If the arrow strikes the abdomen and lodges there, there will be a fissure from the wound, or tissues, or an intestine that has been torn apart, and there is no hope in the removal of the arrow for healing.
If the arrow strikes the bladder and passes out through urine, and there is some cause for rupture outside, and the pain on the patient is strong, then know that it is deadly.
However, other parts of the body such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, ribs, spine, furcula (clavicle), pelvis, and their similar members are saved according to the greater precautions if the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery and is not poisonous.
And I recommend to you that I have seen the nature of these arrows, which means by this to use caution in treating them.
The reason is that in a man, an arrow entered the tear duct of his eye during a nosebleed, and I extracted it from the other side without damaging the eyebrow, and it healed, and no harm came to his eye.
I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the eyebrow during a nosebleed, tearing away the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden, not discovered except for a small tip that adhered to his handle, and it was a sharp Turkish arrow with a lion head without teeth.
The Jew was saved, and there was no serious harm done to his eye.
I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the throat, an Arabic arrow with teeth, and it was embedded in his neck; then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; then I softened it with the guide, and I carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in the stomach, and I thought he would die because of it; but since thirty days had passed without any change due to his precautions, I incised it and threaded it, and he was healed, and there was no serious harm done.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound was healed over it, and after six years, I extracted the arrow from the wound.
I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her stomach, and the wound was healed within it, and there was no change in her condition over six years, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face and the wound was healed over it, and the arrow was removed without causing much pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
I extracted the arrow from the man of the king which had lodged in his nose in the worst possible location and had declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
I was called upon to treat him within three days of the arrow wounding.
Then I examined the wound of the arrow, and it was not very deep; then I examined it carefully with subtlety, but I did not feel it; however, I felt a prick under the right eyebrow, and so I hoped that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
I spread out the area with ointment containing an attractive and digestive property, assuming that the wound would open up so that the arrow could be seen.
Nothing serious happened at the site where the arrow had lodged; and I continued with the ointment for many days, but there was no change; and over time the wound healed, and the patient was cured by waiting several days before he felt the arrow in his nose again and reported this to me.
Then I applied an aggressive and corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe I discovered that it was the tip of the arrow that had adhered to the shaft.
Approach and adjust the incision in the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visible to my sight, and pass the time with it for the space of time up to four months.
Once the wound has been expanded, and it is possible for me to insert forceps into it, leave that in place and do not move it excessively. Then continue to refine and work on it with various techniques until one day using forceps carefully made, according to the shape that will come at the end of this section, begins to take hold of it; and after extracting it, restore the wound.
And certain doctors have judged that the cartilage of the nose has not been restored, and I will restore it, and the wound is healed, and the patient recovers health entirely without any further problems.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you pause this rule and meaning over that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that one are not understandable through narration or do not comprehend those freely.
And the wise craftsman compares little with much; and he takes into account what is present about what is absent; and you should apply new operation and new instruments to the removal of foreign causes in the art when it occurs.
Therefore, I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members in which they have been placed except by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is lodged or by the opposite side of the other side.
And that which has been shot into the place where it enters or is an arrow originating from a fleshly location and shot out of place.
And if you do not move it excessively at the time when it catches, then you must leave it for some days until the surrounding flesh can be softened and relieved of its attraction and exit.
Similarly, if it is lodged in bone and you do not move it excessively, then leave it for some days and gradually move it with traction and motion every day, and it will be extracted.
And if you do not move it excessively for some days, then you must perforate the circumference of the arrow in that bone on all sides with a fine tool until the location is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is deeply hidden in the chest and is felt, then you investigate it with exploration, and if you feel it, then shoot it out with various tools appropriate for its attraction.
And if you cannot move it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the pus, and this is not bone, nerve or vein, then you make an incision over the wound until it is expanded and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are arrows lodged in the ear with which care must be taken, then you remove the flesh surrounding it on all sides with all the ingenuity that you can; and apply ingenuity to it, if you cannot move out of the flesh due to the fracture of the auricles and twisting of those until it becomes necessary.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps at all sides until it becomes obedient; and refine it with the finest refinement so that the arrow does not break and is made difficult to extract.
If you cannot move it at your time, then leave it for some days until the parts surrounding it can be softened, and then gradually move it when you are relieved. If there is opposition to the flow of blood (hemorrhage), then you administer what has been said in its chapter on treatment.
Moreover, observe the virtue of incision in vein or nerve, or cord, and apply means to prevent the suture from escaping; and do it with ease, calm, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
And therefore, tighten the suture to make the patient be in the figure as you should place the suture in it, because it is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures (or shapes).
But the sutures that have been lost on one side or that have separated from the other part, or if some part has protruded from the suture, or if it bulges out because of the upper layer (or skin) and sometimes even more; then you sew over it; and make the incision according to the amount by which the forceps take hold; and pull it back, since it is easily pulled out.
But if it is held in the bone, then you twist the scalpel against the suture as necessary until the suture enters the bone, and widen the hole made by it, and pull it out.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process until it comes out.
And if the suture is in it (the wound or tissue), you push it out with something.
But if the suture is cut and you wish to apply pressure, you insert a probe into it (the wound or tissue), if it is narrow, a concave stirrup so that it enters the concavity of the suture and then push it in with something.
But if the suture is concave, you push it out with a strong probe entering it, because the suture is relieved by it.
And if the suture is contracted, you must convex all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then care for it with what is appropriate.
And if the suture catches in the foot, or stomach, bladder, ribs, and is near where you touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to sew over it, then you sew over it and be careful not to incise a vein or nerve, pull it out, close the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used for suturing:
They have ends shaped like bird beaks, which are made with scissors when they take hold of the suture to prevent it from slipping.
And from these (forceps) are made various types, large, few and medium-sized, according to the size of the suture and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the tightness of the tissue.
Similar to a rod to relieve the insertion in the concave suture and is pushed with that one.
Of vein lancing (or phlebotomy).
The veins of phlebotomy, which it is customary to puncture with a lancet numbered 30. of which it is in the head, sixteen [parts or areas] These are the pulsating veins, which are approximately at the ears, say earlobes; two herbs that appear in both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes called lachrymal ducts; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two arteries that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins called angelic ones; and two veins that are below the tongue. The veins that are punctured in the arms are five [veins]. One of those is the cephalic vein, and it is the latissimus dorsi vein; the common people call it "the vein of the head", and it's deaf (or silent), and it's a minor vein, and it has one branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic vein; it is called "the vein of the whole body", and the basilic vein is punctured in the cubital fossa, and it is called "cubital", and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; the cephalic vein, which is in the arm, runs along the forearm, and it is the one that is punctured, and it appears above the pulse for a clear appearance; the saphenous vein, which is between the greater auricular vein and the smallest digit, and it has two branches.
And in the foot and the calf there are three veins: one of them is below the curve of the latissimus dorsi muscle; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the arm; the sciatic vein, and its location is below the calf of the leg; and in the calf there are other veins that are similar to these.
The aid for the veins that are near the ears is against old catarrhs, migraines, and headaches, as well as old ulcers of the scalp.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is as I recommend to you: it should be shaved the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital region at the location where both veins are with a large cloth with good friction; place a strong bandage around the patient's neck that covers the areas near the ears on two pressure points of the head; and have that done with your own hand, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your own hand, here try it.
Take the surgical lancet (which is pointed), and insert it below the vein in the cudena (the groove on the inside of the arm) until the blood comes out to the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and the cudena (the groove on the inside of the arm) to the crease above, and make an incision in the vein using a sharp blade or lancet. And the length of the incision should be adjusted to two fingers or around that amount; and make the incision as deep as you want, letting the blood flow out as much as desired.
And apply pressure on the pulse and press it until it is healed (or stops bleeding).
And it has been previously mentioned at the beginning of this text the incision and cauterization of those (veins).
But of the two arteries that are in the temples, the aid for bloodletting is against old migraines and chronic diseases of the eyes, and excess acute fluids in the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those (veins) is as I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck so that both veins appear by sensation (palpation) and make sure that the pulse of their veins can be felt with your own hand; then proceed with the bloodletting.
Then you raise the bandage above the vein at the parting as indicated, insert the lancet and incise it, then lift the vein upward; incise it in the same manner as you have done with the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the amount of your necessity.
Then you release the constriction of the patient and place your fingers on the vein for an hour, then apply pressure on that spot and massage it strongly, leaving it alone until it is healed.
Here the memory of theirs, and of those (veins), the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book are explained.
Therefore, the aid of frontal vein lancing is similar to the lancing of the facial vein for ancient patients with facial migraines, headaches, and putrid ulcers.
The quality of the lancing (procedure) is as you recommend; that is, the patient should press their neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this shape:
Place the point of the lancet at the tip of the instrument on that vein and hit it obliquely or with another cause in its manner, letting the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and leave it alone until it is healed.
And some veins are opened with a lancet, but it is not necessary that the lancet should be of an acute tip like other lancets, instead it should have a blunt tip, and lance it transversely, as the bone is close and strong; if the lancet is thin, it could break the bone during the lancing.
The aid of the two veins that are in the eyelids for scabies of the eyes due to headache and swelling in the eyes, and face diseases.
The quality of the lancing (procedure) is that the patient should press their neck with a bandage and you lance them; you should be standing over their head.
The lancing should be done transversely to the length a little and make a few shallow lancetings, as there is not much flesh in that area; if the lancet is thin, its tip could break off.
Make the blood flow as much as necessary and press on those spots, hold them for a moment, and then release them.
The lancing of the nose vein is given for acute fever and strong sodium, as well as face diseases, migraines, and headaches that occur on the face, especially in older people.
The quality of the lancing (procedure) is that the patient should press their neck and place your left hand under their nose, take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the nostril as indicated, as the vein cannot be felt here, and blood will start flowing immediately.
You should move the lancet slowly along your hand and make blood flow as much as necessary; then release it for a moment, as it heals quickly.
The aid of the lancing of both guiding veins helps with alopecia and the beginning of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, itching, and painful, corrosive ulcers like herpetiformis.
The quality of the lancing (procedure) for those veins is that the patient should press their neck with a pillow and be seated on a chair. The artist should be standing over the patient's head.
Make the long vein lancing with a broad thin lancet, and move it along slowly, taking out blood at a measured amount or as much as you see necessary for that purpose; and make the same incision in the other vein.
Release the pillow and apply gentle pressure to both veins with slight constriction, so that the patient is not discomforted; leave it for a while until the wound heals.
The aid of the lancing of veins in the region (around the mouth), is given for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of gums, painful ulcers, and fissures, as well as ulcers that are around the nose and in its vicinity.
The quality of the lancing (procedure) for those veins is that you should hold the patient's mouth open, and press their neck with a bandage; then rotate their lips and observe the two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each of them, and this is more noticeable because there are small black veins in that area; then incise each one with an incision.
If there is doubt as to which one they are, incise the larger of the two and the one with more pus.
Make an incision in the same manner as those veins on the lips.
The aid of both veins that are under the tongue is given for the lancing of the facial vein for toothaches, throat diseases, and mouth diseases.
The quality of leeching those is that the patient lies down with his face towards the sun, raises his tongue, and looks down at it, from one side of it a vein appears and from the other side another vein, and the color of each one is darkening.
Then, bleed each one; be careful not to injure your hand when bleeding them, because these are veins.
Your veins that are to be bled in the arm are the ones where bleeding is common in all men, and the venesection of these is done according to two methods: either they put mulberry or olive oil at a fine consistency, which is then inserted into the vein; or they cut with a scalpel, and call it alnessil, and this is the method:
The veins may appear like this sometimes, and it is necessary to open the concave full veins that seem thick, especially those containing coagulated blood.
This type of bleeding is smaller and has a thinner and more delicate end, and it is suitable for the bleeding of subtle veins containing thin citrus blood.
The bleeding of the basilic vein is beneficial because it is one of three veins: because it drains the blood from the patient's head and neck, and from that which soaks the feet and stomach.
It is necessary for the bleeder to be careful when bleeding that one, as it has an artery nearby, and if you make a mistake and pierce the vein during bleeding, you will cut the artery and cause bleeding, so it is important not to bleed that one with a sharp needle, but instead to cut it like alnessil.
If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, you must leave it and move on to the other one or look for a branch; or bleed in the place where the end of the arm is, as that appears clearly, and cut it with alnessil as we have said.
If you want to bleed the elbow, it is necessary in front of the arm's bend that you touch the place between where you know the wrist is and cover it with a cloth; and place your hand on it and cut the vein with a concave incision using alnessil as we have said, and be careful not to hit the area of the artery.
When you see the patient experiencing pain, swelling appears in the place that you have covered with a cloth, and that swelling is a sign of an injured artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood flow during bleeding like that of a child's urine and the blood is thin red, then you know it is arterial blood; in that case, you should press and hold your hand on the area for a long time; and if the blood flows out, which means it has been cut, you should tighten the arm and leave it.
Keep the patient away from his urine, and be cautious of him lest he move it for several days until it is healed.
If the abscess is not incised and you do not have medicine available, then cut the artery if it appears; since the extremity becomes constricted and the blood drains out; or take a probe and open the fistula, take one bandage and apply strength to that area on the location of the vein with narrowing, with lint inside for another day.
If the abscess is incised, that's good; otherwise, treat it with the liquid from which the memory of the location of the powder for draining blood remains.
The abscess draining from the wound is difficult due to its small size and the possibility of using a lint bandage.
Moreover, the dark vein's phlebotomy is beneficial for draining blood from the subcranial part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it consists of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins as we said.
The phlebotomist should be cautious during the phlebotomy, because after that is a nerve; and if you press in the puncture of the phlebotomy and crush the nerve, it will cause stupor, and healing will be difficult, and weak people will not heal completely. This nerve can often be seen; and if it is hidden at some men and subtle and not visible, then you must stop the phlebotomy with the one you have already started, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then you make the vein in length.
The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves the pains in the skull.
In this case, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive-leaf phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; because it is safe for all veins, since neither artery nor nerve is present there.
Moreover, weak people can have an abscess in some men, when it is not drained during the initial percussion, but don't be alarmed if such an abscess appears.
The first point is that you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and with hope for recovery and caution to avoid illness, and that it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the cavity: cephalic, dark (fusca), or basilic; and that it should be done at the beginning of spring, before breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near food intake, when signs of repletion appear.
And the phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or on the first day following a passage of three hours from the previous day.
Phlebotomy that is administered, but only when it is convenient and necessary, or at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
Children should not be phlebotomized before they reach the age of twelve, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized unless during the fourth to seventh month, and old people should not be phlebotomized if they are already over sixty years old.
When someone wants to be lanced in any manner, it is necessary to clean the intestines before lancing with leon's clyster (enema), if there is a large wound held back, so that superfluous blood does not enter the lancing of the intestines, which are pure, and does not harm the main members.
Lancing should not be performed on patients with nausea, vomiting, sickness, drunkenness or illness, nor should it be done until the ailment is cured, unless the patient has dropsy, and lancing is feared due to colic pain, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive creation of bile and exercise of fasting or vigils, and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporal or animal.
Then, in subtle diagnosis of humors before the sanction (surgery), consider if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
Then enter the bath if there is no prohibition, or exercise for some activity to make the blood thin.
Stop lancing on the foot during the day, unless it is around three hours as we have said.
Therefore, keep the foot guarded during that day from all bad animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear and from all corporeal accidents such as excessive labor, pain, fever and those similar to them.
In the selection of remedies, consider the causes for which men usually use aromatics, fragrances and balms and similar substances according to their quantity of possibility.
Follow the lancer over a cushion that is softer than the one of the patient who is to be lanced.
Then stretch out your arm, and wash it with your hand, the lancer two or three times; then tighten the linen bandage and wrap it two times.
The tightening should be moderated, because excessive or superfluous tightening causes the blood not to flow; or if it is for softening, then prevent the heart of the blood from flowing in that way.
Then, the tightening must be done so that the patient washes his hands with water between them until the veins are inflated and detected by sensation.
The lancer anoints his lancing spot with a little antique oil properly; then place your left hand on the vein, over the location of the desired lancing, so that the vein protrudes a little and the percussion is quiet because sometimes the veins behave like cords flee when pressure is applied, and from those comes the windiness and when you press the lancing spot, the vein contracts and is discovered; and the lancer does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is tightened.
Therefore, for this reason, the lancer must be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then pause the lancing, but if the vein is visible in one attempt, that's good; and if not, you wait a little more at that spot or impatiently, if it is not marked.
If the spot is marked or the patient feels pain, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage too tightly because heat attracts abscesses cautiously, nor enter the bath.
Repeat the lancing if necessary.
If the opening is small and the blood flows thinly and you fear that there will not be enough blood, repeat the lancing in that spot according to the rule and adjust the opening slightly, and do it quickly before the spot is marked because in many people, the spot is marked by little opening.
But if it is already marked, do not repeat on it, because you have no excuse; and pause over some part of the oil opening, because it helps the blood flow. It is better in that spot to use oil than other oils.
Similarly, an oil opening is administered in all lancings where the prohibition of blood flow applies and they do this by using turpentine and sage when it is paused on one of them over the spot because the blood is thinned and is turned when it is thick.
If an abscess is generated in the location of lancing (incision), which often happens and more so in cases where the bleeding is not immediate but only after observation or the opening of a vein with little blood flow, and then you cauterize, place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly scalded, and keep it for an hour as it dissolves.
It is necessary to tie the vein with that blood or another vein.
If it remains in the place for several days with black or green discoloration, do not notice it; if you want to, place some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved or some cause of mint juice or camphor or similar on it.
Abscesses and swellings often occur, so make incisions in the armpit.
Therefore place your hand on it, and if you notice that it becomes soft, then apply compression to it, as the swelling is bad; and therefore make sure to place some cause of what has been mentioned there, because it will flow strongly from the artery blood.
Apply a plaster with the substance that has astringent properties, so that the place is hardened, and treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
It is necessary to draw blood from all people according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color that appears in the blood as it emerges.
Because if the blood is black, you let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly, if it is thick, you let it flow out until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you keep the sharpness for a while.
It is necessary for someone who is full and strong and has the need to draw blood in one day, that the incision of the vein be deepened and the incisions be wide.
And in someone who is weak, it should be done the opposite of that, and it is necessary to draw it out too often, and the wound should be narrow.
The best that can be administered in vein lancing is a cross section, not a puncture.
This method of vein lancing is safe from bleeding and injury to nerves, and it is more admirable and safer than lancing according to the latitude and longitude.
In someone who often faints, it is necessary to administer a small piece of bread infused in milk of magnesia or simple camphor scalded before the lancing, and draw blood from that place in three or four days.
If there is compression due to swelling, take something before the lancing to infuse with myrrh syrup or scented honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or scented syrup with a fragrance.
If fainting occurs due to blood loss, it is necessary to take something to drink water with a subtle fragrance and scented syrup before the lancing; use an aromatic substance with something and limit its legs with that.
Use the other causes mentioned in the section on fainting for evacuation.
Whoever wants to purify their arm and dissolve their blood according to the day, it is necessary for someone who has lancing as a means of evacuation, and whose virtue is fragile, to gradually evacuate the blood according to the amount of its virtue in continuous days.
But whoever wants to purify their arm and release the blood several times, and their body is strong, do this about seven or nine hours after the first lancing.
But whoever wants to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of its descent, it is necessary that it be purified on the second or third day.
But in someone whose blood is already scalded and sharp and causes fever, it is necessary to draw out that blood in one day and a large amount and widen the incision until fainting occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of lancing; and you must place your hand on the pulse of the blood, to prevent death from occurring due to fainting, because many times this happens when the lancer is ignorant and negligent.
It is not necessary that when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood according to the day, as the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to draw out the blood, that you press hard on it with force and extend it slightly, because that is very bad.
Leave it until it is lanced again; or remedy that with the sharpness of the incision that coagulates the blood in the vein orifices; or place something made of tarragon, or sage, on it and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
If the vein is abscessed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the abscess is calm.
If you are forced to evacuate the blood again, and it is not an excuse, then mark the place or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "the cord of the arm" is tapped at the location of the groin or basilica, when it is not contracted or hidden, because it consists of those.
The quality of the tapping at that location is that the patient immerses their hand in cold water until the needle becomes thick and the vein appears clearly.
Then tie it tightly with a ligature or tight bandage around the area where there is a narrow vein; and tap the vein perpendicularly, not transverse or longitudinally.
Make a wide opening and your tapping should be on the joint of the arm where there is a small vein.
If the flow of blood is forbidden, you immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into it until you achieve your purpose.
However, if it is summer days, you are excused from immersing the hand in cold water, and in winter the heart of blood must not be cooled by cold water.
The tapping of this vein is safer than all other veins because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
The tapping of the tendon of the right arm is given to patients with liver disease.
The quality of the tapping at that location is to tie your hand tightly or the patient's hand, then immerse it in cold water until the vein swells and is clearly visible; and tap it transversely; if you are unable to find the vein with this method, it will not be useful.
And remember not to harm your hand in tapping, because nerves are exposed there without flesh.
Then immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run in it, because if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening, and it is forbidden to flow.
And when the blood is drawn in the required quantity, you must stop it on the oil and salt vein to prevent it from clotting; and similarly, you must do the same with all branches.
However, the benefit of tapping that of the left arm is for patients with spleen disease.
Do the same in tapping at this location as you have done in the other.
The benefit of tapping the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as dysentery, retention of menstruation, lung problems and ulcers of breasts and old wounds, and similar diseases.
The quality of the tapping at that location is that the patient immerses their foot in cold water and makes friction on it until the veins appear; then place a rope around the ankle; and the area of the vein, you must press the toe down so that it appears clearly, and from there it branches out to the sole of the foot many times.
Therefore, tapping on the wide part of the sole or below the joint you must press down with the addition of water, because it is better and more effective.
If you tap on the sole of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are located below it on the sole of the foot, and place your tapping so that it is perpendicular to the vein, as if you wanted to puncture it.
Let the tap be sharp.
However, if the withdrawal of blood is forbidden; you immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood run out of it until it is evacuated.
If the tapper is wrong in the first examination, you must immerse it again with tapping a little more, because the location is good; and do not fear the trickery, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
Do the same with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
And from the sciatic vein, the location as we have said should be pressed down below the hip of the thigh.
The benefit of tapping at that location is for back pain when it is due to blood clots.
The quality of the tapping at that location is that the patient bathes and holds their buttocks tight from the waist to below the fourth finger with a long narrow bandage, which is not visible unless it is done so.
Therefore, when it appears, you must tap it according to the method that is possible for you and perpendicularly, which is better; or pierce it through puncture or cut it by section, because the location is good.
It is in many weak men who are constipated; and if it is contracted there, and is not felt at all, you must tap any branch of it, and it is the one that appears near the heel opposite the ear lobe and the ankle.
Be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow in the desired quantity.
Then loosen the tight bandage and place on the site of the tapping carefully and hold it firmly because it heals quickly.
From ventosection and the qualities of using those.
Ventosections are for corns, warts or veins.
Gout is made in two ways: one way is through incision and bleeding, the other way is through ventosication without incision.
This ventosication that is with incision is according to two ways, for it can be with fire or without fire.
The locations where ventosication with incision and bleeding are administered are twelve in the body, of which one is where ventosications are placed, which is at the nape of the neck - the last part of the head; the midpoint of the collarbone from both sides; ventosications on the chin behind the mouth; ventosications with two spatulas; ventosications for an abscess, and it is over the end of the cavity; ventosications with two bellows, they are of two forearms; ventosications of two cuisses; and ventosications of two cuishes.
Ventosication does not draw blood from the veins, but rather from small scattered vessels in the flesh, and thus its effect is not achieved by this method as it is with lancing; nor is it necessary that ventosication be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion before the entire body is evacuated.
But if it is necessary to perform ventosication due to illness or continuous, administer it at any time during the beginning and end of the month, as well as in its midpoint and at some other time.
And therefore, when it is seen in any of these cases and especially if it is during the third or middle of the month, then command ventosication to be performed after more than two or three hours have passed.
In addition to ventosication of the neck, it is also that when it causes gravity in the head and what happens is that it sinks into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
This ventosication is in the location of lancing of the cephalic vein.
And it is not appropriate to use it for complete purge or in cases of catarrh, as this causes great harm.
Therefore, it is not necessary to use it on the elderly or those with cold heads (diseases).
But in the case of continuous bleeding on that spot, it is necessary to command the ventosicator to pause his hand a little at the opening, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But ventosication of the axilla is in the location of lancing of the vein of the arm and the basilica: and this causes asthma, constriction of the chest and splitting of the costal cartilage, cough, and repletion.
It is necessary to prick the axillary ventosication slightly, as if it is left undone, it generates weakness in the chest and stomach.
The ventosication of alhagdahan causes accidental pains in the head and optic neuritis, emigration (spreading), inflammation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; it is in the location of lancing of the basilica vein.
It is necessary to command the ventosicator not to press his hand during incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
Ventosication behind the mouth causes alcohol in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and is similar to oral diseases that are located in the location of lancing of the alveolar vein on both lips.
But the ventosication made with two spatulas causes catarrh of the head (croup), which is caused by accumulation of heat.
In addition, the ventosication of both armpits causes lancing of three veins, namely the basilica, femoral, and cephalic, as it draws blood from all those small vessels that are in the flesh, and those small veins from other larger veins before reaching the attraction to the three veins.
Command the ventosicator not to proceed with incision as the area is exposed with flesh, and there are nerves and arteries below it.
This is a ventosication on the anus and causes hemorrhoids of the rectum and ulcers below it.
It is necessary to command the ventosicator that it be a large ventosication, and that it be on an area requiring strong incision; and strong cuts are needed for subtle ventosications and it should be incised with incision.
But the small ventosications in the chest cause blood to be drawn from the entire body, and cause old pains of coughs and malaise, as well as of the bladder; they provoke menstruation, and cause abscesses and edema; and they are located for lancing of two subclavian veins and the axillary.
The body as a whole weakens and causes fainting in many men.
From the hernias, the remedy is similar to the remedy for two-sided hernias.
The quality of the position of hernias is to place the hernia at first on a cushion and suck it with early suction, and not to prolong the position of hernias, but rather to let them rest lightly, and keep them constantly, and that the humors come to the area by chance. Do not stop repeating it and continue until you see the place redden and swell and that the pus appears from the wound.
Then you will cut and repeat the suction little by little, and be careful in the placement of the patient's body.
However, for a man with tender skin of rare pores, you must cut only once and not repeatedly, so as not to ulcerate the area.
Command the hernia surgeon to enlarge the incision and make a small wound, and take care to facilitate the suction.
And if the pus becomes thick, then you must cut twice, as in the first cutting it opens the passage for fine drainage and for the liquid to flow out. But in the second, there is a more thorough investigation of the removal of thick pus.
And if the pus is very foul-smelling, then a third cutting should be made to achieve the final result.
Lastly, when we want to extract the pus little by little or in small amounts, it is enough for us with one cutting.
And if we want to extract a large amount of pus, we must cut with many cuts; and if we know that the pus is thick, then it is necessary to cut with a deeper incision.
And the depth of incision in the term "cutting" only refers to the stitching.
And if the stitching is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the places of hernias should be treated more gently, more open, resolved; if it is in summer, as with aloe oil or violet oil, or olive oil from double-pressed olives, or oil from camomile seeds, or similar substances; and if it is in winter, use narce oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or oil of pus and similar substances.
If the excess is thick, then use oil of wormwood, balm of Gilead, aloe oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
But if the hernia surgeon has wide pores of tender skin, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and instead, wash the places of hernias with warm water or boiling water from solanum, camomile flowers, mustard, or similar substances.
And for one whose pus is of much moisture, wash the hernias with vinegar or myrtle and sumac water, similar to these substances.
And for one whose excesses are thick, wash the hernias with old vinegar, or water of mustard that is greater than camomile, or decoction of aniseed, or chamomile, and similar substances.
It is necessary to keep the hernia covered before washing; having it washed immediately after washing for one or two hours, and sleeping near the hernia.
What is it necessary to do so that a person with hernia is bled before the herniotomy.
You must first consider: if the hernia surgeon or one who is to bleed is cold and has sharp blood and inflammation, then you must take cooling agents, as with peppermint, endive leaves, vinegar, and lettuce, and similar substances.
And pause their food such as poultry, game birds, foods seasoned with acids, and similar substances.
And for one whose complexion is cold, take almond syrup or anise seed syrup, sumac, and a moderately fragrant oil between November and Easter; and it should be advised to drink sparingly and eat little, pause the poultry and game birds, fish, and small birds and doves.
And it is necessary that on the day of herniotomy and bleeding, the drink should be more than the food.
It is necessary to give some men tarragon extract or musk medicine (musk oil or aloeswood) in advance of the herniotomy or bleeding, or near it, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made thin; and it is not necessary to give that scalding.
However, hernias that are not incised are hernias that are stopped in the liver, on the spleen and on the navel, in the inguinal areas, and in the area of the anus, because these members cannot be incised on them.
And this is not desired for them but rather the attraction of blood from a member, as stopping a hernia on the breast in anemia of blood from the nose or mouth; and it is used to dissolve cold and thickened blood in a member, as stopping on the stomach and navel; because this dilates the member and heats it up and reduces the pain that resolves the hernia.
And when it is necessary for the bladder or stone to be removed when it happens in their oblation or passage, because by its strong attraction, it draws the bladder and expels the stone from its place.
And similarly, when it is necessary for the liver and spleen to be removed because of their imprisonment in that area.
These evacuations are administered with juice alone, and some are administered with fire.
And some of these evacuations are administered full of tepid water in the case of spleen diseases.
This is because the evacuation should be filled and as large as possible, which is tepid water alone or tepid water with appropriate herbs added to it.
The method of evacuation with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers' width, according to how we have formed it; and the depth of the wound should be as wide as that, the size of the probe should be as large as a thumb; and in its length, in the area around it, it should be as wide as that, the incision should be small according to the size of an awl that fits inside it.
It should be made of ivy or lemon leaves, with thick edges, lion's tooth, and clean for it not to hurt the member when placed on it.
And in its middle, a crossbar of ivy or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And this evacuation should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller according to the disease and the state of the person who uses it.
And the evacuations for children and women are different from those for young men and large bodies.
The quality of performing this evacuation with fire on the member is that it should extend the skin with a sufficient amount of wood and a little candle wax, and place it on the middle of the crossbar in the middle of the opening, so that the fire is lit around the edges to prevent burning the patient's body.
And it should be placed on the patient's member, and the aforementioned candle is to be placed on the incision that we have mentioned, until when we have the evacuations and do not require the candle and the steam rises over that incision, then the evacuation will quickly dissolve.
Use fire according to its method, and repeat it if necessary.
When performing an evacuation for pleurisy disease, with water, in which there is no crossbar or incision, and it should not be administered unless it is filled with water, and placed on the member only.
And this is its method: The larger the evacuation, the better it is because it can receive more water.
Capital 75.
Sanguisuga is not administered in any member except in members where the position of evacuations is not possible due to their small size, such as lips and similar, or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and its similar.
And the quality of using those is to find sanguisuga in the pure waters of stone quarries.
And they should be washed daily and at night in pure water until they are clean, and no cause remains in their belly; and they should be evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and evacuations; and they should rub the patient's member before it becomes dark; and they should be placed on it.
And when they are filled and ready.
And if it is possible to get juice from the place of evacuation, it is more useful in addition.
And otherwise, wash the place with vinegar and add salt water, rub and squeeze it.
And if the body's bleeding lasts for a long time because of sanguisuga, and it is exuded, then place a cloth dipped in cold water on it, and leave it until the discharge stops.
If the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle vitriol triturated powder or similar stiptics on it, until the bleeding is stopped; or place leeks cooked in boiling water, and leave them until they adhere to the area, and let the bleeding stop.
And if necessary, repeat the administration of sanguisuga when it is possible to change them.
And if the administration of sanguisuga is prohibited for suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or insert an awl into the area until it bleeds; and place them on it, because they immediately stick to the blood when they feel it.
And when you want them to fall, sprinkle a little powdered allium (onion) or salt or ashes on them and shake them immediately.
In the same way begins the procedure for the third division: recovery. This chapter is about some procedures necessary in the art of medicine; and it concerns the recovery from fractures and dislocation accidents in bones.
Oh, son, understand that the foolish doctors and common people and those who do not care about the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them boast about this chapter.
And for this reason this method of the wise men in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time; but I have not put it into practice before a long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of them, until I extracted the science from them.
Approach with the intention of experimenting and studying throughout one's lifetime.
You have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main science and on which much experiment has been conducted; therefore, here I will abbreviate it for you and free you from the burden of lengthy explanation; I will abridge it in the end of abridgement; and at the end of declaration, I will show it; I will form many forms of the instruments that are administered in this, as is done by addition of declaration, such as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collection from the causes of bone fractures, from which a premise is necessary before we begin the recalling of fractured limbs and various types of each. Therefore, I shall state in the prologue of this chapter the summation of the argument; and the chapters to which the craftsmen are introduced and stand at attention regarding the truth of these matters; it is for you and those who wish to learn or quickly understand this noble art of yours.
And I say that when an accident occurs such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or breakage, it is necessary at the beginning to perform fleubotomy or allaying of that member, or whatever else, unless there is any prohibiting cause, such as weakness of strength, or if that member is in motion, or old age, or time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
And let it be content with a diet of cooling herbs and bird meats such as thrush and partridge; and prohibit heavy meats and filling with food or any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are assured of cauterizing an abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to their initial regimen with which they are accustomed to follow.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods of thick and heavy consistency and those which have viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat and water, rice, peas, beans, cow's stomach, hog's flesh, fresh meat, thick vegetables, and similar foods; and with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is performed more easily and quickly.
And know that the bones shattered in men who are young and those who are old and weak cannot be continued or consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of their members due to disease.
However, nature also adjusts and mends in every part of the broken bone some cause similar to a splint in which swelling occurs that adheres to it until it is consolidated and fixed together, until the time of hardness and firmness arrives, such as fire at the beginning, until any prohibiting cause does not interfere with its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's diet, a diet that has weight and viscosity and thickness, as I have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture in the thigh bone is different from a fracture in the head bone; and a fracture in the foot bone is different from a fracture in the arm bone; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
I will continue with the recalling of every type of fracture, described in its own chapter separately.
The diversity of fractures is as follows: The sentence means: "There are various types of bone fractures in their causes; one is the arched fracture, which occurs in the stars (stellas); and some are fractured according to the length of the bone: and those of the shinbone and splinter fractures, both occurring and not occurring, such as a fracture prepared for writing, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissured small fracture."
"In every type of fracture, there is pain or torment peculiar to its restoration according to the recall of its separate details in their respective places."
"Sign of a bone fracture." "And by that is recognized a bone fracture: its twisted state, and the prominence and awareness of it to the sensation, and only when you press it with your hand."
"Therefore, if there is no apparent twisted state or it does not produce pain when touched with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not here a fracture."
"It is possible that there may be a twisted state or a small fissure, in which case you must press it with your hand and compress it entirely; pause over the location of the medicine whose remedy comes to mind at that moment that suits the location; and apply tightness through subtle constraint."
"And you should know that the location which is arched and not split in two or something that does not occur in the shinbone, such as complete detachment of its entire part, then it is necessary to start from your time on the correction of it having applied a post-operative cauterization."
"And if there has been post-operative cauterization, then you should leave it for several days until the cauterization ceases; and apply ointment to it in whatever way that suits your discretion."
"And you should know that the restoration and piercing of a fracture is easier than in the bone where such a shinbone fracture occurs."
"And strengthen it according to the recall of it."
"But if it is a shinbone fracture, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand."
"And position yourself in such a way as to place the limb where it is extended according to its natural figure, while the fractured parts are being extended, you should then make an effort to return those additions with discretion and in whatever way you can manage."
"And be careful not to injure the patient through your action or cause harm; and proceed according to your strength that you apply one bone with another in the best ways possible."
"And it is necessary that at this time you press with your hand, and if there is any other cause here, correct it and guide it according to the amount of your power."
"And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause post-operative cauterization or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen through their actions."
"And the quality of the constraint of a fractured and immobilized limb is that which I recommend, because you should know that fractured limbs are diverse in their size, shape, and nature."
"And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be made of thin fabric."
"But for those that are large such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that the wrapping be broad and hard, because a firm binding connects the large limb and strengthens it throughout with constraint, in this way that nothing enters into it."
"And begin with your evacuation of alignment, pause appropriately according to the situation, over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings depending on the limb; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding."
"And beware of that at the upper end of the location of the fracture, and strengthen less than you have tightened the area of the fracture." "And extend yourself and the wrapping at the location of the fracture a little, and loosen the tightness gradually until you take a large portion of it."
"And take another bandage and wrap it over the fractured area with the previous wrapping, and wrap the ends at the lower end of the fracture; and your action is in tightening the bandage and loosening it according to what you have said in the first bandage."
And place a cushion between the swellings of the thigh bone or the lion's skin cloth that is wrapped around the tortuous nature of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; but if not, do not cause any pressure on it.
And place a cushion over the other wound, and wrap it with appropriate bandages immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess at that location, and then press on the one where the abscess is and heal the inflammation; leave it for some days; and afterwards press firmly on the wounds.
The needles should be made of linen thread and well-crafted; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and their size should be according to this shape and this figure:
However, the stitch that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and narrower than the other stitches, and the length of the thread according to what is appropriate for the limb in size and shape; and press firmly on the stitches with another bandage according to your primary binding; and place it above with a cloth properly tied as we have said about binding, and it should be your binding according to the location of the fracture more, and the longer it is away from the fracture, the less the binding.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium thickness and subtlety, and made of flax; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the work of some foolish people using thick ropes instead of threads in binding, and this is a great error, because the binding will not be equal.
And very thin threads are not suitable because you will not be able to achieve binding with them, and it is necessary that there be a space of one finger width between each stitch.
If the patient is pricked by the ends of the stitches near the binding in those places, then stop immediately and wrap them with lion skin or woolen cloth before it causes injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by an abscess, and there is a rupture in the bandage, and I will come back to remember it in that chapter according to its specificity.
And you should know that the entire broken member is not to be stitched on the first day; this is because a large limb does not require stitching immediately but rather waits for 5 or 7 days, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
This is the method of plasters used by the ancients to restore fractures, dislocations and twists.
Common plaster method for the restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and more commonly used for women and children, because it is applied to what does not require warmth or friction; take powder from milling, and this is the marrow of the flour that comes out when grinding the wheat in the mill.
Mix it in this way if possible, otherwise sieve it with egg whites, and prepare the paste without being too thick or too thin, and use it.
Another method for treating dislocated and twisted fractures: a recipe of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, migrax (wild marjoram), which is a mixture of one pound of each ingredient; myrrh, aloe, and allochil (a type of resin) in half a pound each. They are crushed and sieved, then mixed with aloe water or egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly. Use this ointment because it has good composition and helps heal broken bones gently, and is suitable for most men.
Another method for treating dislocated or twisted fractures: a recipe of wild marjoram and white alum in equal parts, one pound each; myrrh and aloe in half a pound each. Acacia is six pounds, Armenian bole is two pounds.
Mix all of these ingredients in a mortar with powdered charcoal and sieve them, then prepare a compress with water or egg white and administer it.
Apply a poultice to joints and bones separated from their places, relieve pain in those areas and swelling or fractures: take wool soaked in vinegar and oil of cedar, squeeze it and place it on the affected area.
Do not expect this poultice to have restorative properties, but rather to promote drainage and relieve pain directly.
Another method of poultice for fractured bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of opium poppy; grind everything together to make a poultice from them.
A shortened method of poultice for fractured bones and the resolution of abscesses: grind a mixture of althea, camomile flowers, violets, oats and all other ingredients. Grind all ingredients in vinegar if the limb is not scalded (burned).
If it is scalded, then compress it with a cold water of colander or the same water (used for washing).
Another method of poultice for hard abscess that requires the resolution of the limb: grind a mixture of althea and its seeds, balm of Gilead, melilot, marjoram, violets, camomile, everything together and compress it with water of willow bark or sweet water or vinegar, depending on the quality of the limb and the relaxation of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that a poultice should be placed on a broken limb for its recovery, but rather a resinous mixture of wax and oil, without any other cause; he recommends it to be medium between coarseness and fineness.
In Gaul it is seen that poultices are placed on a broken limb for its recovery and the causes in which there is dryness with little heat such as myrrh, juniper, similar to those we have recommended.
A poultice that relieves injury and pain: grind meadowsweet, hops, shaved human skin or pen of goose feathers, althea, salt and mix everything together; sieve it and compress it to make a poultice.
The amount that should remain for the wound to heal and be discharged depends on whether there is pain or inflammation or if the bone is broken out of its place, in such a case you should not undress it for many days. And if there is strong pain or inflammation at the location, you should remove it at that time and apply a poultice to it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in lemon juice, immerse it in warm water, and with that wash the affected area until the inflammation and pain cease; let the limb rest for an hour; then apply a compress made of wool soaked in vinegar and oil or scented oil on it, for one night until you are sure the abscess has drained, and that the inflammation of the limb is relieved, and the pain is gone.
And apply a gentle and small pressure to the affected area, without straining it at first, and gradually make it smaller until it is healed.
If the abscess and redness, pain, inflammation, and all symptoms have been healed, and no longer need poultices or pressure, then you should proceed as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause of those mentioned above affects the limb, you should not undress it for three or four days or five or six days. And after certain periods of time (20 days according to your judgment based on the undressing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and the skin begins to heal over it).
And you should tighten the bandage more than your initial one and adjust the swelling of the patient's food supply as required, according to the previous reminder.
If you see the location of the fracture already dried and extended more than necessary, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; therefore, wrap it with hot, boiling water continuously for three days, relax the constriction a little, and through this operation, allow nourishment to flow to the limb, and it will heal lightly.
But what the foolish restorers of a limb's fracture do later when it is not restored at first, as necessary, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to their operation, and there is great fear, and if it were correct they would have enlarged the Ancients in their books and would have acted accordingly.
And I have not seen anyone among them do that, so it is reasonable that it should not be done.
Chapter on fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are various, and the causes are distinct, for some fracture is caused by a blow with a sharp object that penetrates the whole bone, which is then broken, as happens in the leg, and this type of fracture is called sciatic; or the sharp object cuts into one part of the bone and cuts through the flesh but does not penetrate to the other side; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
The wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small, and the fracture can be concave or convex; the cause of it is striking with heavy objects or falling on stones, and so forth.
This fracture can either penetrate the subcutaneous tissue (pannicol), which is located just below the bone, or it can occur on the surface of the bone, and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
And of the fracture that is reduced in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair follicle, small, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
The fracture that is caused by falling or striking with stones, and similar occurrences, causes one layer of the bone to separate from its edges, and it occurs in the concave area, such as when it happens to the vertebrae when they are struck and separated at their edges.
Moreover, this is done in bones that are soft, such as in the spines of children.
And all these types of fractures have similar symptoms, such as separated bones. And you will come with remedy for all in their place.
I will discern all kinds of fracture through examination and by testing for them and the removal of corrupt flesh that is over them.
A capillary fracture is recognized by being uncovered on the bone, and it is scraped off, and it turns white when tested, for a fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture, it is first necessary to consider the conditions of the patient, and afterwards if you see signs that indicate fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscesses in the throat, fainting, acute fever, inflammation or redness of the eyes, and similar signs in the greater dispositions, one doubts that it is healed.
And if there are no unusual signs, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if it has come to you in the beginning like a fracture and that is during winter days, then you must remove the bone splint no later than the twelfth day according to all dispositions.
If it is during summer days, then you must remove the bone splint no later than the seventh day, because if the bone remains untreated for too long, it may rot due to the fat, and the signs that I mentioned before may occur.
And if the fracture has reached the fat covering the brain, and it is fragmented into small parts and sticky, then you must pack the fractured area with compressed material according to my recommendation.
And you raise the head of the patient with fracture, and uncover the bone according to your custom and as possible according to the shape of the injury, and it should be comfortable for the patient.
And if it occurs to you, you must examine the bone, search for bleeding or an abscess, and then oppose yourself with what is necessary, which is to place damp cloths soaked in wine and olive oil over the injury, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is relieved, and make sure that the bleeding has stopped; and begin with the circumcision of the bone and excision of it.
And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
The first method is that you insert the bone splint with a narrow incision tool of this kind: And place another incision tool of slightly greater size on it; and this is its shape:
Place the wider incision tool on top of the narrow one.
And it is necessary for you to have a number of incision tools of different sizes, some larger than others, and some shorter than the others and ending in sharp points, and made of iron or steel.
Use them with ease when striking the incision tool to avoid hitting the head and damaging it.
If the bone is hard and strong, then you must perforate around it before applying the incision tools with levers, which are called non-penetrating levers.
They are not called that because the lever does not reach the end of the bone, so at the lever's tip is rounded or edge on top of the sharp head of it, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the bone.
It is appropriate for you to take a large number of these levers, the quantity of which should be according to the thickness of each bone, until it reaches the end of every part of the skull, the sharpness of which may vary in length and width according to the thickness of the bone.
This is the shape of three types of levers: The purpose of perforating around the broken bone is to place the lever on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you feel that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the lever to another location, and place it where the amount of thickness of the rod or environment is maximum.
And insert the incision tools between each crack in the bone and use the smallest one that you can on it until you have cut through the bone or with your hand or some other means using various tools such as tweezers and pliers, which you will prepare for this purpose.
And it is necessary that you take care that the incision tool does not touch any nerve.
Therefore, when you perforate the bone, if it is continuous with the nerve, you should separate it from the nerve and extract it, and then cut and file away the sharp edges of the bone with another tool similar to an incision tool but much thinner.
And if any small fragments or splinters of bones remain, you should take care of them with the tools that are necessary for you; and then treat the wound with linen and ointment as I have said before.
The other method is light and free of fear, which is known as Guillaume's operation and is highly praised; and this is its explanation: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most obvious and visible until when you have found that fragment and stopped at its end, the tip of the following incision tool should be placed gently and slowly over it. The shape of the incision tool is as follows:
The first sharp incision is made along two sides advancing in length, as sometimes occurs; the second rounded incision should be adjusted at the hipbone with the edge of the first sharp incision in the bone.
Then strike with the blunt side of the incision tool into a small depression that cuts through all the bone with ease as it rotates, and you must be assured that no panic will occur in the event that you fear something might happen in any way; if the healer was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them, certainly, he would be asleep.
If any cause of panic remains attached to the bone of the incision, you will make an incision with the rounded edge of the incision tool in that location of the bone, and it will be delivered easily, since it is delivered from there without harm or fear.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the incision, and what is abscessed or remains from the bone is its surface, and it retains roughness and subtle fissures, then you must smooth that roughness and remove those fissures with fine razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places the most suitable and the most correct according to where your operation goes wrong with the broken bone and the shape of it.
You must administer the razor with which you smooth the bone at first from the side of those razors, and then use it near the subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so continuously until you reach administering the pus and all the subtle parts of them.
In each of the other small and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you lost during correction.
It is because not all those who have studied in that art are equally skilled. And we write about what they have demonstrated in large fractures.
If the incision is rectangular when you smooth the bone, then you must take linen cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in warm oil, and place it over the wound; and take another linen cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place it on top of the first cloth and perform a light massage on the pus that you can without injuring the bone; and apply ointment to it, but do not press it too much, only as much as the wound requires.
Leave that with this care for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; then loosen it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed oil, flour of rye, powder of asafoetida and aristolochia, and similar to these.
You should make powder of these medicines that is pulverized over the wound, such as drying ones; and in general, administer all medicine of the property of which is that it absorbs but does not burn.
Be careful that the wound in your care is clean; do not let it get infected with any filth or anything else; nor leave virulence there; because when it is placed on the skull of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, causing harm to the patient with a wicked malignant illness.
If it happens on the skull of the head, when the bone is corrected and treatment is applied to it, and becomes darker in its surface; then consider if the accidents that we have said happen to the patient, you will know that they are harmful without any doubt.
If it does not get darker due to the medicine that is applied on it, but rather due to the nature of the medicine, then you must take honey and warm oil in three parts. And with that linen cloth, place it on the skull; and care for it with the spices of healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into two parts together, but rather one of those parts is elevated above the other, because there are two bones in it; and the fracture does not occur in one of them, but rather it bends, twists, and swells.
If the bone is broken in one of its two divisions, then it is necessary that you insert your little finger into the nose and guide the fracture within with your other finger, and apply pressure from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this for ease, but be careful not to harm the patient due to your treatment.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger does not reach it, then you must align the extremity of the ray where there is a small swelling.
If the fracture is in two places, then you should make an approximation (of what was done).
Cure the patient in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then return the wound to rest for seven or ten days under a cauterized dressing.
Insert a piece of cloth into the nose if the fracture is in one place, or two small ones (cotton balls), if the fracture is in two places, and make them as thick as necessary to fill the hollow of the nose.
As the old restorers say, the cotton balls should be sewn in felt and kept for a day, but I do not see it; however, the cloth must be soaked in hog's fat with powdered millstone, and then leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
Enter the nose every few days instead of cotton balls, since there is too much pus that is wrapped in a lion's cloth; and if the fracture of the nose is very painful and the patient is not forbidden from breathing.
This is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use cotton balls.
And if another seven days have passed and the wound is cauterized, fill the nose with wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil or with honey.
But if the wound is not cauterized, then fill it from outside with sizzling flour and powdered ashes mixed with albumen of eggs, and place a cloth over it (to prevent it) and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the nasal bones are broken with a small or comminuted fracture, then you must cut them, extract them using the instruments appropriate for the case; and sew up the incision, cure it with what heals and consolidates, and apply ointments as necessary.
If there is an ulcer inside the nose, you must cure it with cotton and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
When the jawbone breaks and the fracture is not an ulcer, observe whether the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not broken in two and curved towards the inside. If this is the case, its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger in the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, insert your right index finger into the mouth; and press with one hand the swelling of the fracture towards the inside with ease at the outer parts, and with the other hand at the outer part of the bone; do this gently.
And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, you must administer extension to both sides according to right angles until it is possible for them to be aligned.
If there is a dislocation of teeth due to shock, you must stabilize those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or suture; and place cotton over the broken jawbone, place cotton over the double cloth, and place a large flat stone gently made, or a single piece of felt long enough for the jawbone; and hold it in place according to what is suitable for the injury and the application, until it is not destroyed.
Order the patient to rest and peace, and prevent the sour-tasting lemons from eating.
If you suspect that the shape has been altered in some way, you must examine it on the third day and correct what has already been altered; then fill it with powdered millstone, albumen of eggs or flour of sesame, since you will have removed the wax, and place a woolen cloth over the ointment.
And thus, when the ointment is attached and adjusted to the bone, and its position is not altered, leave it alone, as it will not be removed until it heals and strengthens the fracture; because many weeks have passed since this fracture was tightened in three weeks.
And if another seven days have passed and the wound is cauterized, administer what was said earlier for its treatment until it heals, and remove the cautery.
And if the fracture is an ulcer, consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or not, you must carefully remove those pieces with the tools appropriate for the case.
And if the orifice of the ulcer is narrow, you must widen it with a curette according to your need.
When you have stopped the bleeding from the wound, and it does not continue to flow, then sew up the opening of the sore if it is wide; or apply a dressing that suits the case until it heals.
If the swelling in the body part continues to grow, even after the application of leeches, and the wound does not heal within ten days, then make an incision into it with a knife, and apply a poultice or plaster that suits the case, until it heals.
On the repair of the collarbone when it is broken.
A broken collarbone that is fractured in front must be treated by cutting the muscles on the side of the break and setting the bone fragments in one of three ways.
If the fracture is simple, comminuted, or compound (with an open wound); and if it does not cause severe bleeding or swelling; then it is easier to treat. However, if the fracture causes severe bleeding or swelling, it is difficult to treat, or the fracture is accompanied by a sore.
And the procedure for treating a fracture that is accompanied by a sore, is to have two assistants present, one of whom will hold the broken collarbone and guide it back into place, while the other extends the neck on the side of the break.
Then align the fracture with the teeth, until it is set in its proper form, and not too deep or concave.
If more extension is needed, then place a cloth or linen under the patient's armpit and make it as large as your need requires. Then extend and elevate the arm, and support it with your hand until you align the fracture in its proper position.
If you are unable to extend the arm beyond the shoulder joint due to swelling or pain, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a soft cushion under one elbow (depending on the size needed).
Then the assistant pulls on the muscle of the arm towards the elbow until the bones in the collarbone are elevated above the shoulder joint, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the teeth.
But if the collarbone is painful and swollen, then you must make an incision over it and extract the pus with ease.
And if it is lodged in the bone, you must make an incision over it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have placed the chisel under the collarbone. The chisel has a handle or a shaft of wood or iron and its shape is as follows:
It is shaped like a mortar or pestle with a concave bottom, and its width should be as needed for the bone or fracture, depending on its size or depth.
But the length of the chisel should be as long as is practical for the operation, with two ends so that one end is broad and the other narrow.
If the wound caused by the incision that you have made to extract pus from the bone is wide, and it appears that there is no more pus coming out, then you must sew the edges of the wound together with stitches.
If the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, then you should fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
If an abscess occurs, then you should insert cloth soaked in warm vinegar and oil of roses and wait.
And it is important that the splint not be too tight over the broken bone; therefore, you must observe the patient every day to ensure that the swelling is reduced or the splint has been removed, at which point you should correct and strengthen the immobilization.
Place the patient's head on the pillow and support their neck with a small cushion to ensure that they sleep slightly raised at night; in this way, the assistance provided to the latissimus dorsi muscle is elevated, causing the fracture of the clavicle to heal by raising it. Or, place the patient's arms along their chest.
Do not remove the immobilization unless an infection or abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
Reapply the plaster if you see any signs of infection at the site, adjust it to fit the immobilization, and leave it in place until the clavicle fracture is healed and has formed a callus.
The immobilization should be strengthened and supported for about 28 days, and in some cases, it may take longer, even several months for the healing process to occur.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of a shoulder fracture.
The scapula is broken in its lateral part and not at the tip but along its edges.
Since the scapula is broken in its lateral part and not at the tip, but rather along its edges, when it is fractured in this manner and cannot be seen without touching, you should prepare for surgery and reduce the fracture according to its natural shape using any engineering method that is possible.
Place powder made of ground wheat flour mixed with egg white and lion's stopper on the fracture site, apply double layers of cloth, place a thin wooden stick across the shoulder blade according to the size of the scapula or slightly more.
But if the wooden stick is concave in any of the scapula's locations, you should fill that concavity with lion's stopper, and adjust the stick accordingly.
Strengthen it above with warm steam and hold the stick firmly in place until it no longer protrudes from its original position.
Consider the immobilization every day, and whenever it becomes softened, replace it with a new one and adjust and straighten the stick if it protrudes from its original position.
Keep the patient in a comfortable position.
The scapula heals within 20 days or up to 35 days.
Once this period has elapsed, you should remove the immobilization, and be sure that the bones from which it began have not been affected or their dissolution has not occurred.
If the bone protrudes from the socket and you place a ligament over it, then you should cut through the ligament, remove the bone, and follow the instructions given for treating a clavicle fracture if an abscess occurs in this case.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of an elbow fracture.
The elbow is sometimes broken in its middle part and extends into the joint, but more often, the ends of the bone are fractured and compressed.
And when the bone is broken among its parts, it tends towards fracture and occurs great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and heavy lethargy and vomiting; and it is apparent in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
The restoration is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulders; and press upon the muscles of it, and adjust its ribs with the edge of two fingers, subtly perform the operation and in accordance with all possible means and what is appropriate, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
Then cover and pack it with plaster and gauze and rest upon a thin board of willow or alder and similarly in lightness, because you wrap it in cloth; and subtly tie it over the broken bone so that it is not crooked; and go along its length according to the roundness of the back some times, and tighten it properly; and consider the length at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
And if it is necessary to remove the plaster or pus that occurs in the area, you must corrode or cauterize it, or pain, or abscess, then cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred by means of treatment; and reduce the plaster, sometimes changing its face; and adjust it with proper tightening until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
Know that a fracture of ribs does not occur in thin places, but only where they are located near the chest; and at the extremities of its division from the front, it does not contract because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of this is not hidden from sensation, you must examine it with palpation.
And the restoration should be such that you guide the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, until it is aligned as it should be, and cover and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is tending towards the division inside, it causes strong pain and puncture in the patient, as in puncture that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason you cover the bones with a gauze; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancient physicians were ingenious in treating this with various means.
And they said: it is necessary to stop the food of the patient that generates swelling and flatulence, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the division outside.
But we avoid that for fear it may cause abscesses, unless they occur; and if they do occur, then help with that.
And some of them said that it should be avoided wind and that it should drain with force; and this is reasoning, but it is feared that the wind attracts superfluidity to the area due to weakness.
And some of them said: it should be covered with wool that is already soaked in hot oil, and powder applied between the ribs until it is filled, so that the length is aligned when you wrap it according to roundness; and take care of the patient with treatment for pleurisy and medicine.
And if the strong constriction of the patient who cannot bear it, and the bones are covered with a gauze with puncture, fear is felt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the area, uncover the broken rib, and cover it with an instrument that preserves the fracture, the memory of which was mentioned earlier, and cut through the bone with ease, and extract it.
And that we align the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with bandages until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then cut and pour powder in rose oil and cover the area, and treat the patient according to what is necessary for an internal abscess.
And lie on the bed until healed.
Chapter IX.
Chapter X.
Sometimes the fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and then they tighten, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And if you want to know whether it will heal or not, consider whether the muscles are already softened and stupefied and dead, and cannot strengthen or extend them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle without feeling pain in them, then you know that it is not healed, and in these cases it is mortal.
And if the muscles are swollen and there is constriction and piercing with fingers, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
If you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling such [condition] and wish to know if it will heal or not, then consider its feet.
Here is the translation: If it becomes soft and swollen like that which happens in other places and when it lies on its back, it shows signs of inflammation and excess fluid retention without its will, and sometimes it rolls over onto its back and wishes to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and at that point, do not bother with the treatment of it.
If no such cause occurs, the situation is better and easier to deal with.
The treatment is to apply cauterization to the abscess that has formed on the swollen vertebra, or with oily soaked mullein leaves; place it over that area for several days until the abscess is cauterized.
Then place a comforting and soothing plaster on the affected area, apply strong medicine to it; and command the patient to rest, remain calm, and not sleep on the affected side until it is healed.
If there is need for the removal of the affected bone or any other cause that has been separated from it, then cut the skin and expose the bone; align the edges of the wound, and stitch if necessary; and care for it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
But if the lower end of the bone in the heel is broken and the skin is torn off, then you must insert your left hand into the anus and pull out the broken bone with the right hand according to what is possible by equalizing it; and apply a plaster and splint if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel fractures in it [the bone], then split it open, remove the fracture, and care for the wound with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the repair of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are broken and if they break, their fracture is not anything other than communication between the ends and they are inserted along the length and decline into the sides; pain and puncture occur at the site and the leg is paralyzed when it is fractured.
The repair of it [the ankle] is to stretch your hand over the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it [the bone], then you pull it out as much as is appropriate according to what is necessary for alignment with its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or descends to its sides, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until the repair of that fracture is prepared. And once you have pulled it out [the bone], place a plaster over it and place an immobilizer of wood or skin over that, and tighten it with bandaging without fear of re-fracture or removal of the splint.
Pull the concavity with whatever fills it until it takes on the alignment, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their unaffected side.
But if an abscess occurs, then you cease the extension and repair of it until the abscess is cauterized, and place something over it as prescribed; and return to the repair of it, and strengthen it in that manner.
And if there are swollen vertebrae or they are shattered, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the repair of the humerus fracture.
The humerus is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the arm.
If it is broken, the repair of it [the humerus] is done in one of two ways, of which one is to take a wooden pole of medium thickness as follows:
The tendons are in two ends and should be suspended from a high place.
Carry the patient on a stretcher; then throw out his broken arm beyond the post until it reaches the tiptop in the place where the curvature of the post is attached.
Suspend the patient with some serious cause, or let the servant extend it to the sides; then call for the doctor who is familiar with fractures and keep him with it until the fracture returns as it should.
The other method is that the patient lies down on his back and supports his neck with one hand; then command two servants, one to hold whatever is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the foot below; each of them should extend to their side.
If you want the extension to be stronger, then press hard on the fracture with both hands and have each of the servants extend to two sides.
Therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place a cushion under the middle of the limb and the other on the side of the fracture to keep it compressed.
Similarly, if the fracture is at the joint, then it is necessary to place the limb on that location and compress the joint as well.
Hold it with ease and without trouble, and apply pressure when it is necessary and correctly placed in a good manner; then press it if no pus comes out (abscess).
But if an abscess occurs, leave the constriction for seven days and apply wool soaked in vinegar and olive oil to it until the abscess subsides; then press on it.
The method of pressing on the fracture is to place a plaster on it, then cover it with a linen bandage, and adjust the arm using a splint; place your hand open over the muscle.
Place the cloth and press on the splint to hold the arm in place so that it is in the correct position, unless there is some reason due to a broken bone.
Use splints (stents).
Place the wider and stronger splint over the fracture, placing the width of the finger between each splint and making the length of the splints according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then press on the splints as described at the beginning of the chapter.
Your constriction over the location of the fracture should be tighter. The longer the break, the looser the compression.
Therefore, if you see that the position of the splints and compression is as described in the time when you restore the limb to its natural position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess, leave the constriction (or bandaging) and let the probes (or needles) stay in for up to seven days as we have said.
Then consider the linen in all parts for three days to prevent inflammation or pressure in the area; or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to the excess constriction of the bandaging; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
If you are in doubt about any cause of this (the condition), then do not undo the bandaging except after three days or more.
Let the patient lie on their back, and let the hands be on their stomach.
Place a hot poultice filled with wool on the broken member, and consider during the night or day that neither the member's figure nor the bandaging should be undone or removed; or the linen should be softened, therefore correct everything with your judgment.
The food of the patient should be as previously ordered, only the food should be subtle at first until it begins to strengthen; and then you must make the food coarser for him.
The hot poultice and the blanket of the patient are usually strengthened for 40 days; and then they should be undone, and a bath and medicine should be administered which will correct it (the condition).
If the fracture is fresh, then leave the bandaging and probes in for days or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones that are called the ulna and radius; the smaller one is located near the elbow, and the larger one is below it (the lower part of the arm).
If only the larger bone is broken, or if both bones are fractured together, it is a severe break.
If only the smaller bone near the elbow is broken, then the restoration of it is easy and healing is quick.
And if the bone below the break is broken as well, then the injury is bad and healing is difficult.
It is even worse when both bones are fractured together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one near the elbow, it is appropriate for the doctor to carry out the restoration of it with a small and shallow incision, with ease until the wound is closed.
But if the larger bone is the one that is fractured, then you must make a deep and powerful incision.
And if both bones are fractured together, then you must make the extraction (removal of the broken bone fragments) less forceful.
You must make the hand's figure with the restoration of it and the extended incision over a long incision; and the palm of the hand is at the upper parts, as previously said, and the ear lobe is lower than the others mentioned, and the patient lies on a low couch.
Place a small incision in front of it (the wound) at the height or level of it, so that the patient does not have to work excessively.
The assistant should extend the arm above from the wrist with his hand or bandage, and another assistant should do the same on top of it (the broken bone).
The doctor should wrap the bone in a cloth to reduce it as best as possible.
If there are fragments of bone in the fracture, then you should strive to remove all the pieces at the site with your judgment.
If a fragment of bone appears separated that punctures the skin and is not hopeful for restoration, then you should make an incision on it and remove it using the method previously mentioned.
If the fracture is open, then refer to the previous chapter for its treatment.
If an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with a wax made from rose oil and white beeswax, and it should be in between thickness and delicacy, and strengthen the cloth over it with a delicate bandage until the abscess subsides; and then remove the wax and place an embrocation prepared with powder of milled charcoal and clay of huou, and let probes be placed; and the probe that is placed over the fracture should be sharp and strong.
Know that the name of the stars in the arm is given in major arrangements, or it is a fracture in one joint or in two joints at once.
Then pause your splint at the site of the fracture firmly and strongly, and when the swelling is more at the parts above the fracture or at the lower parts of it, pause the splint a little less tightly according to whether the reminder of it begins at the start of the chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough, and the person who is to bind it should be moderately skilled between being subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
Consider the member and the limb for several days. And if any cause arises that requires rectification, such as the swelling occurring in the member, then you must bind the member with cold water until the swelling ceases.
Leave the member unbound until it stops swelling and then return the splint.
If the swelling has subsided and the bone has been reabsorbed and seems similar to these, then you must correct everything with your skill.
Consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess swelling, as then you must reduce that slightly and leave it for several days until the nourishment returns, and strengthen it.
If the patient does not suffer from any of the aforementioned causes, you do not need to loosen it for approximately twenty days or thereabouts.
Place the patient's hand in suspension due to its ability to reduce agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty days, or weakly it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the complications and the disposition of the skill.
Chapter 13
On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Know that the thumb and the joints of fingers often suffer fractures, but do not treat them unless they are severely displaced.
When the hand is fractured or severely displaced, you must make the patient lie down with his arm elevated according to the level of injury, and then pause the hand over it in an extended position.
The minister should extend the broken bones and the surgeon should align them together until they are properly aligned.
You must apply plaster and gauze, unless there is an abscess caution; then pause a steel rod according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
If the fracture is inward within the hollow parts, you should press the abdomen with the palm of your hand, and then make a round shape like a piece of cloth, and command the patient to squeeze it with their broken palm, keep it tight with long fabric.
The needle of the heart should be with cloth that is lightweight so that the heart is applied to the palm, and squeeze it firmly as needed.
If the fracture is outside the hollow parts, then press down on both sides of the fracture with your palms, so that the hands are open and straight; hold it firmly as needed, so that it is turned over like a handle between the two with linen bandage.
If there is a fracture in one of the knuckles (of the fingers), if it is open, then close it as needed and hold it with the palm and if desired, place a small straight splint on it to lift the fracture and prevent it from becoming worse.
If the fracture is in other fingers (such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger or little finger), then close it and tie it with a linen strip where the finger is, or all of them together if possible, which is better; or place a small splint on it as previously mentioned for the knuckle.
And consider in your treatment and apply the cauterized abscess and opposite position - with the operation - to what is needed when there is any cause of such a thing, as the narration has been repeated about it.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of the bone fracture of the thigh.
The bones of the thigh, when moved, are broken and declared by examination according to whether it turns to the front or swollen part.
The restoration is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage on the opposite side of the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
And extend all the bandages to the appropriate side according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is proximate to the hip of the thigh, then extend the bandage towards the lower side at the front of the thigh, so that the extension contains it, and another bandage on the opposite side of the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is proximate to the lower part, then make the bandage towards the lower part and let the extension be at the front parts.
The doctor should close the bone with both hands inside to reduce it as much as possible in its natural position and the bone is joined by a good connection; then it is necessary to place plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess on the member. If there is an abscess, you should leave it for some days until the cauterized abscess is healed, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be done in this way: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it over two or three times and remove any excess; then wrap the leg towards the lower part and towards the hip of the thigh.
Insert a long needle between the thigh and the lower leg near the front part, and let the ends of the needle come out from the swollen part on both sides, and turn it over the thigh and leg as much as possible with the excess bandage.
Place your hand on the thigh at the location of the fracture and place a splint on it over the bone of the leg.
Fill in the spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloth to coagulate the extravasation (excess fluid).
Start the strong bandage in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you approach the bandage at the location of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller, lighter and more moist.
Extend the needle to both ends of the leg towards the lower part up to the ankle of the foot, and hold both ends of the other splints on the opposite side so that the bandage does not slip from its place.
Place the bandage over this so that it does not cause corruption, cauterized abscess or inflammation and resemble those; and if there is any such condition, then consult with the doctor immediately, and correct all of it as needed according to what has been previously said.
If there is a tumor in the bone, you should close it as much as possible; if not, let it fester and remove it, and heal it with what has been previously mentioned until it is healed.
Some weeks this thigh bone fracture is bound tighter than the others as has been said in the help and arm sections.
However, in such a treatment method, the patient should not become crippled; if it is treated alone, but the other leg is not applied, then it is necessary that he walk with a crutch on the affected side.
You should know that the thigh is bound for 40 days or a few months or a few weeks, and all of this depends on the complexity of the condition and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the femur head.
Know that the femur head fracture is difficult to detect, but it often occurs in old age.
But if it occurs as a fracture, it is only a crack or break in its parts, and this is a wound or multiple wounds, and overall it is the sensation of pain.
The restoration of the fracture is in such a way that it is plugged with what is broken from its parts, and this should be inserted into the joint so that it can be united according to what is possible by alignment, ease, and fabrication.
And apply a bandage and place a pad over the round rod if necessary; and strengthen it with a compression at that point.
And consider all the provisions recommended for other fractures, such as applying a pouch and similar to those that oppose any accident in which it is appropriate to the fracture until it heals.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the femoral shaft fracture.
Know that in the femur there are two bones of which one is large and is called by its name femur; and the other is thin, and is called shaft.
And if it occurs in any of the types of fracture that occur in either of the bones of the arm, and for this its restoration is done as a restoration of the arm plugging, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken, the femur is divided into all parts.
And if one of the bones is thinly broken, the femur becomes divided in front.
And if one of the bones is thickly broken, place it back and it is one of those causes that are not familiar to you.
And apply extension, alignment, and ligament repair according to the plugging technique.
However, if the femur shaft fracture is wide and has many steps, extend it less and more gently, and alleviate with your skill.
And in the femur there is some cause for an operation on the arm when you plug the fractures and complete all the operation, then you will take pieces of poplar wood that have been cut out from solid logs, and these are made exactly like branches of palm; align them to those with small protrusions, and do not touch the ends, and their length should be according to the length of the femur, and from the head to the foot.
And apply two layers of cloth over each one according to the length of it, and place one on the fracture of the femur in one area and the other on the other side, and they should be from the head to the foot base of the leg.
And align the two fractures in three places of both ends and at the middle place, because with this compression the femur is prevented from closing on the right and left sides, and it is in good position.
And a splint of poplar wood should be administered according to the length of the femur, and it should be placed on the femur to preserve its mobility.
Furthermore, whatever you do in a fracture, and when it is a wound properly speaking.
And consider the femur every day and study it further, and keep it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any such cause occurs, you should oppose yourself to it until it heals.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The ankle does not always suffer from fracture; but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes seldom suffer fractures, and they do not suffer them except in the months of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above them, then the patient must rest his foot on the ground in such a way as they walk.
Then place one foot on what is raised from those bones, and press, and bend, and tie it so that it returns to the places.
Then place poultice and a stopper over it, and under the abdomen of the foot place a small table with two hollows.
Then strengthen it with the foot and with traction, as you have wrapped it in cloths and for other reasons that are necessary.
And when three or four days have passed, then you remove the ligature because you will observe the bones tied, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows.
But if some toes are broken, then you restore them and tie them as I and recommend to you in the restoration of the hands. And place the broken toe in such a way as to match the length of the toe, and it should be slightly wider than usual; and under the foot place this table that is recommended to you, and strengthen it with traction suitable for the situation.
But if what is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place a splint on each toe according to its size wrapped in lion skin, and strengthen the table under the heel of the foot, and it must be stationary on one of the hollows of the table so that it remains with good retention.
And it is necessary for you to remember that you do not overlook all the causes which I told you in other fractures of the accidents mentioned; and beware of every accident with what has happened.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the hinge of the woman and the bone of the pelvis and of the buttocks of the man.
When the hinge of the woman is broken, then you make it lie in a bed inclined to one side, and hold it behind.
Then the midwife packs the hinge with cotton and it is made in the cavity of the pelvis as desired; and the woman is constrained, and her hips are elevated little by little because everything is forgotten in front of the separation of the pelvis and the fractured bone returns.
Then place pillows on the hips and when you want to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and allow it to be urinated upon, and return and restore it in the same way as you first placed it, and return to its own pillow first.
Do this for seven days or more until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen over the wound a cannula of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the pelvis, and force air through the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the pelvis because the fracture returns.
And it is filled with cotton and remain for as many days as I have recommended until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis in a man or woman is broken, then administer for its restoration and treatment what I have recommended for the bones of the hip.
And what is right should not be concealed in these fractures which are very close and sometimes require treatment, especially for those who have some knowledge and experience and understand this book well; because the fracture signifies to you in the major situations a direct route in the restoration and traction of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the buttocks of a man when it is broken, take guarguamela of vinegar, and place the buttocks in that; and hold over it a wrapping of cloth, and it should be wrapped and laid for three days or more until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of a bone fracture when it's an ulceration.
It is appropriate for the one who has a fracture with an ulceration, and especially if the bone is large like that of the hip or shoulder, similar to that, you should drill it as soon as the conditions for trephination are available to you or testified as we have said above.
And if the ulcer exudes pus, then you must take care to retain it until you dust it with powdered lime or some other agent, if for any other reason it is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that (place) on the following day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs cautiously, you should delay the restoration of it for up to nine days until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day, because you will cause harmful events to occur.
But if the fractured bone is prominent on the skin surface, then you must forcefully reduce it and bind it with your hands with as little extension as possible.
But if the extension is not prepared and the balance of it with your hands, then you must reduce it with these instruments; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width according to the size of the ulcer; and it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four fingers according to the quantity that is needed in the healing of all types of fractures.
And it should be round, and in little roughness to prevent it from being doubled over during the operation.
And it should have a sharp tip where there is a margin on the sides; and the upper part of it should be thickened, and from its middle to the joints (parts).
This is the shape of it:
It is called "labre voluntary hernia" in Greek, or a small spatula.
Therefore, the end of it should be paused and raised above the protruding end of the bone.
Insert it once and withdraw it only when the bone has returned to its position, and bind it with some means.
And therefore, you must bind the fracture ends together, and if the fractured end is small, and it does not take the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the fractured end into the instrument up to the point where the instrument has the ability to hold it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what we have recommended, then insert it using one of the incisors that we mentioned; or it will be with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And smooth out that which remains in the bone, and remove small roughnesses.
When the bone is reduced and the patient suddenly feels strong pain, understand that the bone has not returned to its natural position, and then do what you can to confer great benefit on the patient.
When your bone restoration is complete, immerse the linen in black mustard oil and apply it directly to the ulcerated area, especially if it's summertime; do not pause over the wound or any other place where there is oil present to prevent pustulation and corruption from occurring.
And administer stars at the time of your completion of bone restoration, and leave the ulcerated area exposed so that you can insert probes with forceps and bandage according to the size of the ulcer.
And be extremely careful not to cause the ulceration with the fracture, because many foolish doctors have often caused death or serious illness or rot on their patients because of it, which is sinful. And if the ligament is loose, soft, and different from other fractures, then...(Translation incomplete)
If the ulcer is large or a bad one, and you fear that other harmful events may occur as we have recommended, and there is pain in the area, then do not apply the stars; instead, use a hard bandage of cloth instead of the stars and tighten it with them.
And when the ulcer begins after one or two days and is caused by a bruise, you should remove the cloth that you have placed on it with oil, and then administer warm water with such medications as we customarily treat ulcers, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar ones.
It is necessary for you to remove the ligament and examine the ulcer every morning and evening until it has become consolidated and closed, and the limb should be prepared in such a way that the pus runs out towards the joints easily.
If the ulcer has passed many days and is not consolidated or has not drained the bruise, then understand that this is a sign of the small pus pockets, and you must examine the ulcer with caution. And of those small pus pockets that are separated and removed, those that do not separate and put the limb at risk and cause pain, force yourself to insert them if possible according to what is available to you.
If a pustule or abscess occurs, it is styomatios, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you must stop someone who knows how to treat it according to the treatment described in its respective chapter.
And concerning the matter where it is necessary for you to say something: when a bone is broken, you should lay it as follows on the limb in the same way as the bones of the thigh and elbow and similar large bones, and do not attempt to attract or extract it, because many times this leads to death; leave it inside as long as possible, since it can break again in about twenty days or less. If you see the wound, then treat it, if it does not heal itself.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of nodes that occur on the trace of some fracture.
This node often occurs during the healing of a fracture, especially near joints, and is swollen in the shape of the limb; and forcibly preventing the limb from its natural operation can cause harm.
Therefore, consider if the node is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and others like them; in this case you take some or all of these, and compress it with something stifling, or with albumen of egg, or with vinegar, and place it on the node in a poultice, and bind it tightly with good binding.
Pull the extracted pus sac out gently day by day; return it and apply another one until the node is gone; or press firmly on that lead plate properly, for lead has the property of retaining anything inflamed in the limbs.
If the node has already turned hard and is tight and it becomes necessary to remove it periodically, then cut it along its most superior part, excise the excess and eminent part, or cauterize it with lancet-like instruments until it is gone; care for it until it heals.
The above text appears to be a medical treatise written in an old Italian dialect that includes some Latin, Spanish, and French vocabulary. Below is a line-by-line translation of the given text:
When the fracture has been restored, and the limb remains slender and does not follow its natural course.
If the fracture of bone is restored, and the limb remains slender and does not follow its natural course, this occurs for several reasons: one reason being an excessive loosening of the ligament and the suture made not in accordance with what is required; or due to excess stricture of the ligaments before nutrients are prohibited from reaching the member; or due to excessive embrocaccio (swelling); or due to superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a decrease in blood in the patient's body and debilitation.
And treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart strong until blood is multiplied in their body; administer baths; and apply heat and comfort on it.
Then apply a dressing over the limb to attract nourishment, or continue swelling of it with hot water until nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
This line is likely a heading or title for the following section. It may indicate that the discussion in this section will be about the treatment of fractures in the second chapter. The text provided seems to discuss the issues that can arise when a fracture does not heal properly, as well as some potential treatments to promote healing.
When the bones are fractured and restored improperly, prohibit any operation on them that is necessary.
When the limb has been restored but is still not healed from improper healing of the fractured bone and node, this happens because the limb's form is blocked. However, the limb should not be prohibited from its natural operation, unless you hear that the person whose limb it is has had a new fracture.
But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly condemnable, causing great fear of the mortal consequence of which it is a part.
If the limpness and nodes are recent, then they should be swollen with hot water in which are placed soft-soothing herbs such as althea leaves, razor root, melilot, and similar herbs; and it should be made into a paste with soothing paste such as dyallaquilon well prepared; or it may be sought mucilage of althea root and be combined with gum of galena or oil of camphor, and applied to it; or it may seek figs that are fat and beaten with pigeon feathers, similar to the medicines called "amermans consolidatio" (bitter consolidation).
And in some cases it is dissolved by continuous light friction with the most humid substances, and the member's movement should be administered throughout all parts at all times.
But if the twisting has already advanced and become hard and turned into stone and has been necessitated for healing by iron, then it is necessary to drain the pus from the affected area and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and remove any excess node from that member with fine cutting instruments, and ease the process with solicitude and diligence.
This line appears to be a heading or title for the next section, indicating that it is the twenty-third chapter of the medical treatise. The previous sections have discussed various aspects of fractures, including their causes, potential complications, and treatments to promote healing. In this section, it seems likely that the discussion will continue focusing on the treatment of fractures or bone injuries.
Dislocation discussion (or Treatise on Dislocations)
A dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, and distorts the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act promptly to reduce it, and not to delay its reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes swollen and soft tissue damage is done, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it is not good to be sick or lying down during the swelling period, as many times it brings spasms and painful cramps.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you attend to the patient's flabotomy (incision), and prepare immediately to drain the swelling; and wrap the member in warm water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
And all members should be cured with the medicine that will bring back their original position (or healing).
And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture: from the upper part of the body down to the lower.
Chapter XXIV.
Treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both jaws are dislocated, they should not be left like that; and a dislocation of either jaw can occur in two ways: one is reduced gently by moving them slightly back into their original position, or it is completely dislocated and needs to be mollified at the juncture before saliva from the patient's mouth flows out and they cannot close their lips, and their tongue becomes wrapped in its fold.
But if the dislocation is slight, it can be reduced with minimal effort.
But if the dislocation is complete and extensive, it requires gentle and prompt reduction.
The attendant should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert their thumb into the appropriate place inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is in one part; or they should insert both thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is in both parts, and the other attendants should be outside with them to support. The doctor should then instruct the patient to stop moving their jaws and allow them to return to their original position; and the doctor should hold the jaw and wrap it until it returns to its place.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, administer warm water and oil to facilitate easy reduction and do not delay the reduction of both. As previously mentioned.
And once they have been reduced and wrapped, the patient's mouth should be closed and not allowed to move, and you can apply powdered fabric with wax (beeswax) coated in oil to the area and let it soften gently.
The patient should sleep on their back, and their head should be placed between two pillows to prevent it from leaning to the right or left; do not force them to swallow anything; let their food be lean meat until the pain has subsided and the jaws have healed.
And this should be done with ease, and do not strain the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, speaking, or chewing, until the jaw has healed.
If the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their original position, this may lead to recurring fevers and constant sweating, and a strong urge for vomiting may occur, accompanied by pure blood.
And when you see this, you should know that it is a bad sign; and many times the patient dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Treatment of dislocation of the neck and extremity of the muscle.
The neck is not dislocated from the side through its continuous connection with the ribs; and sometimes it can be dislocated at the back of the neck, and this can be determined by feeling.
The treatment for a neck dislocation is that the patient lies on their back and stretches their arms. And press the joint with your palm using strong pressure, as it will return to its place.
And place your hand on that plaster and powder it strongly.
The end of that broken and continuous limb should not be displaced in any day; then it must be reduced and set as we have said and as you are equipped to do.
Then place your hand on that plaster, powder and extractor, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
When this method of treatment reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its location.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated from the biceps to the opposite side.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is rarely done; it is not dislocated behind the shoulder; nor is it dislocated in front of the nerves.
Moreover, it is dislocated and out of the sides on the opposite side of the biceps, and moreover in those with less flesh it is easily dislocated; but in those with thicker flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And a strong blow or fall often happens to some men, and the muscle of that man is separated from the cauterized abscess, and it is dressed with what has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you must find out what was done to him, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
The dislocation of it is known when it is on the opposite side from the biceps; therefore distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undislocated one, for you will find clear differences among them; and you feel the concavity at the head of the muscle in this way like an hour-glass, and on the biceps side of the muscle you should touch the head of the muscle in such a way that it is like an hour-glass, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his elbow, nor can he move it at all.
If it is dislocated on the foot or below, you should find clear tactile differences and do not hide them.
And from this dislocation an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
The reduction of it is that the minister raises the hand above it, and places his thumbs below the biceps of it, and raises the joint with strength toward its location, and the minister raises the hand and extends it; and he places it below as it returns easily.
But if it does not return by what we have said, and is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days later you must bathe the patient in hot water and administer a plaster that softens and liniments like if it were a chest wound of aloe, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water, and it should be administered.
Then the patient should be placed on his back and positioned below the biceps of it is to wait for a linen that is between looseness and tightness, and then the doctor places his foot on the shoulder, and lifts the head of the muscle with force, and draws the hand of the patient so that it does not move toward the opposite side, and another minister holds the head of the patient, who must not move to the opposite side, because it will soon return to its location.
And if you wish, reduce it in this way: it is that you bring a man who is longer than the patient and stands on the side of him, and places his muscle below the biceps of the patient and elevates the biceps of him to the shoulders until the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the opposite side of his stomach. But if the patient is light, you must have something suspended to weigh him down, so that the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another way: it is that a long pole with its head rounded like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin, is placed on the ground, and positioned below the patient; then you stand on top of the pole fabric, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and his hand should be extended toward the opposite side, and the other part should be extended with strength, because the joint will return to its location quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the reasons we have said, then use this treatment: it is that you take a pole whose length is two forearms and its width four fingers, and its thickness is reduced in the proximal part of the biceps according to this form:
And place leather strips around the rounded head so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
Position the biceps of the patient below and extend the arm or shoulder over the pole to the opposite side, and tie the pole to the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Position the arm on a ladder of steps according to its width, and extend the hand to the opposite side, and the other part should be suspended from the other part, because the joint will soon join together.
And when the incision of him is completed in any way that is possible for you, then you must stop pressing on the wound with a lamb's wool pad of appropriate size; and place a plaster prepared from powdered mint leaves and honey over the muscle, so it is rolled up, and press down on the wound with a suitable constrictor; and let the dressing be rolled over the plaster, and his hand should be connected to his neck, and let it rest, and his hand should not be moved for 12 days.
And it is necessary that the wound of the patient be stopped up little by little until the member is comforted because it is easier for healing to occur there.
Then apply more dressing to the wound or exercise movement on it, so if it remains closed and does not become soft, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated by moisture that occurs in it or for another reason, then in such a case, it is necessary to administer three cauteries as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all of this is done and the dressing is removed after seven days and the joint is not closed, and the plaster and bandage are reduced upon it a little, and it remains unclosed and swollen and that arm cannot be raised to the upper parts, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, have become injured or stretched out or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
In the case of the dislocation mentioned above, you must apply pressure to the foot and the breast or the upper parts behind it, the reduction is done with a push and extension until it returns.
And another bandage should be applied to that one, and take care of it until it is healed.
And if there is delay in the healing of the member or gravity in its movement, then the patient should bathe it frequently until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated on all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it is evidently displaced by either the elbow or the touch, depending on the shape of the dislocation, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder according to the arm, that is clearly stated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its own muscle.
And you must quickly reduce the dislocation in front so that it reaches a blister of cautery, because if it gets to a blister of cautery, the reduction is difficult and recovery from it is not easy; and especially when it is at the rear parts, for all other types of dislocations are worse than this one and more painful, and many wounds occur in the process, which can lead to death.
The restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that his hand should be extended with two others, and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are above the shoulder and below it, and he pushes the joint with the thumbs of his hands together, or with the flat part of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the front parts, then it returns by bending the arm with its hand until it strikes the shoulder with the flat part of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then you administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two ministers should extend the arm, and have another two ministers to ensure that there is no excessive extension.
Approach should be to roll up the entire arm, as it is wrapped in long folded cloth around it, or bound.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this may help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement; then press the joint firmly until it returns.
Approach the reduction of it (the hernia) requires that pressure be applied on the plaster where there is swelling and protrusion with honey albumen, and it should be drawn out by means of a strong bandage descent; and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
Approach should be to loosen it (the bandage); and since the joint has been formed in its place, you should then loosen the bandage from there.
If the joint is not strong, then you should repeatedly apply the plaster and bandage to it, and leave it for some days until it is drawn out; then approach should be to loosen it.
But if there is danger of gravitation during the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, you should administer humectation in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or press on the dislocated joint, which is a matter of heavy grease; then tie it, and leave it on the bone for a day and night. Approach should be to place it (the dislocated joint) back in its place, and immerse it in bath; when it swells, you should then rub the joint gently with friction, and approach repeatedly on the dislocated joint, which is a matter of round motion, once, twice, and three times. Corruption has now reached the intestine internally through bathing, and it needs to stop spreading.
If you wish, press on the warm and moist cowhide gash with a rod and press firmly on it; do this several times, for it is moist and helps to reduce it to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes dislocates, and the reduction of the dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it is necessary to be quick in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before the location is disrupted or there is a cautionary warning of disruption.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and extend their arm, and then place your hand or palm over the proximity of the joint and press it firmly until it returns to its place.
However, it should be considered if the palm has already been placed on the belly of the hand; in this case, you should extend and reduce the patient's fingers, and if the dislocation is precedent (meaning before), then the position of the hand should be intrinsically placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand fits over the proximity of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, you should press it firmly with plaster waiting for the dislocation to occur, and do not repeat it, as it can cause pain or be impossible to reduce it unless days have passed.
However, the joint should be treated according to its curvature; and do not notice any pain in the patient, but rather soften the hand and do not make it stronger because the nerves may be broken or crushed; then understand that the nerves are crushed or fractured, and then do not engage in it unless it is strong enough with cautery for the treatment of the fracture and confer some cause.
When the shoulder is returned, you should press on the plaster that has been recommended and leave it and strengthen it for 5 days; then approach should be to loosen it and leave the arm of the patient to rest and exercise.
If the movement of it is stopped and there is danger in it, you should gently massage it with hot water and friction for several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Fingers are sometimes dislocated in various places.
When a finger of these is dislocated at the palm or belly of it, you should squeeze the finger and press the dislocation with your thumb until it returns.
Approach should be to support the head of the finger, and suspend the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Approach should be to extend it (the dislocated finger) and suspend it until it is straightened on that same day.
When night comes, you should follow this procedure, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise movement, and leave it at night; do so for several days until it is strengthened.
Do the same thing if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and leave it to that location and perform the first operation as described above, until it is healed.
Do the same thing when it is dislocated in other locations.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of spondylus (vertebra) of the back (spine).
When one of the vertebrae in the back or neck experiences complete dislocation and remains displaced from its place, there is no cure for it as death approaches the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's bowel movement is out of their control and they cannot retain it; many times various body parts or legs or arms, or one of them, are weakened, or a vertebra has been displaced from its place, because weakness means that a vertebra has been dislocated and it is removed in four pieces.
Therefore, it has been removed in pieces at the back and is called gibbosity.
But the cure for it is to consider whether gibbosity occurs in childhood, because in that case there is neither a cure nor healing of the entire body.
But in cases caused by accidents or blows or similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of cure at length, but I have abridged it from that source for a shorter explanation, since it is closer to the clearer exposition, which I have expanded and arranged using various instruments, with which I will show you and expand upon it.
And the one that occurs in the back is not cured except for that which I recommend.
The patient should be extended on their back close to a wall with their feet stretched out so that the walls do not touch their feet.
And a straight staff should be placed nearby, fixed into the ground at the foot of the patient around their head, and another staff on the other side to elevate their feet at the other end of the staff.
The minister should hold the staff, and it should not be fixed in a pit; another minister should hold the other according to that shape.
And cover the patient's head with a cloth and tighten it around their forehead firmly; extend the end of the linen to the staff that should support their head, and tie it there; strengthen another linen across their buttocks, under their arms, and over their chest, and hold it by the feet; then adjust all the linens and tie them to the other staff that should support their feet.
And the minister should extend each linen to the end of the staff, and neither should the two staffs and linens at their respective locations where they are fixed be removed, but rather leave them as I have said before.
The doctor should place their hands firmly on the vertebra until it returns, or they should place a table under it and make sure that their feet are adjusted on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three feet and carve into the wall near the patient's head a hole where the end of the table fits. Then place the tabletop on the vertebra and the doctor should place their feet on the other end of the table, pulling strongly until the vertebra is dislocated and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the hole that is twisted with the hand; and it is that you squat in front of the patient's head at the end of two staffs, whose length should be one arm, and the distance between each staff should be one palm, and a groove should be made in each staff for the turning rod to pass through, and each rod should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it is not damaged.
And there should also be a round staff with the turning hole in both grooves of the two staffs.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the round rod with a length of one palm rotates; and the same applies to the other two staffs.
Then strengthen the linens that you have stretched in the patient's feet on the groove that should support their head, and the linens that you have stretched in their chest on the turning rod that should support their feet.
And you should also have each turn and a minister who turns the rod with their hand, while the doctor holds the vertebra as previously mentioned.
When the vertebra has returned and the location is covered, it is necessary to apply an adhesive plaster with egg white, and then stop it; then place a wooden splint on top of the plaster that is three fingers wide or more, and the length is the measurement taken at the site of the gibbosity, and above the edge of the vertebra.
And let the patient use the linen that we mentioned for nourishment until they are healed.
If there is still a weakness in the location at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and liniment it for a long time with the administration of the table, which we have recommended; and a lead sheet has already been administered in that location.
And sometimes the imminence occurs in the lower part of the spine, called dislocation; and that bone is already inclined to such a condition so that it is not necessary to make an opening for it with this medicine, because great force may cause death.
Chapter thirty-one.
On treating a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not move but only dislocate, and it does not happen to those that happens to other joints due to small displacement and concavity.
The hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inside the pelvis, outside the pelvis, in front, or behind.
Most commonly, it is dislocated inside the pelvis, and rarely in front or behind.
The sign of the dislocation in the pelvis is when, when you align the healthy person's hip with the patient's, the healthy one appears longer and its tip is more prominent than the patient's, and the patient cannot bend their leg. You should anoint the area with cauterized dressing, so that the head of the dislocated bone has already been reached.
The sign of the dislocation that occurs outside the pelvis is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of the dislocation that occurs in front is that the thigh expands according to its natural shape, but it does not bend without pain at the tip, and if it is forced to move, it cannot go forward; the urine is retained and the dressing must be applied to it, and you should walk on your heels.
The sign of the dislocation that occurs behind is that the tip does not extend and cannot bend the front part where it bends the dressing, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the dressing is softened, and you should reach for the head of the dislocated bone there.
But the reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already become fixed in its position, in which case it is not a cure; therefore, it is not necessary to make an opening for it.
But in the case of a recent dislocation (one of the four types of dislocations), you should try to move the joint and extend it in both directions, left and right, because great force will return it and it does not need any other treatment.
If it does not return in this way, then you must prepare strong medicine and extend the thigh of the affected side from the lower part, or with your hands, or apply a ligament on top of the thigh below the tip; and another minister should extend their hand above it as far as possible to press down on the dislocated bone; and another minister should press strongly on the ligament near the root of the joint, and another minister should hold the end of the ligament firmly.
The extension of the limb or from the pelvis to the ankle, or from the back to the lower back.
And the extension should be done all at once while the patient is lifted off the ground and remains hanging.
This type of extension is common to all four types.
Therefore, if the dislocation returns with what has been said, it will be good; and if not, it is necessary for all types to follow the instructions for their own treatment.
In the reduction of the dislocated part, when it is within the joints, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side; then place cushions under the affected area where the head of the dislocation is located and the site to be reduced, extending the limb in the direction opposite the dislocation to the same side of the clavicle.
And take another strong servant and grasp the patient's arms, and forcefully pull the affected joint in the opposite direction to extend it wide apart, because that will return it to its place.
And this type of treatment is for light cure, in which the limb can be reduced more easily than by other types.
But if the patient resists and refuses to cooperate with this type of treatment, it is necessary that both of their feet be bound tightly, loosely, around both the ankles and wrists.
And let each side be of four fingers in length, and the affected area should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And suspend the patient over the head of the post (or bed), so that they are in the highest position possible; and let their feet be two arm-lengths away from the ground.
And command a strong young man to grasp the head of the dislocated joint, and suspend another young man from the patient. The third young man should push on the affected joint with force, because the joint will return to its place quickly.
But in the reduction of a dislocation outside the joint, it is necessary for the patient to lie face down as previously recommended; and tie the affected area tightly with ropes around the chest and feet.
And two posts should be placed, one at the feet and the other at the head; and posts adjusted to the middle of the beam fixed above on which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the post being between their thighs, so that the extension at the affected joint is not restricted.
And each servant should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art (or technique).
And when the dislocation is at the front joint, it should be extended slightly and in accordance with this narrative on the beam (or post). The doctor places his right hand on the affected limb, and with the other hand he compresses that area, and with that compression, he extends the affected arm to the opposite side of the hip.
And if the dislocation is at the back joint, it should not be extended to the opposite side, but raised above the ground; and it should be placed on a hard surface, as in the case where an ankle is dislocated outside the joint, as previously discussed about the position of the patient on two cushions, and his face should be placed down, and the limbs should be extended, as previously mentioned, which will not cause harm.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a table on the site where the joint is located.
So, as the reduction is complex, and the method of reducing it is not hidden from you (you will be extending the patient's legs), when you see them straightened out with no resistance, you will know that the limb, according to what is necessary, has been returned. Then you adjust the thighs and bind them tightly with bandages so that the affected area does not become swollen in any direction; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
And loosen the bandage and the padding, and compare one leg with the other.
If you see them straightened out in their proper position, then you will know that the dislocation is already fixed, and at this point, let the patient get up.
If you see any signs of swelling, then return and treat that area, extend it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
And loosen that area, and make it walk slowly on crutches for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated outside the joint, inside the joint, and more often behind the joint; but not in front of the joint.
The sign of a dislocation is that you command the patient to move their ankle, and then you will know that the ankle is dislocated.
The restoration of all three types of dislocations is that you straighten the patient's leg, so that they can extend their ankle if possible; place your hands on the sides of it, and hold their foot between your feet; and grasp the ankle with both hands and keep them apart from each other with force, and another servant extends his foot until the ankle returns to its place.
The thigh bone adheres to the hip without moving away.
Apply that and let the thigh bone adhere to the hip, and apply bandages for three or four days, then remove them.
Do not make the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction cannot be accomplished, then administer strong extension with ligaments as mentioned in the treatment of the thigh.
Chapter XXXIII.
Treatment for the Dislocation of the Ankle.
The ankle is sometimes moved slightly out of place by accident, and at other times it is dislocated due to trauma, and the dislocation occurs either inside the joint or outside.
The sign of ankle dislocation is that the ankle appears swollen around the area where it is dislocated.
However, the treatment for a slight displacement is easy reduction, and it should be extended with ease and then returned to its normal position.
If the dislocation occurs due to trauma, one must first immobilize the patient correctly, and have a strong and capable assistant from behind the feet in the correct position.
Place your right hand on the upper part of the patient's foot and your left hand on the lower part of the foot near the heel in the location of the cavity.
Pull the foot towards you with your right hand and push it away from you twice with your left hand, extending it, then push on the front of the shinbone with your left hand while pushing backward on the heel with your right hand to force the bones into their proper alignment.
Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve the desired result.
Push the shinbone toward the hip one last time, and you are at the joint.
Therefore, if it returns in one or two days using this method and the foot appears swollen, that is good; otherwise, repeat the operation as it will return.
If the reduction of it is forbidden as prescribed by what you have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, stretch out a flat stone on the ground, and let them lower themselves onto it so that they rest between their thighs, and you have already covered them with cloth to prevent discomfort for the patient.
And place the minister in charge of it with their knees, and another minister should extend the foot with their hands or secure it with ropes around the neck of the foot; and each minister should extend that part as far as they can, and the stone should remain between the patient's thighs to hold it in place so that the body is not torn apart at the sides.
And the doctor should compress the dislocation with their hands, and another minister should hold the healthy part at the sides, as the dislocation will return easily.
And when the dislocation returns and you have confirmed the health of the reduction of it, then stop applying the plaster and remove it firmly, and tie the leg to the bed.
And be careful or protect yourself from the nerves that are located behind the ankle, so that the ropes around it are not tight and do not hurt it too much.
And keep it like that for two or three days; if the ropes become softened, remove them.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days. But if it is necessary to go in front of that space, it is not certain that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and approach what does not receive treatment.
And if it turns into a cauterized abscess, you must administer the prescribed treatment in the location of cure and dressing mentioned in our narrative until it heals over.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers of the feet.
It must be compressed gently without much extension; and that is not difficult, it is easy to do so.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, it must be compressed with the patient's foot on a level surface such as the ground or a table, and remain like that as if walking.
And you stand by the patient, and place your foot on top of what supports the joints, and press down on it with your foot using force until it returns, and make sure that it remains compressed and does not appear again in the elevated area.
And place the patient's foot on a table that holds the entire foot, which has two arms, and strengthen it with a suitable and secure structure for three days; then remove it and allow it to rest from walking until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation caused by a wound, fracture, or any combination thereof.
When one of those occurs and you engage in the cure and restoration of it, many times death occurs after several days.
And therefore, in the treatment of it, do not presume without being knowledgeable and experienced in the art, long practice, mercy, compassion, patience, humility, and modesty; use medicines that dissolve cauterized abscesses only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but help the one you hope will be saved from destruction, with relief from pain, and in which you see some hope. And therefore, strive to make the reduction at the beginning of the cause before abscesses occur.
And therefore, if the member returns as desired, then administer the treatment that dissolves cauterized abscesses and heals the wound with what is appropriate for dry dressings.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture and separate bone fragments, you should perform the setting of them, and do what we said in simple fractures as mentioned in those places.
Keep and avoid what we have mentioned in the paths of fear as preceded by my teachings; for that is better for you, it will please your Creator, and more persistent to your glory, and healthier to your true body in your time. Thus ends the words of Al-Zahrawi, may God be pleased with him. Amen.
