As Albucius begins his words, since he has compiled this book for you as the final work of medicine, by completing it I see that it will be an end to it, and through its explanations and clarifications, it seems fitting for me to complete this treatise on surgery for you.
For surgery is entirely destroyed in our region and in our time, so that the science of it suffers great danger and its tools are lost; except for a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have been misinterpreted and led to error and uncertainty until the meanings of them are closed and the strength and art prolonged.
And it is seen by me that I will bring this treatise to life according to the method of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and for the forms of the instruments of cautery and the other tools of work as well, with the addition of description, and for the preparation of them, which is necessary.
Moreover, the reason why a good craftsman cannot be found in this time is because medicine is long, and that its practitioner must first be experienced in the science of anatomy which includes knowing the joints and shapes of the members; and having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments, and their numbers and origins; and recognizing the arteries pulsating and quiet ones, and the locations for bleeding them.
And as Hippocrates said with his name "art," but in small work, and even more so in the art of the hand.
Moreover, we have already said about that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not knowledgeable about what I have said concerning anatomy, cannot avoid falling into error, so that many men have died in this way as I have seen often, for some are unskilled in this science and take themselves to be without it and its experience.
For I saw a foolish and experienced doctor make an abscess called scrophilus on a woman's neck, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out, until the woman died among those present.
And I saw another doctor who thought he could extract a stone from a man's body, which was in its state, and the stone was large, and it came out and cut through the bladder with it, so that the man died on the third day.
And I called for him to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient he would die as a result.
And I saw another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery and approached a negro slave who had a broken thigh; and with his ignorance he prepared the doctor, extracted the fracture through the wound, using pulley devices and strong rods, but did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he tied it up according to his desires, and bandaged it, and left it unventilated for several days and commanded that we keep it bound; and thus it became an abscess and led to ruin.
And I was called to it, and prepared to remove the bandage, and achieved calmness and relief from his pain.
But corruption had already set in the member, so that it could not be stopped, and the corruption spread through the member until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess cancerous and it became ulcerated near some days, until the malignancy of it grew in the lord of it.
The cause of this is because the cancer grows without humor melancholic, so it does not require any special care, but rather that it affects a member which is hostile to everything.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that surgery be divided into two categories: one associated with health, and the other associated with danger in its greatest preparations.
And I have already tested this in every place of this book where there is danger and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against it and allow yourself to be misled by the foolish, so that they do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And thus take your weapons with caution and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best method for salvation and praiseworthy success by the grace of God, and leave the terrible diseases that are difficult to cure, and lay aside your fears for that deception in your faith and in your name will not mislead you: for it remains for your glory, and thus in the world and forever among your sanctifications.
Galenus already said in some of his teachings: "Do not treat an evil illness, so that bad doctors do not call themselves doctors."
And you shall have read this book according to three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part. The first chapter deals with the feet, their forms of instruments and the ironwork of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter deals with abscesses and perforations, boils, sores, extraction of pus-filled sacs and similar conditions, all collected and arranged in the forms of instruments.
The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, and the cure of twists and similar conditions; a chapter arranged in forms of instruments for the feet.
It is necessary for me to say the qualities of the juveniles of that cautery and its disadvantages, as well as in what situations the cautery should be forbidden.
Therefore, I say that the discussion of the quality of the juveniles of cautery and its disadvantages is a long and detailed one, subtle due to knowledge, and hidden secrets; many wise men have spoken about it, and there is disagreement among them, and I will only touch upon a small part of their discussions, fearing prolixity.
And so I say that the use of cautery applies universally to any matter or materials, except for two situations, which are cases without material.
In the case of dry matter without material, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial in this case, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease characterized by quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is appropriate that diseases that are dry and hard should be treated with something that is wet.
And he who says the opposite, that cautery is beneficial in all dry and hard diseases that occur in human bodies, when you compare the human body and its moisture with the nature of fire, you find that the human body burns.
And I say on the basis of this discussion, that I have experienced this myself on several occasions.
However, it is not necessary that I come back over what has already been expounded and practiced in the chapter on cautery by previous exercise, and to know the diversity of human cases and the disposition of diseases in their circumstances, as well as the causes of these, the accidents of them, and the time period for these.
However, in other situations, there is no need for fear, especially in the case of cold and moist diseases, because all doctors are already in agreement about these, and there is no disagreement over the use of cautery in these cases.
And sons, understand that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it is due to the cautery as burning medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not spread beyond the member being cauterized but only causes a slight harm to the adjacent member.
However, the action of burning medicine reaches not only the member being cauterized but also the adjacent member and can bring difficult-to-heal disease and prolonged suffering to that member.
However, fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything unnecessary; and it is already known through experiment and prolonged study in the art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from the length of my discussion, and if it were not for the fact that it is not suitable for my book at this point to reveal secret hidden aspects about fire and the quality of the operation on bodies and its expulsion of diseases, I would demonstrate a philosophical argumentative explanation, which could help alleviate your suffering.
Sons, understand that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause the best time of spring.
I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the disadvantage due to time is submerged in the benefit of what is achieved by cauterization, especially if cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that evil will come sooner than a slight harm caused by the passage of time.
Do not listen to your suffering, or sons, they do not consider this except the common people and foolish doctors, for that disease which is cured by cauterization is not always successful and they await a bad outcome.
And the cause is not as they believe for that, because cauterization is not in a place of medicine which alters complexion and dries up the humidity that is the cause of pain.
But the cauterization is unnecessary in medicine, because of its willfulness to fulfill the virtue and effectiveness of its operation and the greatness of its master.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some time in the future, depending on the patient's complexion and the location of their illness, as well as its nature, and what has been prepared in their body from excesses, and what has been acquired by them in food and similar causes; otherwise, the illness that receives cauterization is a subtle illness in a few organs with few excesses and humidity, such as cauterization of teeth for pain and similar cases. It is possible that in this case, the pain will not return, but it will be small.
But it is common speech that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is right-thinking speech, not according to what I understand in this matter, because I believe it is not healing that benefits with medicine or any other reason for cauterization.
The cause is contrary to this; the belief that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not when we administer the methods of healing in some illnesses and those medicines do not work, but rather at the end of the illness, they administer cauterization and it improves the situation. Therefore, from here on, it is clear that cauterization is not the last remedy of medicine, not according to the belief which I understand in the common people and the phrases of foolish doctors.
They said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
They said that the location of cauterization does not harm, because this is not absolutely true, since I have already proven and observed that it does not do so in some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than with iron as they said; however, when you cauterize with fire made from gold, it is not up to you, because it depends on the quantity you want for the color of gold, and it prepares to be used; if you adjust it above the fire, the gold melts due to the heat of the fire, and in the fire some layers are produced so that the artisan can carve it with the tool of the occasion.
Therefore, for this reason, caution must be taken when using iron for cauterization; we should do it gently and as accurately as possible in operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to the chapters, and I have arranged those of the head within the feet, so that I lighten the question for those who seek it.
Chapter One.
This cauterization treats the coldness and humidity that cause the secondary symptom of which there are two causes, one is a sign of scrofula and many rheumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the hairline and eyelashes flowing, and many sleeping, and toothache and gout, and generally of any illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, sclerosis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in these illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: First, the patient must be evacuated with medicines for purging the head for three or four nights, according to the nature of the illness, the age and habits of the person.
Then, command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a stool and hold his feet.
Approach the patient's thumb and place it against the root of the nose between their nostrils. However, when the location you are referring to is reached, mark it with a probe, and approach the olive-shaped cautery iron.
Approach that location with your thumb in the manner it descends, and gradually tighten your grip until it is securely held, and then rotate it.
Lift your hand gently and look at the location. If you see some part of the bone protruding, such as the grains of sand, then raise your hand. If not, return your hand to that tool or another one if it is cooled down until you can see the bone I mentioned to you.
Then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it for three days.
Approach the wound edge with your thumb and leave it there until the scar from the fire is destroyed. Cure the location with a strong four-drug ointment until it is healed.
They said that when the wound remains open, it is better to get a splint, because it is more beneficial and helpful.
They said that the coccyx should be cauterized to the bone and the cautery kept in place until some portion of the spongy bone is charred.
Approach it so that it touches the bone, and heal it.
They said that the cautery should reach the bone in the end, until it penetrates deeply into the bone so much that the bone collapses, and this is the form of the small mortar: They believe that the vapors from that location will escape.
The wound should remain open for a long time and be healed until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cauteries in all cases, only in some men out of fear; and leave that one, for it is better for your health, because the head is more exposed to the solution of continuity from the body as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a cruel nature.
The primary type of cautery is safer and better for you; and that method and the work with it are for your health.
Chapter Second.
Of the head's cauterization.
When a chronic and long-lasting pain in the head occurs in the patient, who has prolonged it with gears, cochias, capirpurges, emplaustres, guatzes, cades, gualinas and similar things, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that did not help in any of those causes, then consider that if the patient's head is of strong nature; and it is not cruel and there is no great inflammation, then cauterize it with another cautery slightly later. Approach the corn of his head with a cautery until the coccyx is separated. Cut the coccyx and expose the bone's portion that we have estimated and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the location called "was," which is the place where air pockets are found. Leave your hand in this position, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will have a great deal of pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I will tell you the location of this cautery, because the cautery used for the corn of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one used in the other locations on the head; and this is its form.
Chapter Third.
Of the non-ancient migraine cauterization.
When there is deep pain in the part of the head or it is a dull pain that extends to the ear, treat the head with medications that modify it and administer the other treatment I have mentioned for diseases; and if neither one helps, cauterize it in two ways: either by using acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Hot coals or medicine to burn are the ones you should take a pair of tongs made of iron, and pick up that one and sharpen its ends on both sides with the tips. Then make an incision in the place of pain on the temple with a thin blade that is only deep enough to expose the bone, hidden once it is done.
Then apply strong pressure to the area with a compress, and leave it like that for three hours; then remove the herb and let the wound heal for two or three days, and place a plaster on the area submerged in oil until the pain subsides completely.
And take care of it until it heals completely.
And if you wish, do this with some burning medications that I have written in the second treatise on burning medications.
The cauterization is done in this manner by fire, and the form of the fire for cauterization is as follows:
It is called a clawed iron, because its head resembles the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small projection.
Place your hand over the pain area and hold it there - so that the archer's arm does not shake - and slowly rotate the small iron back and forth.
If the amount of tissue burned by the scalpel is large and intense, lift your hand to avoid shaking the artery that is nearby - so as not to cause bleeding.
And immerse the wound in salt water and let it soak for three days; then apply ointment to the wound with oil, and take care of it until it heals completely.
And if you wish, perform cauterization on the end of the cutlery in the manner of cauterization, and be careful to avoid cutting an artery during this modern procedure.
Chapter Four.
On the ancient cauterization of hernia.
When you treat an emigranea as was said in the previous treatment and the division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, and sometimes because the disease is not addressed by what was said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery knife until it glows, because this means to draw a line on the place of pain, whose length is the maximum size of the finger, or whatever that is; and then pause your hand for a moment and strengthen it, and then make an incision with the arc-shaped blade and penetrate into the bone.
However, it is necessary that you watch over the jawbone, which is swollen, you should make it move again so the ligament is not adhered and the nerves that are affected by it, and to prevent convulsions.
And if it is about the care and caution of a cut artery's bleeding, for in the cutting of it there is fear, especially to those who do not know what they are doing and are not trained or experienced; leave the operation at the beginning.
And you will come to remember the regulation of bleeding from an accident in the artery according to its method, in that book of this treatise.
And if this disease is not helped by this cautery and the body of the patient can tolerate it, cauterize it in a more suitable place on the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals.
And if it is necessary to administer the cautery that was said in the chapter on constriction of the artery with a cautery having two knives, this is a better and more appropriate cauterization.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured with medicinal causes and the other cure mentioned in the division, but the pain is not relieved, then ignite the cautery, which is called puncta, and this is its shape:
Then place the puncta near the ignition and direct it around the entire ear as if a wheel is rolled, or in the circuit of each sample if the pain is in each. Draw the puncta cautery of the ear's edge slowly, little by little, since you know the place with certainty.
And if the puncta cautery is applied all over the ear, then cure each spot until it heals.
Chapter 6.
On the cauterization of turtur.
Turtur which is cured with cauterization is not anything but the spices that come through a flegma, as was said in the division of diseases.
Avoid cauterizing the spice that enters by drying or by convulsion of the nerve.
When you treat that spice of turtur with herbs and capupurgis and guarguarisms, and your cure does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one should be the edge of the ear, the second a small one on the temple, and the third the connection of the two lips.
And pause your cautery opposite to the diseased part, for softening does not appear except in the healthy part that appears healed.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery along the edge of the ear tip and slightly above the hair on the crown of the head, in the temple whose length should be equal to the length of a finger, and then pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the substance of the wound has been burned.
And this is the shape of the cautery, it is the type of the knife, and the shape of which is like a table. However, it is more delicate than that, and it is necessary to have a knife with minimal roughness in that place.
And cure the area where the process has not yet healed.
Chapter 7.
Chapter 8.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what was said and your medicine does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: first of all on all the hair on his head; secondly in the middle of the head as we have said; thirdly in the neck; and fourthly in the groin. And the method of the cautery is done as was said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and this is the last one; and take care to cure it with what processes you have.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterizing forgetfulness caused by fever.
Cover the patient with warm blankets and administer large pills to purify him.
Then shave the head of the patient and apply a plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
Place the patient on several watch for a while, as this is the method of cauterization. And do it according to the procedure you have already stated.
And if this treatment proves beneficial, then do not proceed with further cauteries. However, if it does not, make three cauterizations in the lower division of the head, starting from the most sovereign part of the head to the most inferior part of the neck. Wait between each cauterization for the thickness of the finger, and care for the cautery with what is appropriate.
But if the patient is tolerable of it, make another cauterization in the best location; and if you wish for more addition, then cauterize it over both cornices (corners).
Care for it until it is healed; and make the cauterizations olive-shaped as previously described.
Chapter IX.
On cauterizing for relief and softening of the entire body.
Cover the head with warm blankets and administer pills as previously described; then shave the patient's head, and cauterize it in the best location on the head, on all the corners of the head, on the lower division, and three cauteries on the spondyles of the neck.
And if it is necessary for the treatment of softening the body, and the patient is tolerable with the treatment and the illness is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the spondyles of the back, and later cauterize it until the cordage is completely burned off, and raise the patient's leg. Care for it until it is healed, and make the cauteries olive-shaped.
Chapter X.
On cauterizing epilepsy.
Do not cauterize the epileptic person, but rather that epilepsy caused by fever.
Therefore, you must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with yarrow and with other treatments as previously described in the section when the patient is great and tolerates the exception of medications.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medications, administer gargle and masticating remedies that purify, before that with the passage of several days, with purification of foods.
Then shave the head of the patient and cauterize it with one cautery in the best location on the head as previously described, and another cauterization on the back of the head, and cauterize each corner of the head. And if the patient is strong and tolerable, make cauterizations as previously described with a paralyzing and softening effect on the spinal column and spine.
And make the cauteries olive-shaped as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, pause with subtle cauterization as described in this manner.
Chapter XI.
On cauterizing melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and large fever, make cauterizations with the cauteries as previously described with paralyzing effects.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining into melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, administer to him what purifies the brain as previously described in the section.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a pigeon-shaped poultice made from the proper ingredients on top of the circle, and leave it in the best location on the head.
The patient should be placed in a sitting position, and held from all sides.
Then apply the linen; it is more appropriate for an old sheep to be bound. Heat that part over the fire, warming it gradually by measure; this is what they call suffering when placed there. Then place that in the appropriate place at the head of the bed, and let it enter until it is immersed.
Do this with the patient every week once, and follow the appropriate regimen for him until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points as much as possible, without having a hand with such a prepared cautery: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then place that swollen area in bandages or in linen cloth.
Chapter XII
On the cauterization of water flowing in the vein.
When you have been declared the beginning of water in the vein by the signs I told you in the division, then begin and give the patient to drink that which purifies his head, and keep him from all moisture.
Let him bathe in warm water for three days.
Then order him to shave his head, and cauterize that in the appropriate place on the head; and cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of water in a single vein.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are covered by the skin with a cautery; and place the cauteries in that length in the region of the temples.
Keep yourself from bleeding when you are cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop it with some medicine that is within your power.
I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the abscessing of that, as well as taking care to prevent bleeding.
Sometimes it is cauterized in the cerebellum between two bones with two cauteries properly produced.
Chapter XIII
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears in the veins are old, and through the veins and arteries that are manifest in the head's location outside, it is shown that this is excessive fluid, then cauterize it with a cautery that was mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing in the veins, and with a cautery in the appropriate place on the head and two cauteries in the cerebellum between the temples, and two cauteries in the cerebellum between two bones. And if it is necessary to add, then cauterize it along the entire length of the vein on the forehead above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV
On the cauterization of nose smell.
When you treat that with what I have said in the division and your medicine does not improve, then prepare yourself and give the patient three nights of colocynth, and shave his head, and cauterize it with a moderate cautery and an olive-oil cautery. Then cauterize it with a camomile cautery and two cauteries on the two eyebrows, just below the hair.
Keep yourself from cutting that artery.
The form of camomile cautery is as follows.
Chapter XV
On the moistening cautery for the eyelids of the veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery and with this moon-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if it is you who cauterize, do so on both eyebrows with a small one and two in all directions, and elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
Do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the third part of the eyelid that is being cauterized.
Chapter XVI
On the cauterization of the eyelid of the vein when the hair turns into the divisions within and pierces the vein.
When the hair of the vein turns into the divisions within and pierces it, there are two methods of cauterizing them: one is by fire or is by medicine.
If the cauterization is by fire, order the patient to shave his hair in this way as those who wash them do, until they are elongated and curled; and if it penetrates, you should press the veins of him with a bandage to prevent harm until the hair grows back.
When they are grown back and curled, place the patient's head in your lap, and put your hand over the eyelid of his veins with a sign, with the sign being like a sea urchin, and the beginning of the sign near the hair.
Then place warm oil or egg white on the ulcer.
And heat the cautery of which this is its form.
Then cauterize the area with a small, rounded tool, gradually making dots over it until the surface of the wart is burnt, just like a leaf of myrtle, completely apparent.
The sign of the treatment's success is that you see the wart's eyelid contract and its hairs raised due to the puncture on the wart.
Therefore raise your hand and keep it there for three days, and apply a dressing over the area until the scar is raised. Apply ointment to it until it is healed.
If the hair grows back for some reason and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cauterization of it just as you did initially.
If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it returns to its original position and is healed so that the hairs do not pierce the wart.
If the cautery with medicine burns the hair, command the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and healed, and apply a piece of paper or cloth in the shape of myrtle leaf.
And take known and living worms for the cure. The Latin abbreviation "i.e." means "that is" or "in other words". It's used to clarify a term or phrase that may be unclear or confusing. In this context, it would not be needed as the sentence is already clear in English. And what is this, mix those causes well, and do it with haste so that it is not spoiled; then expand the mixture on a paper in the shape of myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both warts; then place warm oil or egg white on the ulcer, and have the head of the patient be near you.
Place the medicine on the wound and press it gently without moving it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, as a bite is like fire.
Therefore, when you perceive that the herb has bitten, remove the medicine and apply it again with your fingers; therefore, when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; then consider if the eyelid has risen like it should be washed by fire or incision, as this is good; and if not, place the medicine back on the area where it was not pressed, but do not let it spoil until your operation is complete and the ulcer is healed.
Then dress the area with a bandage until the verruca is removed, and treat it with castor oil or another remedy until it is healed.
It is necessary for you to ensure that your treatment guards with careful vigilance that the medicine does not fall off the ulcer; if the eyelid becomes soft within a few days and some cause of the hairs pierce the wart, then you should repeat your medicine over the area where the eyelid has become soft, just as you did initially, and turn it over until it is healed.
This is the shape of myrtle leaf.
Know that warts in men are diverse according to their size and smallness, so accordingly you should perform your treatment.
Do not hide the path of rectitude for the one who studies in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eyelid.
When you treat fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and do not confer your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to hold his head in your presence, and have another servant near him in such a way that he is neither harmed nor agitated by his head.
Then place warm oil or egg white on the ulcer of it.
And heat the cautery, which is in the shape:
The shape should be concave, like that of a reed or a pen with a turning point, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if it penetrates into the other end. If you want it to come out in this way.
However, the concave one is better for the operation.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out pus and dry it. If it is not open, then open it and remove the scabs from there.
Place your hand over the cautery which should be well ignited, and keep the other a little away from the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery on the vein of the nose and burn it.
If at the beginning of your cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; and if not, you should repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; leave it like that for three days, and place a bandage over the area with a dry dressing inside until it heals.
If it has passed ten days and is not healed, place a strong corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and scraped as necessary in its section.
Another method of cauterizing a fistula which some have said: insert into the location of the fistula and close it, then place a thin substance in that fissure, the shape of which is like that: And it was the quantity of one ounce of lead melted; and keep your hand with good grip, and let the lead not harm the patient because the melted lead does not reach the vein of that one; and cover the vein of the patient with a linen or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing.
If the fistula is healed by what has been said about cauterization and cure, that is good; and if not, it is necessary to administer trauch from the nose and reduce the fistula to the center of the nose according to its location.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of the anus fissure.
Fissures often occur in the labia, and particularly in the labia of children.
Therefore, if your treatment of these fissures does not help, you should burn them with a small cautery knife in this shape that we teach you:
The concavity of it should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Place that instrument carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the opening of the fissures.
Cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cauterization of fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms under the uvula or on the palate or between the teeth and you apply a bandage, it breaks, becomes purulent, and a fistula is formed, and if your treatment does not help, you should burn cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, and place the burning iron in the fistula opening, keep your hand until the hot iron reaches the abscess opening, and at the end do it again once or twice; and cure it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
If the pus is separated and healed, that is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the location and drill the rotten bone according to its location.
Chapter XX.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are damaged, and you treat them with medicines but it does not improve, place the patient's head in your lap, and hold the cautery tool of the shape that will come to this purpose, so that you can quickly press the instrument handle on the tooth and insert the burning cautery into the cavity, keep your hand a little away from the patient until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and move the cautery several times according to your desire.
Then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop it, because a damaged tooth is closed, a softened gum is strengthened and excess moisture is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
On the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation, or there is an abscess or worm, or treatment with medicine does not help, you should perform cauterization in two ways: cauterize with a cowhide bandage, or cauterize with fire.
Cauterizing with a cowhide bandage is that you take a cowhide bandage and heat it in an iron pot, then take a piece of the heated bandage and wrap it around the end of the probe, immerse it in boiling water, and place it quickly on the painful tooth until it cools down.
Approach that area several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the boil mentioned above, place it on the painful tooth, and place the hot iron on top of that until the iron reaches the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire should be done carefully, and there must be some caution when it comes to the ear or iron, for there may be some large growth and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And approach the hot iron in the desired shape, place it on the tooth and keep your hand there until the cauterization is cooled; do this several times until the pain subsides or on that day or the next.
And it is necessary to press the patient's mouth with good cloth so that they hold it for an hour and spit, and this is the shape of the cauterization.
Cauterize as desired, according to what is possible for you.
This is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII. (This seems to be a chapter number in the document)
On cauterization for hernias.
When hernias are caused by cold and humors infiltrate them but do not respond to medicines and you wish to promote digestion slightly, then heat the iron in the shape as shown below, having two handles attached so that the smoke escapes through one handle, and place the hot iron on the apostema once, or if necessary, repeat until it reaches the edge of the apostema.
If the apostema is small, place the cauterization according to the size of the apostema and leave it for three days and apply the cloth soaked in oil on top until what the fire has burned is removed.
And care for it with mouthwash, tents, and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII. (This seems to be another chapter number in the document)
On cauterization for ulcers of the throat and constriction of the veins.
When moisture comes over the windpipe, especially when it is accompanied by cold, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and you should cauterize the root of the trachea in the compressed area.
And be careful not to reach the trachea with the cauterization or burn the cartilage of it, but only a little.
Cauterize that area with another cauterization at the junction of the neck at the lower vertebrae. The cauterization should be made as shown before.
And care for it with what has been described before until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV. (This seems to be another chapter number in the document)
On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold moisture, the patient does not have fever or shortness of breath, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauterizations on the furcula in the compressed areas on the left and right sides; and another cauterization in the middle part of the foot between two breasts; and let the cauterizations be made as shown before.
If you wish, make your cauterization with the pointed cautery that is called "puncta," as shown in the treatment for earache pain.
Place points at those places, and care for it with what has been described before until it is healed.
And now the cauterization should have three arms, for cauterization is with this: you can do three cauterizations in one go according to this form:
Chapter XXV. (This seems to be another chapter number in the document)
On cauterization for scrotal itch, which is the head of the testicle.
When the head of the testicle is displaced due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in the usual time, then you must reduce its displacement before it returns, and place your hand on one side or the other of the patient, and lift the cartilage that is inside the scrotum towards the scrotal walls with the fingers of your left hand if the junction is displaced internally.
And heat the iron with two heads; and this is its shape:
And place the cauterization on the cartilage and let it penetrate into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when you have made four cauterizations with the pointed cautery.
And after some time, it will be adjusted according to this count and because the cauteries are eight. (This seems to be a reference to the number of cauterizations needed for a certain treatment)
And place the cautery on pause with salt, and place the patient in comfort, and let the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comfortable.
If the displacement is above and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a flat or pointed cautery, because the junction is confirmed and the moisture is subsided, and the patient is healed.
Title (capitol). xxvi.
On cauterizing the stomach.
When phlegm and mucus enter the stomach and it becomes enlarged due to this disorder and multiplies, and if you continue with treatment and do not help it, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, extends his arms and legs, and cauterizes it with three cauteries: one cautery under the feet about a finger's width from the heel, and two cauteries under the costal arch of the feet until the triangular figure of the cautery is formed; and elongate between those not in line to avoid blistering.
And if the depth of the cauterization is twice the size of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cautery be in this form without addition. If you want, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle of the stomach in this manner; and this should be a circular cautery according to this form:
Cauterize the stomach at the place that is frightened by this cautery: and you should place a point on the stomach according to the amount you want with a trial, and cauterize there with the cautery at the points; and care for it with the treatment that follows until it is healed.
Title (capitol). xxvii.
On cauterizing the hernia in the groin.
When the groin is painful due to heat, moisture or excessive wind that causes it to go beyond its normal condition by egression, and the patient is treated as previously stated without improvement, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back, and three cauteries should be placed according to this form and quantity on the groin below the hip bones, i.e., in a man's lower abdomen.
Let the space between each cautery be according to the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the body straight ahead.
And do not press down on the cauterized area.
And if the amount of what is applied matches the thickness of the skin and it is not too tight, and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he is not standing, make him lie down, who has already extended his legs, and raise his arms.
And you can cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, when you are skilled and careful in the art.
And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and ensure that the skin is carefully punctured in order to pierce the entire body and reach the hernias, because the skin here is delicate; and know this.
Title (capitol). xxviii.
On lancing an abscess in the groin with a cautery.
When an abscess or boil occurs in the groin and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the groin or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the groin, the patient will feel heavy and painful without increased pain.
If it is in the membrane of the groin, then the pain is greatly increased and often doctors become tired in its treatment.
Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back; and show the location of the abscess with your finger; and heat the cautery that resembles thread, whose shape was previously described on another page. Cauterize the abscess with that and the cautery until the skin is completely burned through to the pus, until it bursts and drains pus.
And care for it with treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
It is not necessary to use this type of cautery indefinitely, but rather the one studied in the art of medicine for a longer period and in which many diseases have been known; however, it should be noted that sometimes this operation can be dangerous, but still, it should be done if needed.
Title (capitol). xxix.
On cauterizing scrofula.
The ancient cauteries for the sores of arthritis were applied to scrofula in this manner by a skilled practitioner, and it is this one that you should take from the long, dry razors found, and it should be about the size of a finger.
Then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, then cauterize at the location that is between the continuation of the neck and the collar; and two small cauteries placed under guidance, one slightly declining near the part of the beard, and two cauteries on that which is declining between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly declining towards the backside; and another on the mid-foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauterizes at the lower backside; and one on the location between the shoulders, and two cauterizes on each foot, under the one that is between the shoulder blades.
And it is necessary that you compress your hand on the cautery, not in its hollow, but rather on the open wound.
And it was said by some ancients that some men use a cautery similar to iron and hot like it, and put it in that place which is between the ribs until we reach that abscess and the pus is drained out, as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, because the person may die immediately at that fistula to which there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On the cauterization of the spleen.
When treating spleen disease as previously described and your treatment is ineffective, you cauterize it in three ways, all of which are suitable, one of which is to make three or four stitches according to the length of the spleen following the shape of the cauteries in the foot, the shapes of which have been previously shown.
And the distance between each cauterization should be about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as that previously described in the foot cautery.
And do not compress your hand on the cautery; rather, the patient should be placed on his back.
Another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery with two prongs, as we have mentioned in the dislocation of muscles chapter, and lift the skin which is near the spleen so that the patient's left side is revealed without obstruction.
Your lifting should be such that you lift the skin according to the length of the body so that the cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
And insert the two prongs, heat them up, in the area where they pierce the skin of the other side.
And withdraw the cautery; thus four cauteries will be made.
And if you want to cauterize with a cautery having three prongs.
And return your treatment of the cautery that has been soaking for several days, because it is more effective than the other causes previously mentioned in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Do not cauterize in dropsy, but only in a bladder specifically.
When treating dropsy with the methods of treatment previously described and your treatment is ineffective, you must then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one over the stomach, another over the foot, another over the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one at the heel, and another over the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be appropriate for the thickness of the skin.
And let the cautery be released after it has been soaking for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cauterization with what is necessary for two intentions, and it should be hastened to him with the help of healing.
The shape of the cautery used to treat the abdomen should be like a nail, according to its previous form, and it is that one which is used to treat the feet, following their previous shape.
Section .32
On the cauterization of feet and the genitals.
When the feet are affected by edema and filled with stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize them on the back of the foot near the ankle, elevate your hand with the cautery without twisting it; raise your hand, but do not let go of the cautery, for the stagnant water drains.
The cautery should be made in this manner: Place two cauteries on both sides, and in each side make a cautery with the tip of the cutting edge. And the cautery should be as long as the side of the affected area: The first one goes below and the other above the same location on the opposite side; and on each side, two cauteries are placed.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
And take care of those causes which were mentioned.
Section .33
On the cauterization of abdominal organs.
When an abdominal organ becomes weakened and moistened to the point of becoming soft, this affects its digestive and retentive functions, which are located in the stomach and intestines, and it can be treated with various methods of treatment without consequences, and sometimes the patient may require cauterization to show the effect, so cauterize that area with a large cautery over the stomach as described in the procedure for cauterizing the stomach, with the circular cautery and four small cauterizations around the umbilicus, with a fine needle-like cautery; and with cauterization on the alkatin (small intestine) over large areas, or with two cauterizations.
And if there are excessive moisture and the patient is able to tolerate it, cauterize that area on the pudendum (genital region) and intestines, and strongly place two cauterizations over the stomach and close to the inguinal regions, for this is a perfect cure for which you will not go wrong.
Section .34
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When ancient hemorrhoids occur naturally or one becomes weakened due to cold humors or corrupted moisture, they can be treated as mentioned in the previous section and their cure is not to be doubted; cauterize that area with three cauterizations on the base of the anus, a triangle shape, and with a caution over the umbilicus.
If you suspect that the stomach of the patient is weakened and their food is not spoiled, and sometimes the opening of the stomach becomes an ulcer, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as described previously; place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the gallbladder with a fine needle-like cautery; leave the cauterizations open for some time until it is healed.
Section .35
Of cautery for athlete's foot, near the abscess of theirs.
When you remove athlete's foot, then heat the cautery which is like a ray. Approach that opening with the heated cautery, and place its tip into the vein from which blood flows out.
Do it once or twice, for if there are many abscesses, cauterize each of them according to what you have counted, and apply ointment to those with open wounds until they are healed.
If you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more helpful afterwards.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally made in the divisions of it.
When nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is afraid of it, cure it with cautery.
Therefore, when a fistula appears naturally in someone and is old, corrupted by pus and humidity, it is more suitable that this be treated with fine thread, and bring the amount of the depth of it together with the previously mentioned thread.
Approach with the heated cautery which is like a ray. And bring that heated cautery to this fistula, and according to the amount in which it intersects with the thread.
Repeat over that area until the rotten tissue is burned off quickly once or twice or three times, according to your necessity.
Be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the fistula is in the body of the bladder or in the body of the intestine, be careful at those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you consider that it is not penetrating.
And take care of the area until it heals.
If the area is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you should know that it is healed completely.
If the materials are not removed, then you should know that it is penetrating or in the bone and is corrupting, or be careful of these causes which will come to mind in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the cauterization of sores.
When pain occurs in sores due to cold or thick swelling, and the patient's body is weakened by it, then it is necessary to cauterize them on each sore with a cautery over each sore using a heated iron that recalls its memory.
Hold the cautery with a small gap between them, so that three cauterizations will be made in a line, and thus they will be more helpful afterwards.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When weakness and softening of the bladder occur due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
Let the length of each cautery be according to the number of holes in the bladder; and cauterize it in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
Let the cautery iron be as previously prepared.
Chapter XXXIX.
Treatise on Cauterization of the Meatus (Urethra)
When the meatus (urethra) becomes inflamed and humidified, it is prohibited to engage in intercourse, and menstruation is corrupted due to this, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs during their discharge, then it is necessary that the location be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and a cautery should also be applied above the location or two cauteries, and they should be cauterizing iron.
Chapter XL (40)
Treatise on Cauterization of the Dislocation of the Ankle
When humidity spreads and penetrates the ankle joint, causing its dislocation, a sign of this is that the limb is longer on one side when compared to the other. And the location of the dislocation is felt in the bulging area.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle joint with a circular cautery, as you will have a sign by probing in the circle around the joint, and thus causing the joint to fall into the middle of the circle.
And the cautery for this procedure should be shaped like the one used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three cauteries using an olive oil-shaped large cautery.
And make the cautery according to the size of the dislocation throughout the entire limb, and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter XLI (41)
Treatise on Cauterization of Sciatic Vein
When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to inflammation and humidity, the patient is treated with the remedies mentioned earlier and no other, which is an ancient method; then it is necessary that you release the patient from thick humors with pills made of purgative herbs or artificial pills similar to them, and then cauterize it.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with medicines that burn, or cauterizing with fire.
If you are following the first method learned (cauterization with three triangular-shaped cauteries), then do so over the ankle joint, making sure to achieve good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the size of the finger (thickness of the cautery, whether olive oil-shaped or large).\]   E aprop fay al malaute la man que es dita de la partida de lancha, e le manteneys en aquel loc per molt temprat.
When the cautery is placed over the middle of the ankle joint, there should be four cauteries.
If you wish, cauterize around the circle whose shape is preceded by the cauterization of ankle dislocation, and that which is a circle containing and burning the blister of the whole socket.
This is the method of cauterization in fracture when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended into the joint.
But if it is extended into the joint, then you cauterize it with two cauteries on the joint at the place where the pain occurs; and with one cautery on the shin, four fingers distanced from the skin.
And if it is a lancet cauterization, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the size of the blister.
And if the patient's pain is extended to the location near the ankles, then you cauterize it here where the pain occurs, with a cautery at three or four points, or more if necessary.
And if the patient's pain is under the buttock, then you cauterize it here with a lancet cautery.
Be aware in every cauterization that you do not burn nerves or major arteries, and thus harm the patient or cause contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the shin and overburned in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed up to the foot, and the burn penetrated and rotted the entire foot. And approach very carefully with caution from the abdomen, and thus death will be avoided.
And if the pain is in two places, cauterize each one according to this method.
The wise say in the ankle cauterization of this type, make a circle of iron the size of a palm, and place it so that its holes are according to the thickness of a date or almond stone.
And inside that circle is another third; and the space between them should be equal to the width of a finger; and these circles should be open in two parts; and the length of those keys one or two fingers, and make the margins of iron on the circles decoratively arranged; and this is the shape of it:
Approach the fire and let it burn until it becomes red-hot and sparks, and then place it on the division of the ankle, with the patient lying down on their side. And thus, cauterize it with three concentric circles at a time.
And leave it alone for three days; apply ointment to it with bandages and let the wound heal for several days; and care for it with salves until it is healed.
"Al-Zahrawi says: My son, we have used this type of cauterization sparingly due to the fear of its consequences, and because few people have observed it."
But among the best cauteries for it, there is one that is suitable for it.
But the cauterization with medicinal substances should be done with two circles pierced with a perforated armlet, having a length of the walls equal to the width of their fingers, or however it may be.
And the space between them should be equal to the thickness of the finger; and they should open upwards and downwards, and contain each other in this way:
And place your hand on the division of the ankle, with the patient lying down on their side and press the affected area firmly; and take boiling water in a container, and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be gradually hotter, and hold it for about an hour, and the patient must endure the burning and squeezing of itfor this is similar to fireuntil the pain stops.
And raise your hand with the tool and wash the affected ankle area with warm water.
Leave it alone for three days and place ointment on it until the blackness of the burn subsides, and leave it like that for some days, and it will produce scabs, which is a good sign.
And care for it with salves until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the joint or thigh, make it stationary in such a way that it contains water as in the case of the ankle immobilization.
This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medications. Recipe for alkali and crushed charcoal on both sides of one part, and stir and let it rest in a new wave in which the lower side is pierced with a small hole, according to the amount that fits inside it.
Let it rest on the bottom of the wave again in another boiling water, and pour the alkali and live charcoal over it with warm water, which will rise up to one finger, and when you press them with your hand for good compression, let the hole that is in the water on the lower side of the boiling water open in the lower wave.
Then adjust all that water, and pour another living substance and other alkaline reagent over it, because at that point it will be of great strength and sharp acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, since the operation acts like fire.
And some of the remedies are those which involve cauterization such as honey and vinegar mixed with sulfur.
The method of an ancient Greek physician, and the cure for joint pain and sciatica pain, is very great indeed, and it is said that no other treatment is needed, since it heals in one go as recommended, because the remedy is strong and effective in a bath and application as advised.
It is to be prepared with a green mustard seed, and if it is not available, a fresh fig should be taken; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the joint where the pain is, or in the cavity, or in the leg, and tied.
Let it sit for three hours, or for as long as the patient decides according to their comfort.
Then immerse it in hot water and when the body of the patient has become warm, apply it to the affected area, since the pain will disappear and be healed.
Know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these remedies, but rather the cleansing of the body.
However, Hippocrates himself said that when the vein is stretched with a sheepskin incision, cauterization will be more beneficial; and the cautery should be used in this manner: wool should be taken and soaked in ancient oil, and placed between the toes and the cleft.
Then take a dry sheepskin and inflate it with fire until it becomes charred; then place it over the wool and let it rest on what is stretched out. Repeat this process and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
This method of cauterization is called the "cauterization of cows."
Title: LXII
On the Cauterization of Joint Pain.
Joint pain can occur for various reasons such as injury, impact or excessive bleeding, and for similar causes, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
Cauterization should not be used except in this particular case caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, the evacuation of the patient should be performed using pills infused with herbs similar to them, which are placed on the affected joint at three fingers' widths from its location, followed by cauterization or more cauterizations as needed, according to the tolerance level of the patient and the potency of the herbs.
And perform cauterization using a pointed cautery.
If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations using a medium-sized claw-shaped cautery in this manner:
Title: LXIII
On the Cauterization at the Beginning of Jaundice.
Jaundice frequently affects infants; and the first sign of it in infants is that their eyes become sunken and their movements are restricted.
And it appears in the lower end of the spine and the joints that begin to protrude above the others.
Therefore, when you see this condition and wish to prevent it, cauterize the area using a circular cautery in this manner: that the cautery be applied to all parts of the spine affected.
If you wish, cauterize around the spine using a pointed cautery two or three fingers' widths. The punctures should be close together.
And heal the affected area using the remedy described earlier.
But beware that cauterization should not be administered in jaundice caused by nerve spasm.
Title: LXIV
Treatise on Cauterization for Gout and Joint Pain
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, when gout is cured by cold means of treatment and the pain is not relieved, apply cauterization.
It is that you cauterize in close proximity to the joint of the foot with heated objects (cautery).
The form of the olive oil cautery is as follows:
And if points must be made on the surface of the foot, then use a sharp cautery. If the pain moves into the nails or other joints and it is uncertain, then cauterize that spot with three or four cauteries all around using this olive oil cautery.
If more cauteries are required, then cauterize the spot and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, only approach the wound with the cautery.
If the pain moves into the nail and the toe, then administer cauterization as described in its own chapter.
If the pain is only in the toes and it is called sciatica, then pierce the skin around the nails as described in the rotation, piercing along these two lines.
If the pain remains in the toes, then pierce the skin around the nails over each toe and at the bend of the fingers.
If the pain moves towards the joints or muscles after several days, then cauterize all of them with the helpers.
Do not evacuate the patient with good management and reception of medications, for if it is done properly with this cautery, they will be healed (God help).
Chapter XLV.
Treatise on Cauterization for Ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the hernia and the intestine protrudes through the genital area, begin by having the patient abstain from food on their day and use softening substances to ease the fissure of their stomach.
Then follow the patient closely on their bed and command them to keep their lower abdomen covered until it is ready to be exposed or the hernia appears.
Then return to the area and try to identify the rupture on the pelvis bone, marking the end that resembles the circumference of a circle at the uppermost part of the abdomen.
The form of the heated cautery is as follows:
Heat it until it begins to sparkle. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Place the cautery over the marked spot with your hand holding the cautery steady, and insert it into the pelvis bone until you find the middle of the pubic bone; repeat this procedure if you did not reach the bone in the first examination.
Observe carefully the location of the intestine during your cauterization to ensure that you do not burn the intestine so that the patient does not come to death or other serious harm.
You should know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, do not consider your operation a success.
The cauterization of children should be subtle according to their size and age.
Take care of the cautery site for three days with bandages until the scar from the burn has healed.
Care for that area with other ointments until it is healed.
The patient should remain in bed for 40 days until the site and wound are sealed.
Ensure that the patient's food is adjusted according to the duration of their recovery and that the intestine does not come out under the pressure of healing.
When it is time to move the patient after forty days, administer suitable food and medicine, and continue this for another forty days.
Let him be given rest and nourishment in food and drink, with strong remedies, for if this treatment of healing is followed completely, he will recover.
I will describe the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach, and to begin with, let it not be neglected: cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, so that it is completely closed as the third part of it; and then care for it with what has been said, and not leave it untreated.
Some people have said in the past that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, for it is proven by experience.
And a line is drawn across the width of the tear, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery on top of the tear, but the first cauterization should be lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of twisting.
When an injury or blow causes pain in any part of the body and this pain persists for a long time without improving with medication, it is necessary to cauterize it using a pointed cautery.
The cautery should be applied to every part of the body according to its size, nature, and location of twisting or pain.
If the injury is healed by the first cauterization, that's good; if not, continue to apply the cautery on it; because it is customary for those pains to be points of one member near another, so you must achieve that with cauterization before the patient is healed.
Chapter 47. (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Leprosies of some kinds are treated with cauterization to great advantage, and mostly if the type of leprosy is caused by rottenness or melancholy.
Therefore, when you wish to cauterize it (the leprosy), consider whether the leprosy is common and curable as mentioned in the division and not incurable, or present, and fear that corruption will affect the entire body of the person and their limbs; in such a case, cauterize it on the head with two cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, the second farther away from it, bring the forehead to the end of the hair; and both on top of two horns (corners of the skull); and one behind, on the nape or neck.
Finally, hold your hand on the cautery a short distance before it touches the bone to produce a slight indentation and move away the scabs so that the expulsion of large vapors is alleviated; and cauterize over the skin as previously described.
And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and is manifest, it is necessary that you cauterize it with the cauterizations described in the head; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations over the eyes, and two cauterizations over the spines of the neck, and six cauterizations over the spine of the back, one large one near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two over the ankles, one on each ankle, and two over the joints and one on each joint of the fingers, and two over the elbows, and two over the muscles, and hold the tendons of his feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the hands and feet, and over the soles of his feet, and over the phalanges of the toes.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the sole when cauterizing.
It is sometimes cauterized with one cautery over the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
You should know that the closer you place the cauterizations, the more beneficial it is and more effective; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as happens with sores, because the body of the person is already anesthetized.
It is necessary that the cauterizations be large or few according to the members and joints as previously described in the tools (instrumentation).
Apply the cauterization with flour of roasted barley, honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48 (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
On the cauterization of numbness.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters but does not heal, you should then cauterize that numb member according to the size of the member or its smallness.
Let your cautery penetrate slightly into the skin (epidermis). Treat that member with ointment until it is healed.
Sometimes numbness in the hands and feet, in the spine of the back, and in the eyes (optic nerves) is cauterized, and it is alleviated.
Do not presume this, but rather one who knows the anatomy of members and the exit of nerves throughout the entire body moving them.
Chapter 49 (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
On the cauterization of tumors that are swollen.
When a tumor is old and does not improve with any of the ointments of medicine, you should then cauterize it over that area with a pointed cautery a short distance according to the size of the swelling until the whiteness and color disappear and the color changes.
Treat that member with flour of roasted barley and lentils, olive oil, leaves of arnica, and the blood of pigeons or hens; each should have an equal part, and all are mixed; and let a cloth be placed over it until it is healed.
Chapter 50 (This line numbers the chapter but does not translate the text itself.)
On the cauterization of crabs (scabies).
When a crust is forming and you wish to remove it, cauterize that area with a circular cautery as it is rolled (or rotated).
The wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; however, I do not see this, as I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
It is more appropriate to cauterize [the affected area] in the circle around it as we have said, or with the word 'cautery'.
If there is a stone or something foreign body in the bladder, and you cannot remove it by means of the hand or the instrument which you use, then you should cut open the bladder along its length.
Of the cauterization of ulcers.
If an ulcer is delayed in maturation, due to superfluity or the patient's state being old and weak with little blood, or due to the season, and you want to hasten the maturation of the ulcer; then cauterize around it with small cauterizing points; and apply a soft cloth over that which will cause it to mature faster.
However, if you want to perform perforation with the cautery, then heat the cautery, and immerse it in the proper place of the ulcer until it penetrates through it.
And if the cautery is in the place that is more distant, to relieve the body of the arm; and care for it until it is healed.
Of the wounds of the head and face.
Of the cauterization of corrosive agents.
Corrosive agents are corruption that travels through the limbs, which corrodes in the same way as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you see a corrosive agent in a location that suffers cauterization by fire, heat the cautery with iron nails small and large, as is appropriate in the location where the corrosive agent is present.
Approximate the cauterization of that entire area until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause remains.
Approximate the bandaging of that for three days, and place it on the cauterized areas, soaking them with oil mixed together until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
Approximate the care of that with warm flesh-generating cure.
But if the flesh heals well within three days without corruption, that is good; but if not, repeat the cauterization over what has been corrupted in those areas.
Corrosive is treated with some medications occasionally, for it is a substitute for cauterization. But in truth, cauterizing with fire is somewhat beneficial with pus.
And I have already said the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you need it.
Chapter 33.
On the cauterization of nails and similar things.
Often found in the regions below the feet, illness called nail, which is large and closed, that pierces the foot; and cauterization in those places is performed according to two methods, namely cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
But cauterization with fire is that you heat the cauterizer shaped like a pen of a bird's tail, made of iron according to the size required to treat the entire nail, and it should be thin-edged.
Approximate the bandage of that which is heated over the nail, and turn your hand with the cauterizer around the circumference of the nail until the cauterizer reaches the depth of the nail. Bandage that for three days until it starts to weep pus. Approximate the plaster of that with a mixture of wild mallow leaves steeped in salt, and bandage the plaster over it for one night, for this will be eradicated from its roots.
Approximate the care of that area with warm flesh-generating cure until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and often happens on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer cauterization with water, namely take a cup made of horn or iron or bird's tail pen, place it over the nail; and get a little amount of boiling water into the cup, hold your hand, and turn the cup around the circumference of the nail with pressure on the edge of the cup in the root of the nail, and let the boiling water pass through the root of the hole; and make the patient wait for about an hour for the pain caused by the boiling water to subside, then remove it, for the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do this to those and that in turn until you have treated all of them in the body.
Approximate the care of those pus that come from the roots of the nails which generate flesh.
Chapter 33.
On the cauterization of tremors.
When a tremor arises due to cold in the nerve or fever caused by cold, or for other similar reasons, it is necessary that you cauterize that with four cauterizations or more on the spondylus of the back, between each spondylus with one cauterization; and on the feet, and on the stomach, cauterize olive oil.
The tremor of that subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of abscesses occurring in the body.
When abscesses and pus-filled holes occur in the body which are formed from corrupted gross materials, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized over the entire abscess with a subtle cautery made of mirt or fine razor, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with an egestological long lancet; or with a slow-burning cautery.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the beginning of its eruption according to this method; and it is not believed that it should be done, and the superfluous matter is drained out, making it heal from there.
However, it is necessary to make an appropriate evacuation with leech therapy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cauterization of blood blisters caused by arrows using an incision with a bowstring.
Sometimes blood blisters caused by arrows that are incised should be left unattended in the wound or an incision of abscesses or cauterization of the affected limb is done, and it is difficult for it to heal afterwards.
Therefore, when it happens to someone, you must press with your hand on the wound of the arrow, and wait until the blood blister heals from there, and does not break open.
And place the olive oil-based cauteries few and large, by name many, and blow on them until they are hot.
And take either a small or large one depending on the location and wound where the artery is broken, quickly place it over the vein, and cauterize it until the bleeding has stopped and the area is contracted and constricted to prevent further bleeding.
If the blood flows out of the wound in the artery when you remove your hand and pull out the cautery, then take another one from among the prepared cauteries in the fire, and do not stop doing this until the bleeding has stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are present there, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in such cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: or using cauterization as previously described; or extraction where it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned and the bleeding is stopped, or by tying with thread or a ligament for strong construction, or by applying medications whose virtue is to stop the bleeding; and they should be tightened with pulvinar or compression as appropriate.
However, those who administer appropriate compression with thread and strong bandages or by causing burns and similar things should not be trusted.
But if it happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor any medication, then place a compress over the wound of the vein as previously described, and understand the great pressure needed there until the bleeding has stopped from the upper part of the wound, and do not remove the arrow; and over the arrow, spray cold water with great coolness until the blood clots and thickens; and in any case where cauterization or medication is necessary.
On incisions, punctures and wounds, and on leech therapy and sores and their equivalents.
I have already said in the first capital that cauterization with fire is appropriate and medication that burns, as well as the occasions and causes for this, and the necessary instruments and forms of cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters from the head to the feet.
In this chapter I will proceed according to that method so that the seeker may find relief, therefore on that which he has asked for.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, my son, that you learn that in this chapter is the matter of the first capital on cauterization.
And because it is necessary to be very careful, for in the operation that is in this chapter many times evacuation occurs which is with blood and in which there is life, the aspersio of the vein or an incision on the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the ulcer or extraction of arrowheads or puncturing of stones, etc. And of all these, there is fear and trembling and in the most of them death lurks.
And I advise you not to let this happen to you in which there is doubt, for sometimes you must manage affairs of people with many types of illnesses. And of these, some may go with their illness and death is easy for them, because of the severity of their illness, because of the length of their illness, and because of the illness that signifies death.
And of these, the one who gives you his wealth and orders it, you hope for health from him, but his illness is harmful.
And therefore it is not necessary that you agree with the one who comes to you who has this method; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause concerning him unless you have certain knowledge that verifies what you should do, and whose succession brings praiseworthy results.
Use in the treatment of all your patients prediction and indication for that to whom health is converted, because in him lies help for you in acquiring reputation, memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires his understanding in you and do not depart from His direction and protection, because that is in His hands.
And you should divide this chapter into sections as described in the previous chapter on cautery, regarding the care of the head down to the feet, so that it is easier for you to understand and find what you need and what is necessary.
First Chapter.
Treatment of water contained in the head of infants.
Know that this disease, observed in infants, must be treated by delivering the infant and when the newborn is weak, the head of the infant should be lifted.
And some cases are observed due to a hidden cause which is not known.
However, I do not see this disease except in infants; and all those whom I have seen die are considered lost work, and thus it appears to me useless work in them.
And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and the child's head remained so large that it could not stop increasing due to the size of the child's head, and moreover, increased moisture led to death by cold.
And this moisture is added between the skull and the bone, or it is added on top of the bones at the sutures.
Because the operation in that case, if moisture is between the skull and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure in its length, and the length of the fissure should be two inches long until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore, if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is on top of the bones, this indicates that you see the joints of the head opened from all sides and the water is pressed out when you compress it with your hand in the middle and not hidden from you. It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
and draw out all the moisture; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and feathers; and bring this to boil with oil within five days, and apply liniment and cure the wound with ointments and poultices, and keep the head straight; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it appears more in the occiput, or in the front, or on the left, or on the right; and therefore pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the repletion of the water appear, and do as is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and allow blood flow and kill the patient by this flow of blood with drainage of moisture.
Third Chapter.
When a cataract or inflammation appears in the eyes or feet, and this is an ancient custom, and does not benefit from medication treatment, then you should perform the following incision on those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries in the patient's head, first cool the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also keep the neck of the patient straight with a cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and press on each side on the sides where the auricles are located, and they become hidden only in some men.
And press on the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with the sharp spatula entering into the bone at the length of the head.
And if you want, insert the probe below the artery and break it by making an incision on the sides above.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out with pulsatile exudation, which jumps out frequently.
However, if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary for you to measure from the auricle the size of the space of three fingers and press with the probe and enter into the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let out is one pint (unc.). and be careful not to let out more or less than the amount that appears from the nature of the patient and the filling of the artery in him.
Approach the wound, and if any cause of death remains on the bone, then incise it to prevent the formation of a cauterized abscess.
Wrap the wound with linen and bandages, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old illness or catarrh occurs, due to acrid humidity and the quality in the temples (eyes), or a sudden intense and similar illness, and is treated with the methods of medical care but does not improve, we have resorted to treating these diseases by extracting the arteries in the eyes or cauterizing them as shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those (the arteries) is that the patient shaves his eyebrows which are in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple as it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few men due to the intensity of frost.
If it is hidden, then you should tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and heat the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly. Then, take the probe of which this is the shape: Then bring the probe with ease into contact with the artery; and be careful in the place where it is thicker and extract that at the superior parts until you extract it from the sheath and uncover that of the tunics which are below it, all around.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the end of the index finger, and carefully incise a part according to the length of the extremities and their contraction, and there will not be bleeding, because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise from all over.
And evacuate the blood with the cup. In three places.
If the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with strong thread or cord and not cut it before puttingrefaction occurs ahead of the healing of the wound and there will be bleeding.
And cut off the excess which is between two ligaments, and do this in that hour or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone using a cautery knife until the extremities are incised, and it will remain in place for this operation.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a heated state, for cauterization helps to dissipate humidity, and therefore it is better for healing.
It is necessary to perform the extraction of the arteries in a clean place, and they should be covered with suitable powders, and it should be healed with dry medicines that make the flesh heal and with warm ones until it is healed.
If during another examination bleeding of the artery occurs, then you must restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or fill the place with clean cotton, and press your hand until the bleeding is stopped. If for any reason it is not present, you place your finger on the place until the blood coagulates, and seal the place with hot water until the inflammation subsides, and press firmly as necessary.
And what is easier in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery, since you have tested the two places and have stopped each one, as much as possible, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that the length between the extremities is extended, for it is not consolidated all over with this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two blades is similar. But if the sharpness of one blade is less than two, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades near each other, they will not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in those [tools], it is necessary to heat the fire in those and the flesh is cut easily.
And this operation is better than all other operations and easier.
And the space between the two blades should be the thickness of the finger.
Chapter fourth.
On the treatment of the heart with sharp and acid humors from the gall bladder.
When the acidic humors are present and they are in the heart of those veins that are over the skull of the head and do not improve with any cause of medical treatment, and sometimes the face of the patient turns yellow and it feels as if there is a crawling on his forehead like ants, and the gall bladder of these becomes extended, moistened so much that its skin becomes known, and its bile sacs are scaled by the acidity of the tears, the ancients treated this disease with this operation, and I name this treatment as spasm.
And you order the patient to raise his eyebrows which are on his forehead and carefully incise three fissures equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure should be equally distant from the tip of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelashes which are near the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
Observe the opening of the archways which are in two parts, and extend your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if each opening's space is measured by three fingers, then...
And if you have a sponge prepared or dry cotton cloth soaked with an extract that stops the bleeding, use it.
Place the spatula with two sharp ends, which has this shape of the incision's form: This refers to the space between the temples up to the second incision. Excise all the tissue between the two incisions and the cuff that is on the bone, and place it from the first incision up to the second incision. Then insert this spatula again into the first incision, but use another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Stop the edges of that sharp tool with the adjacent tissue, the cuff and the bone's edge, and cut them using the blunt side of the tool. Then insert it towards the middle incision until reaching the fissure. Excise all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Make sure the incision is continuous and then extend it into the middle fissure up to the other fissure.
And when enough blood collects, squeeze the areas of the blood clots.
Place a piece of old cloth on each fissure and pause over those scabs that are covered with oil and vinegar and vinegar essence. Make sure it does not cause cautery ulcers.
On the third day, remove the dressing and apply a strong infusion of warm water or tisane, and care for it with a basil infusion with rose oil and other substances until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
On the care of wounds by cauterization and ulcers descending from the incisions inside the head.
When there is a cauterized wound that continues and sometimes the patient's ulcers become extended but weak, and the eyelids ulcerate and their eyelashes fall out, and in the front of the head there is sharp, acute pain accompanied by swelling, then you should know that these symptoms come from vessels coming from incisions inside the head.
The best cure for these is as follows: tell the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the middle of the forehead, small in width (starting from the left temple to the right temple; the incision should extend to the bone; and extend your hand from the temples which are uncomfortable due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Excise all the blood with a sponge or dry cotton cloth and then fill the space between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or cotton cloth from it. Place a poultice made with oil and vinegar over them to prevent cauterized ulcers.
When the abscess is opened and it appears that the apostema has decreased in size, then it is necessary to cauterize the bone from where the new flesh starts growing, and apply the drying regimen to cure it, which causes the flesh to dry out, as if you were taking flour of wheat two parts and colophony four parts and mix them to make a plaster, and administer it in these conditions on the affected area of the native flesh.
In this section, the author discusses the treatment of gout, which is described as pain caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, particularly the feet. The recommended course of action when joint pain occurs is to make small incisions on the surface of the affected area using a pointed cautery (cauteri de punt). It is also advised to return any protruding intestines or hernias to their proper cavity and place a hand over the affected area to prevent further complications. The author then goes on to discuss the treatment for an abscess, advising that if the abscess has decreased in size, one should cauterize the bone from where new flesh is growing and apply a drying regimen made from flour of wheat and colophony to help the flesh dry out. This plaster is to be administered on the affected area of the native flesh.
In the next section, the author discusses the treatment for what is referred to as "the thing that attacks in the ears." The recommended course of action is to make an opening in the affected area using a cautery (cauteri), and then cleanse it with vinegar or wine. Following this, a plaster made from the root of the plant called "oropendola" is applied. The author provides instructions on how to prepare the plaster, specifying that one should take the root of the plant and boil it in water until it softens, at which point it can be formed into a plaster and applied to the affected area.
The cause that attacks in the ears can be one of four types: mineral, similar to stone (such as iron and glass), plant-based (such as garlic or beans), fluid (like water, vinegar and similar liquids), or an animal.
Therefore, when stone or other similar causes that do not fit properly in the ear are present, the ear should be left open to the air, and if one can see the stone, then distill some volatile oil or sizam in it, administer the extraction, and make the patient sneeze by applying a suitable condition, and apply drops of the solution to the nostrils to encourage sneezing. Place some cotton or wool in the ear canal to block it, and gently pull the ear open at its edges, as this is often forgotten with these causes.
If not blocked, administer the extraction using the instrument called "gesti epicicarios," which has the following form:
If it is blocked with the "gesti" (referring to a tool or instrument), that's fine; otherwise, administer the extraction using a thin probe of little duplication.
Therefore, if not blocked by the substance mentioned earlier, make a canal from wire and insert the tip of the canal into the ear canal and close the opening of the canal with wax and oil softened so that it is not open except for the canal itself. Extract it with your breath and strong attraction, as it has often been noted that this can be helpful in removing the substance from the ear.
However, if not blocked in this manner, take some alum or beeswax prepared with the tool used to catch birds, which holds a small quantity of powder, and place it at the end of a stick, then wrap it around that area carefully. Then insert the alum or beeswax into the ear canal with ease, and gently remove the moisture from the ear.
Therefore, if not blocked by all the causes mentioned earlier, you must be careful when cutting the affected area to avoid causing an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting the affected area is to first make the patient bleed from the saphenous vein and then extract the blood using the method of its virtue, and place your hand between the patient's teeth and turn their head to the side, making a small incision in the ear canal at the point where the bleeding will come out. The incision should be in the shape of a crescent moon to allow access to the stone, and once the stone is exposed, remove it using appropriate tools; then close the incision at that time with speed, and cure it until it heals.
If the cause in the ear is one of the fats that grow and swell, administer the cure and extraction for it; but if it does not respond to your treatment, you should take thin sponge (spatum teune) according to this form: and administer the abscess of the fat that has formed in the ear.
Do not do this when you think that the substance is already moistened by the steam of the ear, and place it in several cotton balls or wool, and extract it with scissors or a thin probe (subtil) as described earlier, or by incision as mentioned above, as the extraction will be relieved.
When the water that enters into the ear of the patient, who suffers from sneezing, starts, it fills his ear with old fluid and rubs on the ear in which the water is located; if forgotten, it's good; otherwise, take soft pearls and leeches according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly in the fire, make the patient insert one of those into the hole of his ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike another stone on the stone that is within the ear. Do not let this go on with the stone until all the water has been forgotten.
Do not let this go on with the stone until all the water has been forgotten. And when the water is forgotten, take paper or cloth. and place one end of it over the hole of the ear and stretch the other end into the fire until the edge of it is burned off.
And then take another cloth and do this several times until all the water is forgotten, and pull it out with a tube as described above with the stone remover.
But in the removal of an animal that enters into that ear, if it is small, do as described above; but if it is large and causes pain in the head, administer its removal quickly and easily, and this should be done before all other causes of discomfort in the ear.
But in the removal of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what was said above and in the section on distillation and do not achieve success, then you must look at the ear towards the sun.
And thus if any cause of worms appears, remove it quickly or gently, but if there is no cause, take a tube that is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top in the shape of an inverted cone. Insert the narrow end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and apply suction strongly with it, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if no improvement is observed in the patient, close the circuit of the tube with wax as described; administer distillation, which the ancients have used for the cure of worms, and consult the treatment of distillations.
Make your effusion with the tool that infuses the medicinal oils into the ear, which is shaped like this: Make it of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, with a small hole at the bottom.
And thus be sure that the tube of continuous infusion is in the concavity of the ear where it will be needed. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the appropriate cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube  which is in the ear -, and place the ray with the wrapped end and squeeze it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is infused into the ear should be previously heated gently in the fire for a little while. And be careful that the cause to be distilled in the ear is not too hot, as medicines for the ear cannot tolerate heat.
Chapter VII.
On the cure of blockage of ears.
Sometimes young children suffer from obstruction in the womb of their mothers, and this can also occur in some men, blockage in the ear meat due to inflammation or rotten flesh in that area; and this blockage sometimes occurs in the prepuce of the auricle which does not heal, and sometimes it occurs in other parts.
And that which occurs in the prepuce of the auricle, which does not heal, is among the most difficult cases for treatment.
And in that case where healing occurs, you must place the ear of the patient towards the sun and look at it. And thus if obstruction appears, open it with a thin spatula, shaped like this:
If the end of the obstruction is narrow with one side sharp and the other not, make the spatula two lemons wide so as not to injure the ear.
And thus if the obstruction is due to new flesh in the ear or its meat, remove it quickly and gently until all the flesh has been removed.
If an operation is required near the ear, then take thin, flexible iron and heat it slightly, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
If there is a need for an operation due to the swelling of the ear, you should alleviate the pressure and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear.
Place a bandage on the ear according to the size of the wound that you have wrapped in Egyptian balm; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound, or you take some other remedy and immerse it in oil and pulverize it on top of the bandage and use it; if the ear has already been dressed, then you must remove the dressing and replace it with another that you will wrap in beeswax that has been made with rose oil until the abscess hardens. Carefully nurse it until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding from the ear, immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that restricts blood flow, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of athelia (cataracts) that affect the eyelids.
Cataracts which extend to the eyelids of some people are sometimes moist and dry in others.
Therefore you should have them with tweezers or scissors, and cut them out with an instrument suitable for the purpose, and place a bandage over the area afterwards.
But if pain accompanied by bleeding occurs, you should cauterize them with lancicular subtle cautery.
The best cauterization is near the incisions and trophic veins that return when there remains any cause of their rupture; and when they are cauterized with fire, these ruptures are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of large swellings that occur on the eyelids of some people.
Swellings that extend to the eyelids of some people are caused by a condition similar in intensity and hardness to large swelling, which is why it is called "large swelling".
This is an accumulation of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids.
Therefore the operation is to determine whether the swelling originates from the eyelid and spreads everywhere, in which case it is mild.
Therefore cut it open along the length of the swelling and remove it from all sides with ease until it drains, and then suspend it with tweezers and remove it.
If the swelling is large, you should adjust it with suture, and care for it until it heals.
If it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the blood in it will restore and nourish it.
If the large swelling is declining inside the eyelid, you should expose the inner surface of the eyelid, remove the swelling with tweezers where necessary, and press it from all sides. If the incision of the eyelid is long, do not attempt it for any reason.
And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water and care for the area with nourishing treatment until it heals.
Chapter X.
Treatment of exophthalmos (protruding eyes) above the eyelid.
Exophthalmos is an inflammation that occurs in the conjunctiva of the upper eyelid, particularly in children, who it aggravates and often leads to their cataracts. They cannot tolerate bright light due to tearing.
Therefore they often lie on their faces all the time and sleep with their eyes closed; and under their lower eyelids there are swollen and inflamed areas that have already been covered by inflammation, and signs of imminent hernias appear in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, the hernia comes out through them.
Another method of operation is to make the patient place their head on your lap, and place a cloth over them and apply heat, making a circle large enough to contain all the hernias from all sides, and then placing it on top and pressing it with your fingers to force the hernia into the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle with a scalpel, taking care that the incision is not larger than the one made during a lithotomy.
But in the incision, it is necessary that you cut through the cord entirely until you reach the hernia, because in many cases the hernia can be removed by making an incision similar to a white cyst.
Therefore, remove it with bandages that you have wrapped between your fingers on the outside and roll it back and forth between your right and left hands until it is expelled.
And be careful not to stitch up the incision because, with the scalpel, you may not reach the eye and injure it.
If your artery does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust one small piece facilitating its procession (artery), then pull that out as we have said; immerse rags in warm water and vinegar, place them over the area, and press hard using powders.
Also, they crush salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure to remove what remains of that moisture.
Cure what is inside to heal it.
If an abscess occurs at the cauterized spot, then cure it with plasters made of cedarwood until healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods for touching the sick.
When in the eyelids of the sick is born due to the tightening of natural hairs and aging, then we touch the sick person and perform methods for illnesses such as constant tearing and softening of eyelids and gauze on it until it becomes a cause of destruction of the eyelid which is called touching the eyelid, and treatment is done in four ways: or by cauterizing with fire; or with sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by touching with incision and suturing; or by cane as I will say.
Therefore you must hold the head of the patient with one hand; turn the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into the one in which there is no split beyond the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the skin above, and it should be  near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are found  near the roots, and pull the skin upward with the needle, and turn the eyelid to the right.
Then make an incision in the split of the eyelid beyond the hairs, and insert a spatula for the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor up to the lacrimal canal; then pull out the skin and place small pieces of cotton or cloth and powder on it, and press down on the eyelid like a fig leaf of myrtle.
But it is necessary that the figure should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, as it varies among men, as some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
Then make an incision with the spatula along both lines that you have marked, and start from the lacrimal major to the lacrimal minor. And if your fissure is near the natural hairs like that of a king (i.e., large).
Then place the uncus in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and excoriate it completely, and adjust the incision with scissors along both edges with gauze or fine wool, remove blood, and make superfluous skin adhere on both eyebrows with certain adhesive substances if you want to do so, otherwise, do not treat.
Approach the stitching of the wounds within three or four days, and take care of it.
If you wish, leave the wound unsutured and treat it with something that dries and contracts, as the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and the addition of something on it; however, suturing is better, and therefore, the ancients preferred this.
But in the patient, there should be solicitude, and it is a good action, and it is not to be feared.
And another method in treating is to draw on the eyelid with balsam of myrtle and then raise it with three needles separated and joined together as follows:
But if this is not possible, hold the needles and do not let them touch one another, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and pierce the upper eyelid near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other eyelet near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the two needles evenly along your fingers, and lift the entire cord in this manner as we have recommended.
Lift the edges of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it heals.
But if an abscess occurs, make an incision or an opening for it, and fill the abscess with sulphur and warm compresses.
Sometimes swelling occurs on the eyelid, so you must use what we mentioned about incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some cases.
Treating canker (cancro) is done as follows: You turn the eyelid inside out and cut the figure within as I have previously described; then, by art, you make two canals or two fine tubes, the length of which should be equal to that of the eyelid, and the width of them should be less than the width of the space. You have already made incisions at the ends of each division, where you have the threads.
Apply a thin solution underneath the eyelid of the eyebrow, and tighten each canal of each division with strong binding, leaving it for some days, as the cord will die by constriction and be rejected, and it will eventually fall off by itself.
But if it takes too long, then you break the thread and treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when the eyelid is raised, the hairs do not penetrate.
And this is the shape of the two canals that you will make as follows: And the size of the length and width should be neither too large nor too small.
Title XII
On the removal of penetrating hairs in the eyebrow with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard, sharp, and penetrating the eyebrows, the operation in this case is that you take a thin needle, place it on the soft part of the cedar or lion, and adjust the ends of it carefully so that each one moves subtly. And the length of the needles should be equal to the size of a palm (approximately 5 inches).
And prepare another thin needle nearby, and use its ends as needed.
Place the patient's head on your lap and position it near the sun so that your work is visible, as this is a delicate and minor operation.
And introduce the needle into the root of the hair with care and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
And pull out the hair above and insert it into the incision made previously, ensuring that there are one or two or three hairs but not more.
And pull your hand with the hair out of the incision in the eyelid above the natural hair.
But if the incision is not wide enough and the hair has not been pulled out, pull the incision at the divisions below with the needle you have prepared earlier until the incision above is wider.
And watch the eyebrow to ensure that you pull out the incision and the needle, grind each hair with a pestle and leave the pestle for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows well over it.
And if the hair is scant and short, you adjust a long hair from natural hairs, lift it up or let it be shorn so that it extends until there is some space, then lift that up.
The capital number refers to chapter 13 in the text. This is just a note for organization and context. If you'd like, I can include this in the translation as well:
On the treatment of echidna that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When the echidna appears in the eyelid and it contracts when pulled towards either right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or scar or burn, and is called leporina, this is caused by consolidation of plague, scarring, wounds, or cauterization, or similar issues with improper treatment.
The method of the operation in this case is that you make an incision through that consolidation and separate the lips there, place a piece of cloth between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to use treatment for the causes that produce scabbing and constriction; because if you do this, the echidna will return worse than before and there will be no healing.
Use in the case of causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak it in water where alum and its seeds are boiled, or gum guaiacol, which is liquefied with one of the oils, and immerse the cloth in this solution and heal with it.
The secret of your treatment is that you perform everything carefully without any consolidation, as originally intended.
This operation that we have described is not a correction of eyelid echidna that restores the shape of the area as it was originally.
Capital number refers to chapter 14 in the text. This is just a note for organization and context. If you'd like, I can include this in the translation as well:
On the treatment of eyelid echidna found below (lower eyelid).
This echidna that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is truly called echidna, can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental echidna occurs due to wounds, cuts, burns, or similar issues.
The method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, and make the thread pass from the tear duct on the left side to the tear duct on the right side until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin at the upper edges with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and cut the area with a wide spatula. And thus, if the shape of the eyelid is restored as required, it is good; otherwise, take the root and hold it in the split figure, and with that turn the lower eyelid, and make two slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
The extremities of the two slits should be made at the two angles of the incision, which you have made until they converge, and form an angle where they meet so that when they come together, the figure is formed.
This figure is the Greek letter "" (Lambda).
Then remove the skin in that amount which is the width of the narrow part below (lower eyelid), so that the eyelid is visible.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread, and heal those areas with the remedies mentioned earlier and ointments until they are healed.
And if it is necessary to extract by incision, suture, or cautery, then you must make a clean incision on the skin of the eyelid as directed. Then separate the foreskin between two labia as directed.
In the summary of the sermon on the treatment of alxacrati (which is above or below), it must run in operation, according to its preparation for alxacrati, and that form is diverse in shape like grains.
The wise craftsman always prepares tools for every possible manner that can be entered to return the figure to its natural form or similar to it, and the patient according to the operation and instruments in the greatest dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men whose eyelid is fused above the white part of the eye and is hindered by its movement and natural functions, then it must be removed from the edge of the eyelash below the eyelid, and lift it up or stretch it out with oil.
And carefully cut the adhesion with a thin spatula that is not sharp, taking care to be gentle so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the spatula without touching the white part of the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such as to easily remove the adhesion and restore the eyelid to its natural form, and heal the entire adhesion.
And apply warm water or saltwater to the eye, and you can also distill oil of roses in it.
Separate the space between the eyelid and the cornea with gauze soaked in wool oil infused with albumen of egg, and apply it to the eye for three days using consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of a nail and the removal of skin growths around the eyelids.
Know that the nail can be of two types: either it is nerve-like and hard like a small stone; or it is not nerve-like, resembling congealed white moisture, which when touched by a hot iron, or if it is pressed, it breaks off and no oil is inserted into it.
And both the spices do not start before the tear duct above, which is small and gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of air.
But the method of working in the incision is that the patient holds their head in your lap, and opens their eyes wide, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with one finger and extend it to the sides above. Then take a needle and insert it into a hair of horse or ox or cow, or something similar, or strong skin, or bend the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the side of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and hold the nail with tweezers; and extend it to the sides above, and remove the hair from the side of the nail that covers the pupil. And so you follow the hair to its root.
Then you incise the remnant in the root of the tear duct with a thin spatula or small forceps, and clean the natural tissue around the tear duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears during the incision.
And sometimes the nail with the sole extended or held with tweezers, as has been said, and it should be cut out with a lion-shaped spatula, which is the shape of this:
Be careful not to touch the corneal tissue with the spatula and avoid causing rupture, and make sure that the pupil is perforated.
Then make the incision in the eye with a little saltwater or salty solution made of vinegar, and let it stay there for another day; and take care of it with water that covers what is inside until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-wrapped and cannot be penetrated with the needle, then this type of nail should be treated with medications, and it will heal in the same way as other nails and is recommended in the division.
If you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a thin lion-shaped spatula with sharp accuracy as follows: With sharp accuracy. And if it is rarefied and hardened and grows in that root, then distill your oil in the eye made of vinegar or rose water or saltwater, and apply it to the eye for another day.
And be sure to perform the operation until all of that which is from it is removed, unless a counter-abscess forms in the eye, in which case you should remove that, and treat the abscess at the beginning until it heals.
And be sure to perform your operation on it with reason until it is healed.
The evacuation of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed by a strong odor, should be suspended for an hour; then incise that part of it, and do not deepen the incision to prevent the flow of tears.
Then apply steam to the lacrimal head and make it sweat until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
The incision of ulcers and that which is born of flesh attached to the odor.
Sometimes in the ulcers of alcu, flesh grows red, and it becomes swollen before covering the pupil or pressing against the eyelids and strongly compressing the eyelids at their edges, forming a rosebud-like appearance similar to a balcony railing.
But the operation on him is that the patient lies still with their head on your lap; and then you open the ulcers of that area and collect all that flesh with scissors or tweezers, and then incise the flesh from the beginning to the end using the scissors, and be careful not to touch the wound during your operation.
And make the incision with which you shall incise that one or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forcops which are gathered according to the shape of it as this chapter may require.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, fill the wound with salt powder or distill into it red powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and then wait until a cautery pus forms over the wound, covered by albumin of egg white.
If there remains any cause of algares and is full of cauterized blood, and you fear a cauterized pus, then you should lance the wound and care for that cauterized pus with what will dissolve that pus, and then apply treatment to it until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh attached in this manner that occurs in the algares of this kind.
But you must be careful to avoid all care of the wound through natural or accidental means, perform with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member has suffered enough from this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Collect samples from the urine
Urine samples are requested which will be tested and the clothing around it should not be disturbed for several days. Uncover the urine container for as many days as needed.
At the beginning, it is necessary to first determine if the urine in which the sample is located is strong and there is no other illness present in addition to gout, then you collect that sample.
You command the patient to bend their head towards your chest and suspend those veins with an ounce or two depending on your judgment; this ounce should be of subtle doubling in this manner:
or two ounces gradually into one container according to this method:
Then collect those veins carefully, using fine and delicate methods, while avoiding blood, until you see the veins becoming swollen from the urine and turning red.
Be careful not to damage the urine container or its stopper; if your operation is in the middle of the day, and you are firm in your actions, do not insert anything but those veins.
And when you are done, you then distill the urine in order to make it green or red for that acidity to dissolve what has been collected from the sample.
But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at that time, then you place everything with what relieves the pain of it and let it rest for several days until the pain is alleviated and an abscess or pus has formed.
And repeat the process as necessary until it heals.
This is the procedure for the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On reduction of arteries to the nose.
When you treat arteries with cautery or sharp medicine as per the previous narrative and it does not heal, do not delve into it, but instead make an incision over the abscess when it is mature, and extract all the moisture that is in it and allow the bone to be exposed.
Therefore, when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has this shape:
It is called a sharp head, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be round like an arrowhead, pierced by drilling or abrasive powder for a subtle piercing (as shown in the following image).
Stop it on the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the corruption is scraped off.
Let it rest for some time, and then restore the area with drying and binding agents.
If the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown back and it separates from the body and remains for 40 days without being renewed or forming an abscess or other complications, then you know that it is healed.
If not, do not delve into it but rather reduce the opening to the shape of the nose, and follow this method: you dig around the bones or with sharp medicine until the bone is exposed, then you take a piece as follows:
The handle should be extended towards the tip as shown in some cases.
And let it rest on the bone, and that piece should be from the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the urine, and rotate your hand with the piece until you penetrate the entire bone, and the patient will feel air coming out through their nose when they exhale.
Therefore, restore the area with drying agents as you have been instructed.
Once the flesh and area is hardened, return the material that flowed out from the wound to the nose, thus it is lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On reduction of the protrusion of the urine container.
When the urine container protrudes completely without any inconvenience or diminution of the clothing, it is necessary to lax the patient, and then to have them follow their normal routine, and to pause for a while in the neck without scarification and with good suction; and then pause over the urine container with a liniment made of aloe, opium, myrrh, and frankincense, and strengthen the plug over the urine container without using too much powder.
The method of powders is to take cloths from the lion's wool, and each cloth should be folded into four layers; and make powder from these.
Then place them one on top of another according to the quantity required for use. Apply strength to the powders using tough, firm fabric and strong binding; repeat the plasters with juice without cutting; remove the plasters and let the wound rest day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then it must be tightened firmly.
Then remove the ligament and rest day and night as mentioned before.
If the wound has been reduced (healed), that's good; but if not, then apply the plasters with powders and binding and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXI
On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunica.
When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes elevated, proceed outside the eyelids as with a small knife, and shape the incision like a crescent moon; and if you want to make an incision, perform the operation as follows: you insert the needle into the uvea from below at the limbus (the junction between the cornea and the white part of the eye), and then place another needle through the conjunctiva (the transparent mucous membrane that lines the inside of the eyelid) where the tear duct is located, and let it penetrate; then remove the first needle according to its position; and make an incision in the double fold and lift the uvea around the needle circuit, and tighten that area.
Then remove the needle and let the yarn sink into the egg white (albumen) of the eye, allowing the thread to be absorbed.
Then take care of the eye with something that supports it until the wound is healed.
And some weeks after the entire area around the eye is covered with a circle of fabric, it should be perforated with a thin spatula that reaches the edge of the eye, allowing moisture to penetrate the white part of the eye (sclera), and gently lower the eye and insert it as soon as possible.
Then tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
On the treatment of conjunctivitis (inflammation of the membrane covering the white part of the eye and the inside of the eyelid)
This disease called conjunctivitis is not just mucus discharge that accumulates in the eye, but something else.
But the method of working on it (conjunctivitis) is to make the patient lie down with their head straight and supported by your two hands, so that you can see the discharge coming from the eyes towards the lower eyelid, and then dry it without letting it descend, and keep the light out, and the patient should be able to see the causes as they did before.
If it does not descend (to the lower parts), know that it is water.
If it is not prepared to descend into urine, then make the patient hold between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the surrounding panniculus, near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea at the crown (inside the location), until the urine is excreted.
Once the urine is excreted, you must distill it into water, adding honey or water in which you have boiled fennel and honey.
And apply treatment for other causes until it is cured.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of urine descending from the genitalia.
I have already said the kinds of urine in their classification and which should be pierced with the needle, then perform that according to the patient's health.
Then you must make the patient lie down between your hands on a chair and let him urinate, holding it in tightly.
And place your right hand near the eyelid of the left urine, if it is the left urine that contains water; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
And with your right hand take alum, if it is the left urine; or with your left hand, if it is the right one.
And place the tip of the alum near the crown for the thickness of the root in the alum of the urine from the tear duct, and then rub alum with its power and roll your hand on it.
And insert the alum into the urine and feel that alum has reached due to the heat.
It is necessary that the measure of the path of alum to the puncture be equal to the measurement of the space, which is from the pupil to the end of the black spot (the corona of the urine); because you will see the pupil with the vision of the urine through the clarity of the cornea.
And place the alum into the location where the urine is, and then draw it down a little at a time, and if the urine descends quickly, you must have the patient quickly drink what he sees with his eyesight, and place alum in his urine.
And rest for a little while; therefore, if the urine has descended, you must wait a little longer until alum is not expelled.
And when it is dry and does not descend, you must remove the alum easily, rub it a little with your hand, dissolve a small amount of clear salt in gemma and use it to wash the inside of the urine; then wait outside the urine, stop or wool infused in rose oil and album of huou and liguidum with water for the urine.
However, we and those of our time stop on that one with a compress soaked in albumen of huou (egg white).
And if it does not obey your alum in the inside of the urine due to its hardness (since some men have a very hard urine), then you must take the spatula, which is called albid, and this is its form:
And therefore pierce that conjuncture with the albid, and do not hurt yourself in the process, and make sure to do it gently towards alum.
And insert the alum as previously stated.
You must complete your work, prepare the patient's bed for sleep with a comfortable bed made in a dark room, and forbid any movements.
And let nature take its course for the smoothness of the situation, and do not tilt his head to the right or left in any way.
Let him rest according to his disposition for three days.
Approach that person in that darker place and uncover the wound, examine it carefully, show them some causes, then return the limb into the day seven [days later].
It is necessary to do this during the time of healing or as soon as possible, apply an infusion. It is necessary that you remove this because water can easily penetrate it due to its great and violent swelling.
But if an abscess occurs cauterized, you must remove the pus within seven days and treat it with a remedy that will help the abscess heal.
Then clean the wound and place a plaster over its oral surface to control the swelling for several days, it exists in the darkest place.
And gradually lead them out of that darkness and talk about their causes with them.
Know that it is not excused for a disciple to miss the vision on any occasions, and then you should be bold in performing the operation.
We have now heard of one of those who are from the Artes, and one said that a fire was made in the Magdame's anus and the water is drawn out with it.
However, we have not seen this in our land who has perfected it, nor is it found in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
These are the forms of the medicines for the uterus, by means of which one can act on those who do not know them.
They are made of earth or iron specifically, and they are the extensions of them with this subtle triangular tip, the sharp end resembling that form.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dead flesh in the nose.
When in the nose various dead fleshes are born, some of which have a cause similar to the scorpion of moving legs, or polyps of the feet; and this illness is called polyp because it resembles the foot represented by it. And from there comes cancerous, ulcerated, dark-colored flesh; and from there is the lion's flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in the one who is not fraudulent or cancerous among these fleshes, it is necessary to cauterize the patient with your hands and expose them to the sun, cut open their nostrils, and pick the wound on those fleshes. And remove that from the sides of the wound, and make a clean cut in it with a sharp, fine spatula on the side where you know that all the flesh is already exposed; if some reason remains for which abscission is possible, then you remove it with one of the subtle instruments until there is no more cause. But if it is a lord with blood or an abscess occurs cauterized, you must stop the bleeding; or if it is malignant abscesses, you must tie it and cauterize it inside until it is abscised and all the cavities are left open.
And apply hot water or vinegar to the nose near the incision. But if the nose is opened and moisture passes into the palate, you must know that it has healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, you must know that inside it is dead flesh in the puss on the bones of the nostrils, to which no abscission has been achieved.
Therefore, you must insert a needle of sufficient thickness into the one who is swollen and moisten it in nutmegs, pause between each nutmeg the amount of the finger or thumb, and anoint the patient and introduce the end of the needle into the nostril with the ray or another cause that is possible for him.
And after this has been done, draw the patient's smell into it until it reaches the channels of the nostrils, and it will be exuded on his forehead, for many observations resemble this action to children in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who want to do it.
And pause the two extensions of the needle, one end that protrudes from the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and apply the serrated flesh with the needles that are in the needle, and do it until you know that the flesh is on the needles of the needle.
And remove the needle, and pause at the nose near the extraction of the blood with a cotton ball, and do it for three days or more until the pus has corrupted everything that remains of the fleshes.
And at the end of the illness, pause at the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
If the healing process lasts longer than expected, use that one.
This is the form of the instrument for the capillary purger maker, with which essential oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
Make it of silver or earth, similar to a small uncovered lantern, such as a small bowl and lid, with a small hollow compartment underneath for the medicine.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a cane, and the cannula of the capillary purger maker should be flat, open; at its end, there should be a handle with which you will have it when you are sucking oil or whatever liquid or essential substances you want.
Chapter 25.
From the nostrils at the extremities of the nose.
When a boil appears at the extremities of the nose, it is enlarged and noticeable on certain days within which the regulation of menses occurs.
Therefore, when it begins to appear, you should incise it at the start and drain it entirely. Then place something over the area or apply burning cautery or medicine that burns in its place.
However, if its incision is delayed until it becomes noticeable, then consider whether it is hard, dark-colored, and with little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous ulcer, for a boil that incises this ulcer can cause great harm to the patient.
If the ulcer is soft and not dark-colored, and incision is possible in its entirety, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, cure the area with whatever evacuates and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is dissolved by ulceration or similar conditions.
Know that when continuity is dissolved in one of these joints, there is little benefit in performing the operation except for certain men.
Therefore, when you intend to treat any cause of this, consider whether it is a fresh ulcer with its own blood supply, and then you adjust the lips of the ulcer with suture and heal it until it heals.
And if the lips of dissolved continuity are already separated and each part is healthy, it is necessary that you cauterize each divided edge of its margin until bleeding stops. Then adjust the two lips with suture and tie them, sprinkle dragon's blood powder on it and let it rest for two or three days, apply an emplastrum of diaphoretic herbs, or one of the consolidating plasters, and leave it there for two to three days, remove it and change the emplaustrum until the pus is expelled, and heal with linctus until it heals.
However, the method of suture is that you add the dissolution of continuity or with needles as in abdominal suturing, or add the dissolution of continuity with pus as you have been taught.
Chapter 27.
Extraction of the causes that appear in the two lips in their divided parts.
When boils appear in the divided parts of a man's lips, they are hard ulcers resembling pustules, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary that you separate and cut each lip of the boil, fill the cavity with a solution made from fresh sage triturated until the blood stops flowing, wash it with warm water and heal the area with an ointment that has astringent properties, until it heals.
Chapter 28.
Incision of the meat adjusted in the gums.
Gangrene sometimes occurs in the adjusted meat of the gums, which the ancients called albulus, so it is necessary that you hang it with hooks or keep it with a probe and incise it as needed, and allow blood to flow or drain the pus.
Place a cushion over the affected area (sore or wound), or apply styptic powder or cauterizing agents.
If the flesh returns (relapses), then incise it secondarily and cauterize it, for cautionery will not return again.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason for tooth extraction:
When on the surface of the teeth, both those in the root and those erupted, and between the gums, sharp protrusions, growths, or some ulcerated areas are blackened and become citric or greenish under the gum due to corruption, they are called "black teeth."
Therefore, it is necessary that you hold the patient firmly between your hands and keep his head on your side, extract the teeth in which such protrusions and causes appear like sand, until no further cause remains, and remove the blackness, citrinitas, and other substances until they are purified.
If the reason for tooth extraction is still present at its onset, that is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning over them on another day and on the second and third until it reaches its final statement in what you wish.
Know that teeth require various types of resorbers (resorptive agents) in different shapes and forms according to your treatment plan. Therefore, since the resorber for a tooth in the root is different from the resorber used between teeth, you should be prepared with the appropriate types of resorbers that you will soon see.
Chapter XXX.
Extraction of Teeth
It is necessary that you cure the tooth of its pain with all caution and delay in its complete extraction, because there is no reason to replace the ulcerated area when it is extracted, because it is a sublimate that is an excuse for its extraction.
However, when the patient is to have that tooth extracted, you must absolutely be certain which tooth is causing the pain, because many ulcerated areas cause the patient discomfort and are in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, as we have often seen in barber surgeries.
Therefore, you should be certain which tooth is causing the pain, and if you know this, it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with spittle in which there is some virtue, until it dissolves the tooth from the gum all around its perimeter, and then apply the forceps or fine-tipped forceps to the beginning, little by little, until it yields.
And apply oil or ointment with strong holders and a strong grip, keep the patient's head between your thumb and forefinger firmly so that he does not move too much, and extract the tooth correctly in manner that you do not break it or cause him further pain.
And therefore, if the tooth is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it next to it with ease and apply force to its removal as at the beginning.
However, if the tooth is fractured or corroded, it is necessary that you wrap that fracture with fabric and tighten it at the tip of a thin rod so that it is not broken during your constriction on it with forceps.
And you must work with extreme caution and incise the entire circumference of the gum and use your strength carefully to avoid breaking it and leaving a part detached from it, and return to the patient for his greater discomfort than the initial pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless approach to extraction, as they do not administer what we have recommended; because many times they cause great swellings on sick men which are difficult to treat, and all of its remedies remain ineffective or some of them, or that you extract it with bones from the jaw as many times we have testified.
And before the extraction of it, wash the mouth with water or vinegar and salt.
And if bleeding flows from this area, such as many times ulcers do, then drizzle some vinegar and asperge it on the wound, and if the vinegar does not stop the bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps should be slender with jaws that are narrow at the beginning and become longer, but short and thick, so that they are not bent when operating with them.
They should be as thick as sometimes necessary, but not so narrow that when they are tightened, they are bent; they should be short and long.
The forceps should be made of iron from India and the jaws of them should be straight but with teeth on the edges that interlock and tighten strongly; sometimes the jaws are shaped like a stork's beak (called ciconia), which is strong.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones broken in the jaw.
When the removal of a tooth that is broken remains for some cause, you must wait over the area to soften it by bandaging for one or two days; then introduce forceps or pincers whose jaws are shaped like a stork's beak (called ciconia) or guanta, which is the shape of the forceps:
The jaws of them should be made hollow like a file or an almond.
And if you do not comply with these forceps or pincers, then you must be careful on the edge and carefully remove all the flesh and insert an instrument called atali, which is a small lever of this form:
It should be of short length with a thick end, but not swollen so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, it is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which this is their shape: the first instrument is a triangle with some thickness on one side.
The second instrument is a triangle with a narrow tip.
And you are helped by this instrument, which has two arms of the following shape: and with other instruments that I will mention for tooth removal; for it is helpful when using this instrument similar to a large pair of scissors, and this is its shape:
of the triangular tip bent or short, which is somewhat thick but not swollen so that it is not broken.
And you should also know that the instruments for teeth movement are similar to other instruments.
The skillful and expert craftsman must find the right tools for himself according to what this signifies the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not know or mention their proper instruments, due to the shapes of different species.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth is broken or dislocated, then apply a warm poultice to that area with what is appropriate for it from the instruments and forceps that I have mentioned in the removal of incisions of teeth, and help yourself with gestures whose shape is this:
It should be somewhat thick but gradually, and held in the mouth to prevent it from escaping or fleeing until all the bone is forgotten; then restore the area with appropriate medications.
If there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that fracture and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When a tooth is prominent not according to its natural form, and this occurs more often in women and especially venerable young girls; therefore you must consider: if the tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible for suturing or liniment, then you should perform a root canal on that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument, which has the following shape, similar to a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel of very sharp edge.
Make your incision with the shape you have chosen to incise that tooth into pieces over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and do not cut any other teeth in the process.
And if the prominent tooth is suitable for filing, then file it with this Indian steel file, which has the following shape:
Let the file and the margin be made of Indian steel; let it have many small sharp points like a lima used to make needles, with which you can file the tooth gradually over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged in the process. Then straighten it at the end and cut off any remaining pieces with scissors.
If the tooth has been broken and cut off part of the tongue, then you must file the remaining portion to ensure that the sharp edge is smoothed out and the tongue does not get injured or the speech is impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver fillings.
If a tooth is lost due to a blow or extraction and the patient cannot chew food properly after medical treatment with styptic medicines, then you must fill in the gap with gold fillings instead of silver ones because silver turns green and may cause further problems in a few days, whereas gold does not change over time.
The fillings should be thin and thick depending on the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the gold or silver filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, allowing it to grow with two twists towards the affected teeth, or one twist if only one tooth is affected, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Place the dental cement into the gap where you started and press gently with ease until it is not affected anymore.
Your string should be thin enough to pass between the teeth without damaging them.
Then cut off the excess filling with forceps or pliers and place it in each location as needed, folding and hiding it between the healthy tooth and the affected tooth to avoid damaging the tongue. Tightly seal the filling with wax, like Romans do.
But if it falls out or breaks, replace it with another filling immediately in the same manner at all times.
This is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the filling for two healthy teeth and two affected teeth, like this example:
And when a tooth or teeth are re-implanted in their original locations after extraction, and they grow back as recommended and remain healthy.
And this can only be done by skillful and wise artisans.
Sometimes cow bones can be used as a replacement for teeth in certain cases, and they are shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is tightened as previously mentioned, and it remains useful for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the incision of the liniment that appears on the tongue and prevents speech.
This linament that appears on the tongue sometimes is either natural with which one is born or accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
The operation involves opening the mouth of the patient while their head remains on yours; lift their tongue and bring the corresponding nerve ligaments accordingly, to a depth that is sufficient for the tongue to be freed from its recent binding.
If there is any hardness or denseness, and this is caused by the consolidation of a wound, then you cast hot oil on it and cut through to the depth where the ligament was cut and the denseness is resolved.
"Be careful not to make a clean incision in the flesh at the edge (of the wound) and cut through the arch and let blood flow out."
"Then wash the wound with vinegar or salt water or clean water, and place a linen cloth over the tongue; this is meant to keep the patient from biting their tongue every night in order for it not to become consolidated again."
"If bleeding occurs, apply a solution of vitriol and water; if blood continues to flow, then cauterize the area with a light cautery that is suitable for this purpose." "Then treat the other causes until it is healed."
"Chapter 35"
"On extracting a ranula from beneath the tongue."
"At times, an ulcer-like swelling appears under the tongue that inhibits its normal operation, and it is difficult to open the mouth."
"The operation involves opening the patient's mouth wide and examining the ulcer."
"If it appears dark or black and hard and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is cancerous."
"If it appears white with moisture, you should apply oil to it and use a fine spatula to scrape it off entirely. If blood flows during the procedure, apply the solution of vitriol (a strong acid) over it to stop the bleeding."
"Then return to your work until you have treated the issue with appropriate measures, making sure it is washed with vinegar and salt, and treat it further with other remedies until it is healed."
"Chapter 36"
"On extracting ulcers in the ears and those located at the back of the ear and other ulcers."
"When there is swelling behind the ear that feels like a gland, which can appear outside and are called 'ear glands', if they do not heal with the remedies mentioned in the division, you should consider whether the ulcer is hard, dark in color, with little sensation, you should not touch it with iron."
"If the ulcer is red and has a thick root, do not touch it with iron because of bleeding; instead, allow it to mature before either pulling it out or letting it break on its own."
"If the ulcer is white, smooth, and has a thin root, it should be scraped off."
"The operation involves determining whether the ulcer has healed with rest and complete recovery or if it has been reduced by some means. Then, you should position the patient in front of you, with their head on your lap, open their mouth wide, and a servant should hold down their tongue with a noble instrument that takes this form:"
"It should be made of silver or iron, and be thin like a knife."
"Therefore, as you press the tongue down and expose the ulcer, grab it with your tool and place oil on it. Then, pull the ulcer out at its edges as far as possible." "Another thing you should pull is some cause of the membranes (linings), and then cut it with an instrument that takes this form:"
"Another thing you should pull is some cause of the membranes (linings), and then cut it with an instrument that takes this form:" It resembles forceps, but its extremities are bent, so that the orifice of each one is facing the other, sharp, it should be made of iron and handle it carefully.
If this tool is not present to you, then make an incision with that spoon whose shape is like it: It should be sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other side.
Then, after making an incision, make another according to this method of incision and cover the incision of the patient with warm water.
If there is bleeding, cover it with water of scorzonera or myrtle root decotion or similar to stop the bleeding until the bleeding stops, and take care of it until it heals.
Sometimes we need to apply ointments or other poultices on the abscesses or boils, and make incisions according to the method I described for two incisions in a cavity.
I have been treating a woman with an abscess that was born in the groin of her body, which abscess turned dark and had little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her body, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she would have died soon if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
The abscess had already grown so much that it erupted through two openings.
So I should fistulate and insert myself into one of their orifices, and pull it out, and take a large piece of it, and I should incise the other opening where I can find the other end, and I should close its mouth, compress its tongue, and insert the orifice into the abscess.
And I should remove a large piece of it, and there was not much blood flowing from it. So the woman's groin is healed, and she should start drinking water immediately, and I should be careful about her food, so I will not continue to incise that abscess for a long time, and a new abscess will appear in its place, which I will incise until it is prolonged.
So I should anoint and cauterize the woman's groin, so that it heals more quickly; and I should walk around and not know what God has planned for me.
Chapter 37.
On the incision of an abscess that is abscessed.
When the catarr of the vulva is abscessed and long, it is called pus-filled abscess; and if it is in the lower thick and round part, it is called boil.
But when it is healed according to what has been said in the division and does not receive your treatment, and sometimes an abscess that has already cauterized and is thin remains subcutaneous, then you must incise the rounded one; and if it is long and blood-filled, dark or black in color, and not tender, then you should be careful when making the incision, because there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it as I have described its whiteness and length, you should seize the patient and press his tongue with an instrument that matches its shape and place the orifice in the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of the two instruments that are mentioned in the incision of two cavities.
And you should not incise it unless it is aligned with the natural boundary without addition, because if you incise it more, you will damage his speech.
And during the incision, use what I have recommended in the incision of two cavities, and care for it until it heals.
But if the patient is afraid of the incision, you should use ointment in the cauterization without fear, and the method of cauterization in him is only with sharp water, and you should hold his head in your lap, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have mentioned, and take some of the water that I have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the live tissue, and hold back the thick or thin part, and fill the concavity of the tool whose shape this is:
The external part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed should be concave like the handle of a spoon, and the instrument with the medicine is placed on the vulva, and the patient should lie down so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows into the intrinsic medicine through the instrument, so that it does not cause any problem in his groin and that it cleanses him.
And place your hand with the medicine, and press it on the uvula for at least an hour until you see it darken and become numb from the action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and cover it over the tip of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray into the cotton in a tube until the cotton adheres to the tube, and do this as many times as you want until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and remove it when it dries and falls off within three or four days.
If necessary to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and wipe away the cauterization in the vicinity of the grape with a damp cloth, clean with that water which is around the medicine, wash with warm water, heal from outside with plaster, and guard within with ointments until it is healed.
This kind of healing is safe when inserted for a short time with fear.
Sometimes the ulcer is healed with a subtle substance that cauterizes and inserts, which is cured with subfumigation in this manner: carefully mix calamint, origanum, ruda, scicadus arabicus, camomile, broken herbs similar to those mentioned above, and prepare all these causes or some of them in water, and immerse; boil the water well and strain it through a clean cloth; let the water be heated properly, and place a tube made of silver or iron at the center of the ulcer, and place an instrument hollowed out with arsenic on top.
Place a mouthpiece in the sick person's mouth to the point where the steam can reach the ulcer until it is covered by the swelling.
Apply the described methods until it is dry and be careful not to perform this healing at the beginning of an abscess formation, for it would worsen the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather make a lancing of the abscess after it has matured.
If you do not have this instrument, then take a tube and block the opening with wax in the patient's mouth to prevent the steam from burning it, for the wax closure prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
This healing is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and adhesions in the throat, and other causes.
Ulcers adhering in the throat or a thorn of the feet or any other cause.
Therefore, you must extract what appears from those things, over which you place your sight, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of it, so that it is clear to you what is in the throat.
And what is hidden and is obscured in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of soap or bread crumbs or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of sea sponge and soak it thoroughly with water, then make the patient swallow it, because when it reaches the location where the thorns are extracted, they will be forgotten. But if you do not have a sea sponge, take an eel and soak it in water, and when it is soft, extract it; or take a pot and place it and press the patient's throat through it.
But if those causes are not forgotten as I said before, then use an instrument made of lead in this way:
It should be as large as a small finger and in the opening of it, there should be a concavity that you insert into the patient's throat with ease.
Lift the patient's head upwards and be careful not to touch their throat bones, because it may cause pain or pierce the bone or thorn, or let the doctor handle it with his hand.
But if the patient can handle it better, because of their knowledge of the location of the attached cause and they press downwards on it, and lift their hand with the instrument upwards, all that in accordance with the quantity that was prepared until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
When the blood clot is medicated with the remedy mentioned in the division of healing with medicines and does not improve, consider placing your hand in the throat of the patient at the end, because you have prepared it as I recommended.
Therefore, if you see a blood clot, extract it gently with a thin or pointed instrument.
If it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a hot iron in the concavity of the tube and do this several times (until the blood clot is dead and comes out of the throat) and keep the patient from drinking water all day.
Approach and grasp a syringe filled with water, open its mouth in that place, and rinse it with that; and do not allow any cause to leak out from there, and change the water once an hour, for blood will soon clot when the water is felt.
But if not forgotten what has been recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafoetida using the instrument that has been recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so it may fall down.
And another method of operation in fumigation of that is to take a bowl filled with burning charcoal and covered on the side with a cover having a hole, and the end of the instrument should be placed within that hole; and hold it over the fumigation; and make the patient hold their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the fumigation does not escape before you know that the fumigation has reached the blood, for the blood will soon fall down.
If it does not work, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and have them eat salted foods and almonds, and drink no water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
This is the form of the instrument with which venous blood in the groin is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps in some ways, but is curved in another. The handle should be placed in the groin, and the end of it is similar to a stork's beak, which has a notch on the side, sharpened with a file, so that when pressure is applied, that does not slip.
Chapter XL
In which is contained the entire sermon on the opening of abscesses and their treatment.
Abscesses are of many species and various types, as we shall remember from this book. Each type is described in detail herein.
They are diverse in terms of the method of opening and treating them through two methods: one for abscesses that are located inside the body, and the other for those caused by moisture or fluid accumulation.
The second method is applicable for locations where accidents of the body occur, as an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttock; and an abscess in a soft tissue location is different from an abscess at a joint. Each of these types requires its own treatment methodology.
Some abscesses should not be opened, but rather allowed to mature and heal on their own or complete their course of action.
Some abscesses should be drained when they are hard and do not mature on their own, such as those near joints, for an abscess located near a joint will prolong the pain in that area until it is lanced, and can cause damage to the ligaments or nerves of the joint, leading to stiffness of the affected member; or if an abscess is located on a limb, it should not be delayed in lancing it until it has matured, as this could lead to gangrene; or if it is located near the buttock, it should not be lanced before it has matured, since this could cause the spread of infection into the folds within the buttock and create a fistula, or an opening that does not heal. It is important to know when to lance the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
Know that it is matured when there is the yielding of pain and the ceasing of fever, and the decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
And know how to perform perforation at the place below the abscess and where pus is coming from healing of the prominence.
Perforation should sometimes be through the length of flesh or body, if abscesses are in the parts of the neck or feet, and in places of ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries; and in the end, in all places that swell where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in fleshy places, it is better to perforate it sooner rather than later as long as digestion of the purulent matter is confirmed, thus as we have said; for if you perforate it before that, the pus's course is prolonged and there may be more putridity, and the abscess's lips are hardened and its depth increased.
If an abscess is under the skin or subcutaneous tissue, you should perforate it when necessary according to the thickness of the flesh or body, or according to what that member requires.
And it is necessary to make a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where it is necessary to make a surgical incision and open the wound, when this is done, it is said that the wound has been prepared, as with boils and carbuncles.
And of those that are incised with a wound having three angles; and of these is the one where it is incised like a fig leaf of myrrh, as with abscesses in the joints (gout).
And of those where round and crescent-shaped incisions are administered, and similar to these.
But if it is not like the ones described above (superficial boils), you should perforate it with a superficial or flat perforation only.
And when the abscess is large and has collected a lot of pus, you should perforate it and not take out all the pus at that time; having extracted part of it, leave the abscess open for another day, and then extract a larger part, and perform daily observations until it heals.
Furthermore, if the patient is a young child or elderly person in poor health, for the animal spirit often resolves with the release of pus, and the patient may die from it, you should be cautious about these cases.
Take great care with this chapter, and when performing the perforation of these abscesses, avoid pus-producing diseases and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat incision; if the abscess is large and the fissures of the perforation are numerous, you should wait for them to close on their own.
If in the abscess a piece of the skin is separated or you have concaved it around its circumference, you should close that with old cloth or thread made from fabric, as when you tie bread or herbs, without moisture; and keep it for three days; and then process and care for it until it heals.
But if bleeding occurs during the operation, you should administer warm water and vinegar mixed in a cloth that can be placed on the area of the bleeding and observed for a while.
If the flow of blood persists, then you must administer the regimen and treatment and powder which I have recommended in several places of this our book and division.
If it is in winter, and the place of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must pack powder made of vinegar and oil of caution on top of it.
If it is summer and the places are fleshy, then you must pack powder made of alum water and oil or vinegar and oil, and leave it for three days as I have said, and then you must drain the abscess and cleanse it, and administer the treatment to it that is appropriate until it is healed.
This is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the distinction I have already said about every abscess in a particular manner, this is the method of treating it by chapters specifically.
Chapter XLI.
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck, small abscesses occur that are of a special type containing tunics which are made from it; and the types are numerous.
And they have blisters, and those that contain moisture similar to lime. And those that contain moisture similar to flour and resemble them; and those that are hard and stony.
And in the sectioning and removal of them, there is no fear, as excising them does not counteract archery.
The operation in the sectioning of them is that you should expose them with an instrument shaped like this, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
If it contains moisture, then you should cut it with sectioning along the length and sectioning along the surface according to this shape:
Start the sectioning from line B to line G, so that when the moisture is evacuated, you excise it, and do not leave any cause of it at all, because too many watched return if there is any cause left.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment if it is present, or if not, in water and salt; fill it with that mixture and leave it inside for another day, because with that acid it will rot everything remaining of that skin.
Approach that area with an Egyptian poultice secondly and thirdly if necessary, until you trust that there is no other cause of that skin layer; then treat the wound with the poultice until it heals.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it as follows: Make an incision in the shape of a cross, and cut between the edges of the incision and remove it entirely from all sides, exert your effort in extracting the sac containing it.
But if you encounter resistance in your incision, do what I told you first.
Treat an opened abscess and its healing as you were told earlier; incising an opened abscess is easy because it contains little blood and moisture.
Sometimes these abscesses are in the head in some men who have no humidity at all; this is caused because when I incised an abscess on an old woman's head, it turned out to be hard, rough, white, and could not be crushed, and if anyone were to strike it, it would cause pain.
But in other types of abscesses that occur in the head, this is not relevant to the topic at hand, such as abscesses that occur on the scalps of children and require the removal of the scabs; but the incision of these should always be a superficial incision.
Pause the puncture of those in the lower part of their body, as this will alleviate the pain in the lower parts of their body.
Then treat those with what is necessary for their healing.
Chapter XLII.
On incision of scrofulas that occur on the neck.
Most often these abscesses occur in the neck and on the shoulders and in the joints; but sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body.
These abscesses that occur in the neck, and those that are caused by swelling, and all scrofula of this kind is divided into its own layer, just as in the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have mentioned before.
The types of these scrofulas are either swellings, some of which are hard, and those that contain moisture, and the malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that which you see well-positioned in the incision, whose color is similar to that of parchment and extends throughout its entirety without being attached to the nerve of the neck, nor veins, nor arteries, and is not tumorous, it must be incised shallowly along the surface of one side of the body from line G to line B, and scrape it off in its entirety, then cut two edges of the parchment with scissors or a scalpel if needed, as mentioned in the abscesses on the head, and carefully remove it piece by piece.
It is more careful not to be incised the vein or nerve.
Let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not press on you in incision or disturb the patient, and that incises what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause at the stitching of the plaster or other powders which stop bleeding, and let it dry, and leave it alone until its acuity subsides and the abscess becomes soft and turns into pus. When the blood is drained.
Then return to your operation until you have finished it.
And ask the patient if there are any other small scrofulas, therefore incise those and clean them.
And if it is near the great vein of the scrofula, then it must be ensured that it is not incised the scrofula from its root. Advance carefully so as to fold it strongly and let it fall on itself without harming it.
Then fill the wound with old linen which you have already smeared with Egyptian ointment and take care of it.
And if you incise the entire scrofula, then it must be ensured that you approximate the two edges of the wound and stitch it as soon as possible without leaving any superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the large size of the scrofula, it must be understood to incise the root of it, remove it and administer stitching and what has been said.
And that scrofula which contains moisture, it must be perforated with a superficial perforation at the location of its maturation, and pause the perforation of what is causing the deepest pus in the body, as has been said.
And apply perforation, warm with heat and similar to those, so that it destroys what has been removed from the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleaned, then take care of it with generative meat ointment until it is healed.
Chapter xliii.
On the incision of the pit of the abscess in the guolary.
The ancients made this incision on the pit of the abscess, and no one in our land has performed it.
And this is the writing of the sermon of those people.
But in men having scrotum, it must be avoided the extraction of the pit, for it is not helpful because all the veins and larger vessels of the patient are nearby.
But in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or scrotum or both ears, when the disease is not in the neck, it must be ensured to perform incision of the pit to avoid the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when we want to perform it, we must incise the pit of three or four circles of the scrotum, or a smaller one in the breadth in that which is between two circles according to quantity, and let the incision be in the cavity, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for incision because it lacks flesh and its blood vessels are easily accessible.
And if the doctor is poor, it must be ensured that you extend the parchment of the scrotum with a scalpel, and cut the parchment to the canal, but avoid blood vessels if any reason for them occurs.
And it must be ensured that you incise the cavity according to what has been recommended; and it means over the incision of the canal for the flaccid member which is from that place with the area where it has been torn apart and the abscess of the throat.
And let the wound be kept open for some time.
Therefore, since the hour is extended in which perforation is feared, add two edges of the parchment of the wound, and stitch only with the cartilage.
And apply medications that make the flesh heal until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon which we have recommended is to open the scrotum of the patient who has one or more abscesses, and if the patient comes to death, and the anus of him is cut, then someone goes to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes through the wound for some respiration, and he is saved from death.
And for this reason we command to keep the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and it is the evil for three days; and therefore we command to stitch the wound, and take care of it until it is healed.
What I see has been witnessed by me is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into the patient's chest cavity and cut off a piece of the lung, and I was called for treatment. I then listened to the wound as one listens to the dying, exposed the wound, and stopped the bleeding which was coming out from the small hole in the wound.
Furthermore, I verified that it had not pierced a vein or artery, and the wound was bleeding. I cured it until the wound healed.
The servant did not speak unless he was ordered to, and return in several days for further treatment of her condition.
Now, I will tell you that there is no fear in the section of the epiploon.
Chapter 44.
In this section, we discuss an abscess that occurs in the chest wall outside, which is called a hernia of the chest.
The hernia of the chest abscess is a large abscess as indicated by the color of the body, and it is common in women.
It can be either natural or accidental.
In the case of a natural hernia, there is no remedy for it.
The accidental hernia can be of two types, one of which resembles fatty nodes, and the other type resembles an abscess caused by thickening of an artery, in which case there is fear. It is necessary to make a presumption about it only in the case of a small one. You should examine it and investigate it as described above, if it resembles fatty nodes but is not suspended in any veins, then you should cut it out the same way as you would with lipomas, and remove it with what contains it of skin and bursa; otherwise, you should thoroughly examine its entire existence, and apply a remedy to the area until it heals.
Title. Forty-fifth.
On cutting of the types of knots.
Of knots of various kinds and I have already said all their species in the division.
And it is necessary that I distinguish between a knot and an abscess as there may be doubt.
Therefore, I say that an abscess is heat and fever and violent pain that subsides the ebullition of excess fluid; it is a completed rotting that now ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But a knot is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cystic lump which is in the bag of the bladder.
And according to the color of the body, and it begins like a boil, and is made in the same way as cheese, whether large or small, and there are two types, one fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are swollen, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, extract it and investigate it at its beginning for the stone that is called intromes, according to its shape which will appear in the chapter that is close to this.
The method of investigation of abscesses and all knots is that you take this stone, introduce it into the moist part that you find in the abscess, and you roll your fingers over it little by little until you know that the stone has penetrated the skin.
Approach the wound with your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the contents while considering what is issuing from its trace.
If the moisture flowing out is forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should cut it with a surface incision as mentioned in other abscesses.
If there is no moisture coming out from the abscess's trace, then you should know that it is fat.
Dry over it with a section shaped like this cross: Thus as you have been taught, and suspend it with a thread, and cut off the skin from all parts with ease, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over it and extract the pus with the node.
However, if it is torn during the operation, it will not be possible to extract the healthy part, and therefore you should examine whether there is any cause, and then extract it in pieces before anything remains.
But if something remains, either a little or a lot, return the node according to what is more appropriate.
And if you see that a small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and corrosive powders and strengthen it, and place a cauterizing plaster over the abscess, and cure it with another healing method until it is healed.
If the node is large, then you should cut both lips of it and treat it with whatever causes healing.
However, if the pulsating vein is opposite or not pulsating, you should cut it and fill the area with boiling vinegar that is triturated and let it rest for two to three days until the plaster dries and the bleeding of the blood stops; then return to incise what was torn from the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for cutting and piercing.
Of these, the abscesses are of three types, one is large, another is middling, and the other is small.
The form of the large abscess is as follows:
The form of the small abscess is as follows:
Make them from iron, wood, and cut ends properly, so that the abscess is pierced in the abscesses.
These are the forms of the lancets, and they are called albeds, and one of them is called burd.
They are of three types, one large, middling, and small.
The form of the large lancet is as follows:
The form of the middling lancet is as follows:
The form of the small lancet is as follows:
It seems to be discussing medical conditions. Here's the translation for this sentence in English: "It is necessary that these are due to abscesses, eruptions, fistulas, and buboes because some of them are from bones and other causes."
"Then, the boils, abscesses, and carbuncles are to be treated with large needles similar to great pins, which are sewn through the skin. They can be made using lime, iron, or silver. The best are those made with lime."
"And the black plum juice is used to treat these, as experienced physicians agree that for such boils, the fistula should be opened in the concavity of which the reflection takes place, and this reflection should be reflected with its light onto those reflections."
"And of three types, where some are long, others medium-sized, and others short, according to the size of the fistula and its narrowness."
"The experienced physician forms:"
"Form of the average physician using lead:"
"Form of the small physician using lead:"
"The shapes of the nails are of several types, where some are simple, with only a curve, and there are three types: large, few, and medium-sized."
"And from these come the uncurved ones, and they are of three types."
"And of those uncurved ones, some have two curves, and there are three types."
"And from these come those with three curves, and they are also of three types."
"And all these are necessary in their place."
"Form of the few simple nail:"
"Form of the large nail with two curves:" "Form of the medium-sized nail with two curves:" "Form of the few nail with two curves:"
"Form of the large nail with three curves:"
"Form of the medium-sized nail with three curves:"
"And these are the forms of scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut, and they are of three types: large, medium-sized, and small."
"Form of the large scalpel:"
"Form of the medium-sized scalpel:"
"Form of the small scalpel:"
"The edges of those from which the incision is made are sharp, and the others are not sharp, and they are not stopped in this way, but rather they are made with caution during the excision of the knot to avoid injury to a vein or nerve, and for these the patient will heal and gain a small amount of peace due to the cauterization which is necessary after the incision of the abscess."
"And these are the forms of cauterizing agents (alum), and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see."
"They are made of lime and resemble glass with which alcohol is made."
"And the pointed edge is coated with a hidden spatula, and when you want to move it inward or outward, as you see."
"The forms of spatulas (small instruments), which are hidden between the said ones during the incision of abscesses and not perceived by the patient, come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small." "And these are the forms of those:"
"The forms of forceps (instruments) with which the flow of blood is cut off, and they come in three types: large, medium-sized, and small. The forms:"
They are made of lemon rind, round in shape with some length, and they are subtle.
It is necessary that these leeches of various sizes be prepared: large, medium, and small, so that with them you may quickly remove blood flow in necessity, and at first treatment there is no medicine.
However, do not use them to draw blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy places, such as in the armpits of the shoulders and the groin, in the armpits of the chest, and in the breasts, abdomen, and genitals, and similar parts with fleshy areas.
Some veins are made with such small instruments resembling fish-scoops shaped like this; through which blood is drawn when it is done by venipuncture, or incision of a vein or an artery.
Some veins are made round in shape like this:
Chapter 47.
On treating the male breasts, which resemble those of women.
Some veins are inflamed in the male breasts, and must be treated like scabies as they begin to appear, and inflame the breasts, resembling those of women, and we must apply remedies, leave them alone.
And for the one who suffers from this, it is necessary to incise them with a semi-lunar section as shown here, from line B to line G, and remove all the pus, apply a layer of carminative medicine, bring together the edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
But if the breast declines towards the hips and is softened like in women, then it should be cut in two pieces, with two semi-lunar sections as shown here, each contained within the other, so that the end of one is inside the other according to this form, from line B to line G. Remove the coagulum, which is between the edges of the wound, clean it, and administer the treatment and powders mentioned above until it heals.
If you do not complete the incision that is necessary to incise, due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then you must clean the wound with a cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the ointment corrodes away what remains of the coagulum, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from the armpits.
The abscesses that come from the armpits are of the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus sac.
And some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture must be incised with a semi-lunar section as shown here: from line G to line B. When all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you should completely cover it with a piece of cloth and leave it for another day.
And keep the cloth covering and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess of the species of lymph nodes or scrofula is, you should cut it as mentioned in the section on scrofula.
If the wound is extended and exudes pus, you should apply cautery as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 49.
On incision of abscesses that occur due to an artery or a vein.
When an artery is broken and the coagulum that is above it is consolidated, abscesses occur and there are signs to distinguish whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it is long and located in the neck of the body; and if you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel stridor.
And one that is due to a vein is round in the manifestation of the body.
And incising the abscess is an error, especially in the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is dangerous, so its treatment with iron must be avoided, and one that is near the edge, or on the head, should be avoided.
But on one that is due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut the coagulum section lengthwise; and separate the section with stitches and the artery, and open the tunics until it is exposed.
And place that needle over the other incision and make it penetrate through, and tighten the ligature with a firm double knot at two places - which causes you to be an apprentice in the extraction of two ligatures that are in the temples.
Then punch the place where there are two ligaments with a spatula until blood comes out completely and the abscess is resolved.
Then administer treatment to produce pus until the ligaments fall apart, and then cure it with appropriate care until it is healed.
If it is an abscess caused by vein section, you must have your hand on the abscess with a ligature and administer treatment, then insert the needle at the place where you have your hand, and make it penetrate; and use double thread to pull it out from the other side, and tie the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you in the grape vine ligature of two parts and both ends of the thread.
But if you fear pulling out the thread, insert the needle through the entire abscess first, and tighten your four fingers at the incision of the needle.
Then dry the abscess in a part of it until what is in it comes out, then you incise the excess of the ligature, and leave what is left connected.
And place a poultice on the inflamed part that you have immersed in wine and oil, and administer treatment with warm and wet care until it is healed.
Chapter of the abscess that occurs by twisting of nerves.
Similarly, as abscess occurs in the ligature and vein, so it occurs in nerves when it occurs due to excessive labor or injury, and for similar reasons.
The worst thing is in the locations of the joints or ankles, or in any location where the joints are injured.
It is a severe abscess, and its color is similar to that of the body, and it is in the larger areas of the body, and when it is narrowed with great force, the patient feels like they are stunned.
It is not an abscess in the front of the body, and therefore it should not be ligated, and it is harmful all over, and does not spread to the sides neither in front nor behind.
Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be sewn with iron, because a strong blow will cause contraction.
But those who are in the head or forehead should be ligated with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, you can use forceps and excise it cautiously.
And if it is large, you should suspend it with an uncini and excise it, then close the wound and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On abscess section that occurs due to the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
In many men observed in the abdomens of those and in other parts of the bodies of those who are called worms due to their resemblance to fungi, whose heads are thin and caps are large; and the labia of these are turned inside out, and it is small and it is greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one, and in his abdomen were two things that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them white, small worms.
And the labia of these were turned inward and split, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Therefore, you should incise them and turn one inward by eighteen inches. and the other by six inches.
And the operation of incising them is that you consider whether the patient is humid and the color of the abscess is white, moist, thin pus; then you make an incision with a spatula flat, and be careful to cauterize in fire because many observed should have the section of it expelled without much blood; and if it bleeds, cauterize it.
And if the patient is weak and afraid, avoid incising with iron; but take a new leaden thread and tie it as described before; leave it for two days.
Then tighten the lead thread in the constriction of the thread; therefore, you must not tighten the large amount of lead in the worm too much until it is excised and falls out by itself without labor.
But if the worm is of large size, you should make an incision with some cause for fear and anxiety, especially if it is in the abdomen.
Possibly you can incise the size of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And care for it until the wound is healed.
Be careful to avoid incising a worm that is of dark color, with little sensation, with regular shape, because it is cancerous.
And I will return to the memory of cancer regarding this.
Chapter 12.
Treatment of the umbilicus in an emergency.
The navel is treated for various reasons: either due to a fissure of the navel which exposes the intestine or hernia as in other ruptures; or due to bleeding that flows from veins or arteries as previously mentioned, or due to constricted ventositas within it.
If it is due to a fissure of the navel and exposure of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; it is less painful, and different treatments may be applied. If it is due to the exit of the intestine, place that area with something that has been recounted earlier, with a greater degree of diversity, and as you press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden; then return it; and strong heat is applied to that area, and the wound should be cleansed with much effort.
If it is due to moisture, it is less painful and not hidden when pressed with the hand, neither constricted nor swollen.
If it is due to bleeding, darken the abscess by applying these signs:
If it is due to rotten flesh, the abscess is severe, large and hard, and should be packed according to a certain amount.
If it is due to wind, the touch of that area is less painful.
The operation in that area should be considered if the umbilicus is due to bleeding from an artery, vein, or wind; you must be cautious of treating it, for there is fear and danger as taught in the chapter where abscesses caused by arteries and veins were discussed.
If the umbilicus is due to intestine or hernia, you should command the patient to empty their bowels and remain extended; then place your hand around the entire umbilicus, and command them to stay facing upwards between your hands; then circle the area of the umbilicus with a thin spatula; extend the size of the abscess towards the navel's edges with great force; and tie it in the circuit of the umbilicus with strong thread or cord, and use a proper technique for tying.
Tie the middle of the extended abscess to the ligament and introduce the pointed instrument into that area as indicated and try to push the intestine back into its place; if you cannot find or hold it with the ligament, then you must extract the hernia and forcefully push the intestine back into the abdomen.
If you have found the hernia, take it with one hand; and incise any excess tissue from that area.
If it is against your artery or vein, then encircle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and tie them with strong thread and insert the needles into the circuit you have created around the abscess in a cross pattern, making the needles penetrate; and tighten the abscess in four quarters over the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and allow the extended flesh to fall back on its own; or incise that area which is thin and may be easily closed, and care for it with something that is suitable for wounds until it heals.
If the umbilicus is due to rotten flesh in that area or moisture, you should follow the steps as previously mentioned and extract the pus or moisture from that area, which you will then hold in place, and care for it with something suitable and that consolidates the area.
Chapter thirty-three.
Treatment of cancer.
We have said in the division, about the kind of crab and in what manner is the cure for it with medicines, and that it is a scourer in its healing because it is ferrous so that it is not ulcerated; we have said crab originates in the spleen and the caution in its healing.
The ancients said that sometimes crab is in a place where it can be eradicated, such as the head, which is like the mammary glands or their corresponding parts in other members, and especially when it begins small.
But when it becomes old and large, it is not necessary to treat it, because I cannot heal from it nor have I seen anyone else, nor has it been reported to me.
The operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient alone for some days and purge them of black bile several times, and apply hot poultice to it if it is a clear and obvious abscess.
Then prepare the patient with the preparation in which the operation is located, and warn them of the painkillers that are necessary for it; and bend the entire body from all sides with a good traction until there remains no cause for the pain. Let the blood flow from it and do not open it lightly, squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you can handle among those available to you.
But if it contradicts your intention to bleed thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood stops, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter .liv.
Treatment for edema.
We have already recommended, in the division, about the kinds of edema from water and the signs of each kind, and the cure for it with medicines.
The one that is cured by iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not appropriate to apply iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypoxeresis because it is deadly.
When you have already treated this species of edema tympanitis with medicines and it does not improve, consider that if the patient has already achieved debilitation, or is suffering from another disease such as edema in the lungs or stomach, like those, then be careful not to treat it with iron because there is a fear about it.
But if you see the patient with an excess of strength and not suffering from another disease besides edema alone, and neither old nor young, then the method of operation on it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and apply pressure to their abdomen with your hand, direct the water out through the lower part of the penis, and take a mouthful of dry peppermint leaves according to this form:
two pointed sharp parts, of an acute shape like peppermint leaves; but it should be in some shortness, little by little, so that during the operation with it you do not pass into the intestine and damage it.
Consider whether the generation of edema is from the intestines, because in that case you must be careful to move away from the navel by about three fingers' width at the lower parts, on the right side of it above the penis.
But if the generation of edema is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by about three fingers'width.
And if the generation is from the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
Your incision must not be over the ribs where you want the patient to lie, so that fluids do not accumulate at that place.
Then perforate the entire intestine with an instrument, enter that incision and lift your hand with the peppermint leaves between the intestine and the bladder, and you will remove it; if there is the thickness of a nail or more.
Then perforate the bladder to where the peppermint leaves reach the place of water. Extract that and introduce an instrument of this shape: and is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver, brass or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is sharp at the end like a pen nib, as shown here:
And on the upper part of it there is a band (armilla), so that when the instrument reaches the water, you immediately place the band on the instrument to evacuate the water in the best possible amount, because if you evacuate more than what is necessary at that time, the patient may die suddenly due to resolution of their animal spirit, or they may experience cynopsia which is near death.
Evacuate from there according to the quantity of its power and according to what the condition of the patient signifies regarding the quality of the pulse and goodness of it.
Then approach the instrument, and let go of the water that is retained because it is being held by the clamp that is over the cuff, and recommend to you that you perform it according to that method. (Note: "le instrument" refers to a medical tool or device used in the procedure mentioned previously.)
If the patient tolerates it, approach the instrument on another day, and extract a small amount of water, do so over several days with caution, and be careful not to let any water remain except a little. (Note: "aquo" refers to the medical procedure performed earlier.)
If you fear the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then treat it with burial in sandy ground, move the wound over hot bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medications until it is healed. (Note: "aquo" refers to the medical procedure performed earlier.)
Cauterize the stomach, and the liver and spleen near the water extraction site, as I have previously reported in that treatment. (Note: "aquo" refers to the medical procedure performed earlier.)
Chapter 15. (Note: This appears to be a heading or chapter title for the next section of the text.)
On the treatment of children whose genital areas are not perforated (or undescended). (Note: It is unclear what "locs de la urina" refers to specifically, but it seems to indicate a problem related to the urinary system or genitals.)
In some cases, one of the children is born from the mother's womb and the head of the genital region is not perforated (or the cord is tight or it is not in its proper position). (Note: "la sua mayre" refers to the child's mother; "mixtio" seems to refer to the baby's genitals, but I am unsure of the exact meaning.)
Therefore, it is necessary to perform a perforation as soon as possible with a thin probe in this manner:
Then, tie a thin lead clamp around the cord and leave it for three days or four (days). (Note: It is not clear what "trauc" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the umbilical cord.)
And when he wishes to urinate or defecate, release it (the clamp). (Note: It is not clear what "aquel" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the baby's genitals or the umbilical cord.)
And if you do not release the lead (clamp), it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not be able to pass through this closure. (Note: It is not clear what "aquest claure" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the baby's genitals or the umbilical cord.)
If the cord is tight, treat it with a lead clamp as previously stated, for several days until it is expanded. (Note: This likely refers to the baby's umbilical cord.)
If the cord is not in its proper position, release it, which occurs because in some cases, when the baby is born with an umbilical cord that is not properly positioned, the head of the penis cannot urinate at the birth canal, and you must lift the penis to the birth canal with your hand until the penis is raised over the birth canal. This is not a problem related to procreation because the sperm cannot reach the mother as it should, and it is a serious illness. (Note: It is not clear what "les partidas" refers to specifically, but it may be a reference to the vagina or the birth canal.)
The procedure for the operation in this case is to position the patient on his back, and then extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand using forceful extraction, and cut the end of the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with a sharp instrument such as a needle or blade. This should be done in such a way that the meatus (urethral opening) aligns with the end of the penis and the umbilical cord falls into the meatus as it should. (Note: "lu" refers to the baby's penis, "la tua ma sinistra" means your left hand, and "pluma" means feather or pen.)
And be careful in your operation of bleeding (or hemorrhage), because it often happens in this procedure; pause and wait for the bleeding to stop, and treat the wound until it is healed. (Note: The exact nature of the operation being referred to is not clear.)
Chapter 16. (Note: This appears to be a heading or chapter title for the next section of the text.)
On cleaning the albuginea (fibrous tissue) that occurs in the foreskin of the penis and scabs, blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis. (Note: It is not clear what "albater" means specifically, but it seems to refer to a medical procedure related to the penis.)
Often this condition occurs in the penis and is a painful protrusion of flesh. (Note: It is not clear exactly what "es eminencia de carn laga" means, but it seems to refer to a painful or problematic protrusion of tissue on the penis.)
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant. (Note: It is not clear what specific conditions are being referred to as "malignant" or "not malignant.")
Non-malignant, it is necessary that you suspend it using a thin wire and remove it until it is completely cleaned; then pause over the affected area and apply Egyptian ointment on it; and after that, treat it with Egyptian ointment daily until it is healed. (Note: "enguent" likely refers to an ointment or salve.)
And if an abscess is malicious and dark in color, you must administer cautery close to its incision and lance it.
If an abscess is at the base of the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and it splits into two parts, one inside and the other outside, you must first open the abscess that is within, until it consolidates; then you should take care of the outside because if you heal the split while the foreskin is still not secure, it may burst.
And it often happens in the genitals and on the darkened and corrupted foreskin, so you must cure everything that has already been damaged or is about to decay or has decayed; and apply liniment on it, which is made with ground mustard seeds and egg yolks and vinegar.
Then you should heal that with the other treatment until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs, administer lunar cautery as follows:
Because cautery helps in two ways at the same time, one for blood flow and another for the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is destroyed and everything is corrupted at that time, you must insert a lead tube into the foreskin for the patient to urinate through it.
In the attachment of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this attachment does not occur except in one who has an intact foreskin and circumcision is not required; and when attachment occurs due to a wound or abscess) it is necessary to break the adhesion with a blunt spatula until the liniment dissolves and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
And if it is difficult to separate that very strongly, you must break the adhesion between the head of the penis and the foreskin in some way, because the foreskin, when thin, can easily be perforated by its own fragility.
Then you separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thin instrument that is moistened in water to prevent them from sticking again.
And it should be healed with warm styptic until it is solidified.
Chapter LVII.
On the purification of children and on the treatment of those who suffer from circumcision.
Circumcision is not a cure for continence like other diseases: but because it is our operation and theirs by our will, and the removal of that part is specifically in children, it is necessary to assign the best procedure and the easiest method possible without harming their health.
Therefore they did not write about circumcision in any of their books, because it was not used in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experience, the cause being that I have found that most craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and purification with a new knife and torches; and they use liniment and incision with the nail.
And I have already prohibited all these methods and I do not find a better purification with scissors, liniment, or needle in circumcision like with the nail because many times the skin is torn more than before because the foreskin has two layers and one layer remains behind, and it is easily punctured again and certain pain occurs. And the purification that is performed by alphecats and is called digital, which is used by shoemakers, is not secure for the incision of the tip of the male member because it easily enters the wound.
But in circumcision with the nail, a sharp knife can cut and spoil your operation. And the skin of a child is naturally short and many times it does not need purification in that manner because there is no need for it, and I have seen it myself.
But the purification that is performed with scissors and liniment with a needle has been found by me to be bad, because scissors are of proportional incision, so the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand in proportionately two sharp points, and cut it accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and compression of the liniment with a figure containing the skin of the penis from all sides, with which there can be no error at all.
And the method of the first operation is that you keep the child lying down more if he is one of those who are small, that you do not make him stand up except when you put the needle in his penis and let it go the next day.
And make sure that he is happy in every way possible with whatever understanding he has of this procedure. Make sure that he is positioned between your hands and not in the center; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
Insert your hand into the penis of the child and inhale the skin, pull it out until the head of the penis is exposed, and then purify that part which has become dirty with filth.
The form of the forceps is modified, this is its shape:
Let the unarticulated ones be not-cutting and the others be cutting, so that the nail does not pierce the flesh, and let the length of both be as sharp as the length of two handles together.
But the mistake in modification is that it forces out completely the internal plaster or you must make an incision.
Therefore, you should stretch out the one with your nail in front of the abscess and make an incision according to its size.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a tweezers and make an incision.
But if it lasts for more than three days and remains inflamed after the abscess has opened, you should let it drain pus cautiously, clean it gently, and make an incision according to your preparation.
Be careful of the head of the splinter, as it will not come out with that.
And therefore treat it with the remedy recommended in the powder treatment.
If an incision is made in the plaster to the correct size and the edges are observed, it will not become inflamed.
But treat it with what I have said until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the cure of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction, caused by stones or clotted blood, or by tumors or abscesses, similar to those mentioned in the methods of treatment in the division.
If it is not dissolved as I have said, and the cause is severe for the patient, then it is necessary to administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and be narrowly conical, as fine as a bird's feather reed and about the length of a thumb and a half, to which there should be a narrow cannula at its head.
The method of emptying the urine by the instrument is that you take the folded needle and thread it through the wool or cloth for good binding; and insert the extramitatz of the needle into the area behind the syringe, and make an incision with the forceps if any cause requires the wool, but insert it into the cannula forcefully. And move the syringe away from the body and the linen and apply the albumen of egg.
Hold the patient on a hard surface and wrap the bladder and penis with wet oil, olive oil and egg whites.
Insert the syringe gently until it reaches the base of the penis; fold the penis over the pubis; push the syringe into it; and push it further until it reaches the bladder, which should reach the desired result, and not follow this order if it is wrong, but follow the path where it twists.
Then stretch out the penis with a small amount of wool, as the urine will soak the wool.
Then extract it and treat the urine, using a syringe, not ceasing to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter 49.
On the quality of clysters for the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When ulceration or an abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood clots within it, or it is constricted by a stone, and you wish to distill waters and medicines from that place, then do so with an instrument called a cannula, and this is its form:
If the part of it is mute, it is closed. And in that place there are three passages: two from one side, as sometimes occurs.
At the beginning there is a concave place, in which there is something that is covered, according to its size it should be added, until some cause is drawn from the humors towards that place, it should be drawn, and when it is expelled, with what it is expelled, it should be added, and when it is expelled long, as a cannula is made in naval battles at sea.
Therefore, when you wish to expel humors from the bladder, insert the end of the cannula into the humor, and draw with it the thing that is covered in the opposite parts, because the humor will be expelled into the concavity of the cannula.
Then insert the end of the cannula into the urethra as recommended in the syringe; and draw the humor with what you are drawing, because that humor will reach the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it.
The subtle crucifix form of the bladder, which is called cystoscopy, and this is its form:
It should be made of silver or copper, the head of which resembles a small feather, and inside it there is a hollow tube.
Then take the bladder in motion, and stop at that place where you wish to cystoscope the bladder, and tie it firmly with a double stitch with a strong thread, and heat the humor there.
Then insert the end of the cystoscope into the urethra.
Then press your hand on the bladder with the humor and structure until the patient feels that the humor has reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; perforate it completely in its entirety; and insert a strong needle into those passages, so that they rotate; and attach the circle as a syringe, so that you stop at the place where you wish to draw humors, oils, and waters.
Then tie that in the instrument and proceed as you have done with the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humor reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones (gallstones).
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their cure with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, and the signs of that.
We have also mentioned the operation on a stone with the hand and the knife.
And the stone formed in the bladder is that which is implanted in the bladder.
And we will now tell it with clear and concise explanation.
Therefore, say that stones formed in the bladder mostly occur in children; and their signs are that urine which is expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in sand; the patient strains his abdomen, and passes bloody stools, and it is necessary to press on the lower back in these cases.
The cure of children from this affliction occurs before they have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure the elderly. But in young people, it is advisable to use what is appropriate for them.
And of that stone which is larger and the cure is easier; but if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we approach the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning to cleanse the patient with a cystoscope which extracts all the fissure that is in the bladder; because that fissure sometimes prohibits the emergence of the stone and the search for it.
Approach the patient with their feet and make them lie down in a position such that the stone descends towards the opening of the bladder or occasionally jumps out from its location.
Prepare the patient with your hands and have them lower their clothes, so that the bladder is fully exposed.
Approach and completely expose the affected area.
If you feel the stone in the space, you should immediately make an incision on it.
If the stone is not visible completely, you must anoint it with your left hand's oil if the patient is a child, or your right hand's oil if the patient is a grown man, and insert your finger into their anus. Find the stone and insert your finger to retrieve it. Turn the stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
Approach and press on the stone with your finger and expel it outward through the incision.
Command the servant to press on the bladder with their hand; command another servant with their right hand to spread the patient's legs apart at the incision site, and command another servant with their left hand to raise the bed sheet that is below the legs, in the location where the incision was made.
Approach and insert an instrument shaped like this: Cut through the area between the anus and genitals, not too much, at the left side; make the incision over the stone and your finger should be in the anus, making a transverse incision so that the incision outside is wide and narrow inside according to the size of the stone that can be possible, and not too wide, for if you press too hard with your finger on the stone, the incision may be difficult; and remember, it is better to err on the side of caution.
Know that some stones have edges and corners, making their extraction difficult because of this.
That stone is round like a peach pit and is easily extracted.
If the stone has edges and corners, adjust it in the groove.
If you are not careful, you must apply pressure on the stone or press it gently but correctly, with a tool whose tip is similar to a file and should be applied to the stone without going astray; or insert a subtle curved instrument beneath it.
But if you cannot apply pressure on it, widen the incision slightly, and if you see bleeding, cauterize it with concentrated vitriol.
But if the stone is more than one, first press your hand to the opening of the bladder and insert your finger; then insert another small instrument near it; proceed similarly if there are more stones.
If the stone is large, ignorance is that you make a large incision, because the patient may experience one of two outcomes: death or prolonged urine distillation, due to which the location is not completely healed.
But administer the stone's removal with care or use forceps to break it into smaller pieces and extract them piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood ointment and cauterize it. Place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or rose oil and warm water, on top of it to prevent post-operative infection.
Place the patient on their side and do not remove the linen for three days.
Once you have removed the linen, clean the area with warm water and oil, and care for it with an antiseptic and antibacterial ointment until it is healed.
But if pus, cautery, and corrosive appear in the wound, which resembles blood in the bladder being frozen (and this is known as hematuria), insert your finger into the wound and remove the blood, for if it remains, it can cause the bladder to corrupt and decay.
Clean the wound with soap, water, and salt, and use any appropriate opposition until it is healed.
It is necessary during the entire healing process that you lie down with both legs and adjust the medications placed on the area.
If the stone is small and located in the vagina, and urine flow is prohibited, treat it with what I recommended before proceeding to surgery, for prolonged treatment of this condition can cause surgery; and as I mentioned earlier, take a perforating iron with this shape:
of a triangular shape, sharp, inserted into a rod (or tube)
Then take the iron and tie it to the base of the triangle to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the urethra, penetrating with ease until it reaches that stone. Rotate the instrument slowly in that small stone, and you will perform the perforation on it gradually until the other side penetrates; for the urine is soon released.
Then press your hand on that which is broken from the stone on the side of the urethra, because it is fractured and forgotten by the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not possible due to any reason that prevents it, then tie an iron over the stone, and another iron above the stone. Then strike the stone in the urethra between two incisions. Then extract that (the stone). Then remove the ligaments and clean the clotted blood from the wound, which is made in the bladder.
And there is no need for the iron to be tied around the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder; and the other ligament on top serves as a precaution, because when the iron is removed near the edge of the stone, it returns to its place and heals the wound.
You are required when you remove the iron from above that you lift the skin over it, or else you will not comply with your obligation, and the wound will heal in this way as has been said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones in women.
Stones in women are rarely produced.
If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and it is forbidden by many methods.
The first one is because the woman who gives birth easily is a virgin.
And the second one is that you will not find a woman who knows if she has been with a doctor when she is a virgin, or belongs to married women.
The third one is because you do not find women who know this craft, especially the operation with iron.
The fourth one is that the location of the incision for stones in women is far from the stone itself, requiring a deep incision, and there is fear in this.
But if the situation requires it, you must take a woman who knows this craft and is scarce.
But if you are deprived of her, then search for one who is experienced and skillful, or present a married woman educated in the affairs of women, or a woman who has mastered this craft in some way.
Therefore present her and command her to do everything that you order her, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; this is because she must determine whether the woman is a virgin, then place her hand in her vagina and seek the stone.
Therefore, if she finds it, extract it from her hand, and then command her to make an incision on it.
But if she is not a virgin, command the married woman to enter her hand into the patient's vagina and examine the stone; place her left hand on the bladder and press it firmly with good judgment.
Therefore, when she finds it, you must gently extract it from the bladder opening on the side and with the assistance of her strength until it reaches its destination at the correct location.
And make an incision on the edge of the hand to determine the location of the stone in any place; the incision should be centered on that side and the incised tissue should not remain attached to the extracted stone.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into the incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to its size, knowing that the stone will be extracted from there.
Know that the types of stones are like seeds: for some are small and large, hard and sharp, long and round, and have rough edges.
Therefore, you know the types of stones because you indicate what you mean about it.
If you see blood flow, adjust the location of the cautery and apply it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation when the stone has been forgotten (removed).
And prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can be assisted by them in your operation.
If you see blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is due to the arrow that is inserted, then you stop the bleeding with powder on the location and tighten it with pulvils and sutures, and do not repeat this; leave the stone in place and do not extract it, because a woman will die from pain. Treat the wound.
When the wound has become putrid after several days, if it swells up, then return to your operation once the pus is expelled.
Capital sixty-two.
On incision for strangulated hernia.
A swollen hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane which contains the intestines and is called the sac.
Sometimes it is in the fatty tissue itself which nature has prepared for this purpose in the separation of the intestines, until it becomes a new intestine; and it is the membrane of the genitals between the white membrane which I have said is not the case.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genitals, so this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens by an impact made on the genitals.
And this moisture has different colors; the color of it is either turning yellow or blood red, purple, black and foul-smelling, or white swollen, and this is what is most dangerous.
And the signs by which this accumulation of water is recognized are as follows: if it is in the white membrane that I have said, then the abscess will be rounded and declining a little along its length like an egg-shape, and the genitals appear, since the moisture contains it entirely.
And if the moisture is in the fatty tissue itself, then the abscess will be rounded with the separation of the intestines, and thus it is considered to be another intestine.
And if the moisture is between the membrane of the genitals and the white membrane, cut it with scissors.
And in order to know the color of the moisture, you must examine the color of the moisture within the abscess with a cut made through the center of its shape; and according to what comes out from the interior, judge accordingly.
So when we come to the treatment of it with iron, it is necessary that we command the patient to be lanced if this is possible for you, and sometimes clean the body of him.
Then place a small cushion on his back for some reason and cover him with damp cloths.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right side, who will extend his leg two arms' length to the membrane of the genitals and the lower abdominal wall.
Then take a broad spatula and cut the membrane of the genitals from the same place along its length up to the pubic bone.
Make the incision according to the right angle along the line where the hair of the genitals begins, up to the white membrane containing it.
Remove that, and observe it, and keep yourself for this purpose so that you do not cut into it; and your excision with which you have removed it should be suspended by the largest and most delicate vein, and scrutinize the excision according to its quantity as much as possible.
Then pierce the swollen white membrane with a wide hole and drain all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with scissors and stretch out the white membrane at its edges; do not touch the membrane of the genitals containing it, and make an incision in that manner as is possible for you. Make an incision of the entire membrane or in pieces, and especially the thinner part of it, because if you do not scrutinize the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
More if the intestine processes from outside its membrane during the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the white membrane, return it inside and then sew together the two lips of the membrane of the genitals with sutures, and treat it in this way as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the intestine corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you remove the tools that are its supports and extract the intestine, and treat it as I have said.
However, if the water is accumulated in two parts separately, you must know that there are two hernias; therefore incise the part that you have done on the other side, and if it appears to you that it is a hernia, then you do the operation.
Then you will abstain from blood, enter into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or in oil-soaked wool; and cover another wool which you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genitals and the lower abdominal wall; and cover it with double and thick cloths and linen, and let them lie there according to this pattern:
and place two cloths soaked with carminated wool according to this pattern; the ends of them should be sewn with thread or wet wool, and they should be attached with a structure in the arms of the shirts, and one of the ends will take hold of the buttock up to the back, and the second will take hold at the pubic bone, and two ends on two thighs on one side and two ends on two shoulders, and the entire incision should be sewn together in the arms of the shirts.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery in place of surgery using iron; it is that you take a subtle cautionery knife and insert it into the hernia area near the groin, and it is lit when we have found the white chalk containing water, then you take the cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek letters.
Then pierce that white chalk, and light it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then stretch the white chalk and cut it, remove it with scissors, remove it with a subtle cautery that is lit; and pierce it as far as possible until you eradicate everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch it.
Know that this operation is more safe and distant from bleeding, and better than surgery with cutting.
But if you encounter an abscess at the time of cutting or cauterizing, or bleeding, then you must cure that which opposes you for it, with treatment as appropriate for each case as previously stated.
But if the patient is weak and does not hope for the second operation due to its horror, you must perform perforation as previously recommended; and it is certain that you, according to what I have said about signs, must confirm that this hernia is watery.
You must then place the patient on a raised bed, and pierce the abscess in the lower part of it with a shallow incision, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And the opening should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then pause over the area and let it lie there, so that the remaining water remains. And cure it until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to draining the water at that time you perforate it: this should not be done except when the white pus in the wound's orifices creates resistance and prevents the drainage of the water, in which case you must put a pen or instrument with which the water is extracted from the edema, following its design; or adjust in the pressure of the wound a small.
Know that the water returns, and is stopped for about two months or more; and when it has stopped, you must perform perforation according to the aforementioned method, as the patient will pass through their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On incision for fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in incision on this hernia there is fear of danger even in the best arrangements; for which reason I see the abandonment of it and being saved by the better method.
And I remember the operation in that case, and the characteristics of abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that abscesses are formed in bodies composed of genitals and caused by several factors: either by acute aggressive fluid accumulation which is poured into the genitals, or by injury.
Its color depends on the color of the body, and it is not detected in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
A flat abscess is hard, whose color is dark, and it is not felt.
And sometimes it is done by knotting of the arteries, and swelling of those that are already perceived as remembered, or swelling of veins.
But the swelling of arteries is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not necessary to touch it.
But the one caused by swelling of veins is not dispersed by any cause, you must press it with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this type there may be incision and on the other fleshes; and you insert the genitals, and let the water out at the top, and extract it from the white chalk, and release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and pierce the suspensory that you release from all parts of the water's opening.
Therefore, if the water is already consolidated in those fleshy areas, you must extract the water and pierce it.
And if there is adhesion for any reason of the chalk, or between that which is between the bladders, you must remove all that adhesion and pierce it with a round incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the place of adhesion that is behind, you must pierce everything that is from it and extract the water as previously stated.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, you fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and wine; and treat it with the other treatment until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
The cure for a hernia is from a root (or plant).
A boil surrounded by a kind of sheath resembling the scrotum and with softening of the testicles is difficult for the patient to exercise movements or walk.
In the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear for what comes before it (a warning).
However, we must say what operation should be done next after those initial ones.
Therefore say that it is necessary to seize the patient on an elevated chopping block; and then separate the suspenders of the testicles at the junctures (the lower part of the body); and apply the belt of the genitals with your hands, with liniments proven effective for the loins, and let another servant extend it forcefully.
Then insert a sharp pointed tool through a transverse incision on the right side of the vessels until they are exposed.
Then remove all the tissue from that area, as you have said in the extraction of archery in the temples.
Then insert an awl with a double point into that place where the boil occurred, and let one of them be in the first layer under it, and the other watched closely at the bottom (end) of them. Then make an incision in the middle of that place with a straight cut according to the length of the body and extract what has been added from the putrid and corrupted fluids (pus).
And cure the wound with treatment for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels do not become blocked, because it is not harmful for this purpose.
But if the boil occurs on all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be blocked by the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and become shriveled up, or shrink up so as not to be helpful to them.
Chapter LXV.
On the treatment for internal hernia.
The cause of this internal hernia is a cut made in the expanded cavity over the abdomen of the intestines, because when the intestine ruptures it goes into one of the bowels.
And this rupture can be from the cavity or the extension of it, and both types occur for various reasons: blows, falls, shocks, loud noises, or due to a heavy cause, or similar reasons.
The sign of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, it is a boil that extends around the anus because the cavity compresses the bowel.
The sign of this is when it is due to a cut in the cavity, because at first it causes a sudden, intense pain; and the boil appears in various places apart from the expected place, and that is precisely due to the bowel, and the body extends beyond the edge of the cavity.
And in some cases the intestine is forgotten and it is called internal hernia "zirbal."
And sometimes it is made with wind, and sometimes the bowel tears open and this is retained, and it is a grave danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes bad pain and particularly when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the types of this illness with sharp instruments, fear must be avoided, so it is necessary to avoid hunting in that area.
And the method of this operation is to command the patient to return the bowel with his hand to its cavity if it protrudes into it (the body), and place a cushion on his lower back between your hands, and lift his legs.
And then stitch the belt that surrounds the belt of the testicles at the junctures, and make an incision in the entire length of the belt; and insert two fingers into the edges of the incision as needed to cut the incision with those.
And if the incision is large enough that some part of it can be forgotten.
And remove that cavity where the belt of the testicles is located, until the white hard cavity of each side is exposed.
Then insert your finger into the place where the testicle is located between the white hard cavity, which is below the belt, and between the white cavity and resolve the adhesion that exists behind the testicle.
And place your hand on the belt of the testicles at the sides, and with that extend the white hard cavity on its sides with your left hand, lift the testicle and the white cavity to the side of the incision; and command the servant to extend the testicle and you dissolve the adhesion behind it with complete solution.
And search with your hands that there is no cause of the bowel wrapped in the white hard cavity. But if you find any cause for it, then you place it in the abdomen below (the lower body).
Approach the division below the scrotum for section, from which blood and pus should run as we have recommended in what has been said before.
Approach the wound with wool soaked in oil and wait; then administer the bandage that we have recommended (and sometimes a white linen is cauterized, as we mentioned to prevent bleeding, because often this happens), and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
But if the wound heals slowly, boil some water and wrap it around, then wait until it falls off as we have said before.
Approach the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI. (66)
On ventose hernia.
In this type of hernia, no one has been seen to be cured by iron.
In the beginning they said that this should be done as we have recommended for hernia caused by water; that is, you press the vessels near the section and seal the area around the abscess with something that stops it, until the vessels fall off.
Treat the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII. (67)
On the rupture that occurs in angina.
Sometimes a rupture occurs in angina as we have said before, and you should open it up.
Do not give any reason for hernias to the genitals, and if they do occur, it is rare; and return them back at all times.
But if the time has been prolonged with this method (bandaging), a fissure should be made in the scrotum before the hernia descends into the scrotum; and this occurs due to the extension of the scrotum, which happens as we have said in angina, which causes it to become stretched out, making the area weak and susceptible to abscesses.
The cure is with cauterization, as described earlier.
Sometimes it is cured with iron following this method: the patient lies on his back between your hands, and you seal the area of the rupture of the abscesses with a section as wide as three fingers.
Approach the white intestine that is below the scrotum until it is exposed.
Approach the rod and place it on the protruding part of the intestine, and press it against the abdominal wall.
Approach the two protruding parts on the end of the rod-like intestine and sew them together with stitches.
Approach the end of the rod and do not make any incisions in the intestine, or extend the opening, nor use other methods as you know in the treatment of internal hernias.
Approach that with the cure for sores, and when you incise the fields, clean it up and restore the sore within until it is solidified; because the scab has not formed and the prominence of the break is not adjusted.
A cautery is better in that place, since it is more conducive to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum of the testicles.
When the scrotum of the testicles is swollen in some men it is softened with herbs, since the flesh that is between it is softened and the care of it should be observed.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is asked in its treatment that he make the patient lie according to his side, and incise the entire swollen scrotum that has been softened over the natural scrotum; and then adjust two lips with stitching.
And if you wish, cut at the beginning of the excess swollen scrotum with three or four stitches and with a firm stitch.
Then incise between the stitches, and care for other sores until they are healed and the fields heal up.
Chapter LXIX.
On castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but there is a reason for me to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except in two ways, of which one is when it is in the knowledge of the doctor when he is questioned about it, who knows the cure for it if it occurs; and the other way is that we sometimes have a need for castration of other animals for our benefit, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore, say that castration is done in two ways: either by strangulation or by making an incision and cutting off the testicles.
However, in the castration by strangulation, the method of operation is that we tie up the animal in hot water until its testicles are softened and lined up and hanging down. Then take hold of those with your hand until they have dissolved and do not appear again.
In cases of castration due to a split (fissure) and section, you must have the animal (or instrument) and press the scrotum of the testicles with your left hand.
Then draw together the sutures (suspensors), and make an incision through each hole with one cut.
Then make an incision where each abscess has been cut open. Do not leave any cause on the abscess, but treat it with a fine poultice over the vessels (veins).
This method of castration is better when it is done by strangulation, because strangulation weakens the testicles and causes the animal to lose its desire for sex.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX (70).
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is of two kinds: one where it appears when the space between the scrotum and the testicles is filled, in which case there is a female vulva present with pubic hair.
And some of these [hermaphrodites] have a urinary passage that is located in the scrotum of the testicles.
In women, there is one type: it is such that the female genitalia over the pubis resembles two male testicles, but it is slightly smaller and is divided by a small separation like male pubic hair and two testicles.
The treatment is of three kinds: one for men and one kind for women. It is necessary to cut open the flesh closely so that the poison escapes from it, and then cure it with other treatments for other wounds.
In the second kind of men who have a urinary passage in their scrotum, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter XXI (21).
On the treatment of leprosy and excessive flesh in women due to certain causes.
Leprosy is treated naturally and is improved by following certain regulations; but it is sometimes excessive in some women to such an extent that it spreads like leprosy in men and extends into the vagina.
Therefore, you must remove the excess of leprosy with your hand or an instrument and cut it open.
Do not continue cutting, especially near the root, to prevent bleeding.
Then heal it with treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Newly born flesh is flesh that is produced in the mother's womb until it fills up, and it is called "cauda" because of its appearance; therefore, it should be treated like leprosy, and it should be cut open as we do for leprosy, and healed until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII (72).
On the treatment of jaundice.
Jaundice is when the female genitalia is not perforated or has a small hole. And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and this is caused by poorly sutured flesh or strangulated bowel or spleen.
It is caused either in the mother's womb, during childbirth, due to a suppuration above or below it, or due to a discharge, and it is forbidden to engage in intercourse, pregnancy, or conception, and it is also recommended that menses be avoided.
The diagnosis of this condition is made by examination of the cervix using forceps or a speculum if the opening is visible; otherwise, you should examine it with your fingers or with light.
If the opening is due to strangulation of the bowel, and it is near the two labiae, you should dig and break it open.
And place your fingers between the labiae and press gently on both sides with the forceps.
The woman should be on her back with her legs spread apart and you should extend the labiae with force until the strangulated bowel is broken and the opening is opened.
And apply cotton dipped in oil to the area and leave it there for a few days to prevent the wound from scarring.
If the strangulated bowel is large and thick, then it is necessary to incise it with a lancet or a myrtle leaf.
If the opening is due to sutured flesh, you should suspend it with an instrument and then incise it.
And these are the medicines that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as opium, dragon's blood, and vinegar, mixed with white wax.
Then insert a broad leaden cannula to prevent the wound from healing lightly.
Hold that for several days and administer warm liquid.
And let it heal with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes it happens in the greater growth of other fleshes, and then it is necessary to incise them according to this method. However, if it is for cancerous abscesses, do not apply iron in any way to the cancerous abscess which is in the major one.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red lump that sometimes occur in women's vaginas.
Hemorrhoids are recognized as the orifices of mottled veins in which blood continues to flow constantly; and old hemorrhoids that have become firm.
And I have already said in the division the types of these and the signs of these, and therefore I will say those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
So I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when in the cervix of the vagina and do not appear to the senses, then there should be no treatment with iron.
However, those that are in the orifices of the vagina which can be felt, are the ones that are cured.
And it is necessary to place the woman in more heat and apply oil of roses or sharp wool, or linen, and incise them with a lancet.
And apply powder over those (hemorrhoids) to stop the blood flow from one of the incisive powders without pain, such as opium and similar ones.
And apply hot water bottles to her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the blood flow continues, then make that sit in a decoction of sumach, mustard seeds, coriander and similar ones.
And apply barley flour with honey and vinegar mixed with water on the anus.
If the blood is separated, it is good; if not, make it adhere with two forceps, and to the nipples without scarification.
And apply wool and immerse it in the juice of colandre, or the juice of arnagleza, or the juice of garlic with repentine vinegar and let it adhere to the place; and let the place be treated with gargles until it is healed.
And let it heal until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of a septic abortion in the uterus.
Different types of abscesses that occur in the uterus, such as cancer, abscessed lapis, ulcers, bladder stones, fistulas hemorrhoids, ruptures, and other abscesses. I have already said about these diseases, their types and signs, and the treatments for them in the division.
And it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about cautery abscess that appears in the uterus when it comes from abscesses that are treated with medicine, and if you want to know how the operation of iron is performed on it.
Therefore, you must consider if the pain of the abscess in the patient begins suddenly with blows and chills and fever, and sometimes it swells and if you can feel that over it, then do not operate on it with iron, but let it heal with water that helps in the maturation of the disease until the acuteness of the accident ceases.
Then you must make the woman lie on a stretcher that has two stretchers; and she should recline on her back and place her feet near the lower abdomen, her thighs spread open, her arms placed under her breasts, and each one in its appropriate position.
And the midwife follows the doctor to the right side and administers the instrument with which the cervix of the uterus is opened, the shape of which will come according to those cases that make it necessary.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you should be in the same position as the cervix of the uterus of the woman, and whatever goes into the uterus from the instrument should not exceed the cervix of the patient. However, if the instrument is larger than the cervix of the uterus, it is necessary to apply powder on the texture of the cervix of the uterus so that the introduction of any instrument into the cervix of the uterus is prohibited.
And it is necessary to let the liquid that flows out of the instrument of the doctor go above and for the one who ministers to hold the instrument and turn the liquid into it until it is opened the cervix of the uterus.
When an incision appears, it is touched with the hand and lanced, then it is necessary that you cut off its head with a lancet.
When the pus is drained, it is necessary that you plug the wound with a plaster soaked in warm oil or vinegar in which there is some styptic substance, and place a linen cloth on top of the wound at its opening.
When you separate the mother and the afterbirth, place a clean wool cloth soaked in water in which evil-smelling herbs have been boiled on top of the navel.
Then let it be cured for about two days with an enema, which is appropriate until it is healed.
After some days, the navel and the wound are washed with water and salt, and then with water in which rosemary or long-armed asterisk is boiled, and then return to the enema.
If the wound is inside the navel and swollen, it is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron, having care of it as has been said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to treat ectopic pregnancies when they appear unnaturally according to figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth by signs, and when you see the woman expelling at the onset of labor and desires to breathe air, and above her is lifted by that which comes out with birth, and hastens the emergence of the ectopic pregnancy, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and its head is the first to emerge, and the second one either attached to it or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's abdomen is pressed so that the embryo emerges gently because if it emerges over its head, the second one comes out with it and is cleaned of superfluous matter with good hygiene.
But if this birth is unnatural and incurable because when the embryo comes out above its feet and the body of it is outside the head of it and its legs are, and one hand or foot. The opening sentence translates to: "Either his head or his hand is turned towards his belly, and he has violently twisted his neck onto his shoulder, and the appearance of his body is not praiseworthy."
The necessary cause is that the midwife be wise and skillful in all those cases, and avoid errors and disappointments.
And you are showing the entire figure of them, and which device is in them for it to be understood by him and be standing upon it.
When the man ejaculates on his head due to natural urge, and he is violent towards the woman and it happens with difficulty, and sometimes the potency of him has already been weakened, then do this seizer, or what women have, and evaporate the semen from him with fenugreek juice and moist oils.
Then the midwife enters between her thighs with a small spatula and cuts the second opening, or dries it up with her nail into which the moisture that is in it flows. Press the woman's belly until she gives birth.
If she does not give birth, then it is necessary to rub her with egg white and fenugreek mucilage with a pumice stone.
And command him to do it, rub him with a rough cloth and make him vomit with the condition, and open his mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forgotten soon.
If the two heads of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them gradually with ease. If it does not enter, the woman is made to lie on a stone and lift her feet up, and the stone is moved on the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
If the heads are not turned inside out and the fetus dies, then you incise them and extract the rotten part of the fetus or seize the body with cloth and extract it, because it will be forgotten.
When the fetus comes out on his feet, it is necessary that you push them upwards, and then turn the fetus small, and open its mouth, and grab one of its feet and stretch them out little by little.
If it is inside the vagina, then command him to push, and make him vomit with a condition, because it will be forgotten if God wills it.
If it is not forgotten by the water we have recommended, then you return the small fetus little by little into its natural position, because it will be easily forgotten soon.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take egg white and dissolved gum, grind everything well in the mortar, and apply the mixture to the cervix of the woman, at the base of her stomach. And make that seizer in hot water until it reaches the hypogastric region.
And when the parts of him have become softened, then make him inhale myrtle smoke and suspend it upon him. And when the inhalation has lasted for an hour, then you make him seizer on a stone, and make him vomit and open his mouth, and take it out, and press gently on the lower part of his stomach to expel the fetus soon.
The long-term fetus hanging from one of its arms. If there is a reduction of the arm, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her bear down.
And if bearing down does not work, then make her lie on a bed and hit her buttocks violently with a hammer, and administer the medicine that I have recommended with mucilages.
And if the labor has begun, then make the seizer on a stone, and study on the reduction of the arm, and deliver the fetus in its natural position, and make her vomit and command him to push until it is forgotten.
The fetus on the expanded shoulders of its mother, and the opening of it is at her waist. It is necessary that the midwife have hold of the fetus and gently turn it little by little, with ease.
And when it is swollen and hardened, then you pause on the affected area with what we recommend for oil and poultices.
And apply small amounts of the poultice gradually, and when you have made it, then place that pestle on a pestle and command it to be tilted towards the right side, and also command someone to hold it; make it shake with condition. Delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
When the midwife encounters an obstructed labor using this method, consider, and then you shall incise the second one with your nail as far as it is emptied of moisture.
And if the child is suspended on the face and neck, then you shall incise the navel to ensure it does not become stuck and die.
Then gently push the child into the birth canal until you feel resistance and command the woman to take some breaths, and he shall easily come out if it is God's will.
Birth of twins or multiple children. Know that twins born prematurely are often weak, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and usually fatal; however, it is not unnatural, but rather due to the mother's condition.
Count the twins, regardless of how many there are, a second one, and separate them by cutting the ligament at the navel of each one. Sometimes they are easily born naturally, while sometimes they are born easily due to an unnatural cause, and some are born easily without being washable, as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver, you must care for them in the manner we have described for treating abnormalities.
And if the mother is thin and skilled in all ways that facilitate ease and subtlety, and delay, and is clever according to each figure prepared by the midwife for the good of the patient.
Recollection of that which forms in the womb from embryos and aborted.
Sometimes the number of pregnancies in a woman can be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, or even more. However, it is essential to confirm that a woman has had either zero or eleven pregnancies, as this was caused by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this requires that the midwife be knowledgeable in understanding which of these is similar to the other and therefore apply it accordingly.
Chapter 66.
On the extraction of a dead child.
When you treat a dead child according to what has been said in the division of medicine and it is not outside of that, and you are convinced that you must use force, then consider whether the woman is of good character and not one of those for whom danger is feared due to the circumstances surrounding her.
The woman must be placed on her left side with her head inclined downwards and her hips raised.
The assistant should hold one leg or tie it to the left side to ensure that the body does not extend during the extraction of the child.
You should moisten the woman's mouth with oils and poultices made from althea, fennel, and other seeds.
You should anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and poultices, you should enter your hand into the woman with ease, and you should surround the area where the fingers will be inserted in the child.
In the appropriate place: then consider whether the child is prepared to be delivered on its head, and you shall insert your fingers in the heels, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, in the crook of its arm, near the ribs, or beneath the hip bones.
But if it is to be delivered on its feet, you shall insert in the ankles or the middle of the ribs.
It is necessary that you hold the finger with your right hand, and bend its curvature in the location between the fingers of your left hand, and enter your hand with ease and insert the finger into one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the desired result.
And place another hand or the third one if necessary on the abdomen of the patient, to prevent distention but not extension according to its natural length.
It should be good all around, in order that the swelling may be alleviated as much as possible, just like it is done when extracting a tooth and rooting it out.
It is necessary for him that what is between [the swelling and the affected area] should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoint some oil on her fingers and gently massage the affected area and rub the retained part.
Therefore, if the birth is forgotten, the fingers should be pressed into the place that is deeper inside; and do this until everything has been expelled.
But if the hand is outside the other and it cannot be reduced by pressure, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it until it has all been expelled, either at the joint of the hand or at the coccyx.
And in the same way, do this to the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it happens that pressure can be applied to the swelling, or water is collected at the head, then insert between the blades of the spine spreader and cut the head and drain the water, or break it with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come in the chapter that follows this one.
Do the same if the fetus is large-headed by nature: and then insert it with an instrument called "algeometre", or take it out with an alundat as mentioned before, and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and contracted by the furculum, then it should be cut open until the moisture that is in the feet has been drained.
But if there are no complications and it is not swollen or enlarged, then you should cut the head immediately as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the afterbirth is everted or in the wrong place, then it is necessary that you perforate it to drain the moisture that is in it.
But if the fetus is on its feet, then the extraction of it is easy and the direction to the mother's mouth is easy.
But if the fetus is contracted in the abdomen and feet, then it is necessary that you extract it with a cloth that you will wrap around your hand, and cut the abdomen and feet to let the fluid that is in them flow out.
But if the other limbs are stuck and the head turns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, then insert your hand in the anus of the fetus and find the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the mother, and place a finger or two fingers inside, and pull it with them.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an afterbirth that is in the umbilicus, then it is necessary not to rub it; instead, administer a moist and oily emulsion. Apply plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fetus is on the side, then pierce it if possible; and administer what has been mentioned in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, cut it into pieces and extract it.
It is necessary to avoid any cause within the second childbirth.
And when you have completed your work, administer what has been said about the treatment of afterbirths that occur in the mother.
And if there is bleeding, then send to a stytic water and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in the belly of which there was a dead fetus, and above that fire another one observed. After a long time there was an afterbirth in the navel of the uterus; and it swelled so much that it burst into fire, and began to emit smoke.
And I was called to cure it, and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied some powerful plasters with strong adhesive to it, and extracted a bone from it, and after several days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly surprised because there is no bone in the womb.
And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
And so the wound healed, and many small bones were extracted from it, the woman living in that condition for a long time, but recovering gradually with a slight loss of arm.
And I did not wonder about that, since in such cases there is knowledge and help for the doctor when administering treatment with his hand.
In the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Shape of the lever used to open the mother:
This is the form of strangulation in which the veins are compressed, at which compression there are two benefits in the extremities of two feet. Perhaps this benefit should be more subtle with a constrictor, and it should be made of ivy or hazelwood stick.
The diameter of each stick should be two fingers and the edge of both sticks one finger, and the length of each is a little over a palm; in the middle of the two sticks there are two adjustments of that same stick which have already been fastened, the length of which is a little more than the width of a palm, and the diameter of each is slightly more than two fingers.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth to open it with those when you perform the prescribed benefits.
Another similar form, but more subtle and lighter:
Make it from ivy or hazelwood sticks in the likeness of forceps. However, at the end of it (the instrument) there should be two extensions like this, and the length of these extensions is a little over a palm, and the diameter of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother with it (the instrument), you should first position the woman on a bed, with her legs raised and apart, and open the space between them. Then place your hand on the instrument in a manner similar to when you forceps compress, according to the width that you want for the mouth of the mother up to which the metal will be inserted.
The form of vertebral manipulation that the ancients called:
The form of impulsion with which one pushes something:
The form for anamnesis, in which the head is crushed:
And it resembles forceps at the end, like this at times, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like this at times, at the end of which are teeth like the teeth of a vice, with which it is inserted and crushed. The form of brief anamnesis:
The form of incision with a spine:
The form of incision with two spines:
The form of a spatula having two extremities, at which the head is separated:
The form of two spatulas wide:
All those instruments are exercised, and when there are many species of that instrument and they are prepared, the craftsman should be as light in his operation and as much as possible according to the quantity of men.
And do not neglect any of those instruments, for the necessity of them is not to be excused.
On the extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is retained, it is necessary to order the patient to hold their jaw open, and then you should command that person to cough, and firmly press your hand on their mouth and nose, and if by doing so it has gone beyond (the tooth), good.
And if not, you should take a woolen cloth and perforate it with a hole, and place the herbs that are used to open the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, chamomile, anise, camomilla, scicadus arabicus, cassia lignea, and santaurea, in that hole. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the tide, and place that one on fire.
Then insert a funnel made of cane into the mother's mouth and keep it in until the vapour comes to the concave part of the womb.
Then let that vomit similarly as we have said, and the second one will come out quickly.
If the treatment remains close and is not evacuated, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or alum solution, and insert it into the cavity and seek the second one (finger), and when you find it, take it out little by little... If it is attached to the mother's anus, then insert the hand as recommended, and when you find the second finger, extract it little by little so that the mother does not suffer severe pain. Then lubricate both right and left hands with ease.
If the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with stirring and medication of water with herbs.
If none of the causes we have recommended is forgotten, then be careful not to overdo it in the process of extraction, but what comes out of her must be placed in the woman's vagina and anointed with oil and tetraformula; for it will heat up within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
When it becomes hot, the evil authority is raised to the head and stomach, and then it torments the patient; therefore, they should be administered sub-fumigations and appropriate treatments.
Moreover, among the ancients, sub-fumigation with cinnamon and dried figs has already been spoken of.
The shape of the instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated should be used to retain menstruation and the second one (finger):
Made of metal or wood.
It should be stopped at the thin end inside the cavity and the wide end above the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on the arms of the fire.
It should contain whatever is consumed by the sub-fumigation, and another one follows.
Treatment for an unperforated child's bottom.
Newborn children and those whose bottoms are not perforated, which must be treated with care and attention. Therefore, the midwife should pierce that opening with her own finger; and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp spatula, and make sure not to touch the rectum.
Place some wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and anoint it with oil inside, until it heals.
If you fear that it is obstructed, then pierce a cannula for several days and stop when the child wants to relieve itself.
Occasionally there is obstruction of the bottom due to plague or abscess; therefore, that obstruction should be incised, and it should be treated with what has been said about the treatment and lead.
Treatment for fistulas that occur afterwards.
Fistulas that occur after the delivery are not painful and thick, those that occur near the anus or in the space of one delivery.
It is a fistula or moles.
If the thickening is old and has become damp with white, foul-smelling pus or subtle ulcers, some of these fistulas penetrate.
Those that penetrate are recognized by what comes out of them during discharge and by the odor; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation, and it is beneficial for the worms to come out.
Some of these fistulas occasionally penetrate into the bladder space, and into the muscle of the scrotum; and some of these fistulas penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knot of the buttock.
That in which a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate is that you put your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of wood or metal into the fistula when it is not turbid.
If it is turbid in that one, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
If you do not feel it from top to bottom and do not perceive any cause of discharge, worms, or odor as mentioned earlier, then you know that it is not penetrating, and you can proceed with the treatment.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or muscle of the scrotum, the meaning is clearly that it is urine from that one and the place should be consolidated with medicine.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and pain occurs in the area, the sign is that the probe enters if there is no turbidity inside the bone, and pain occurs in the area around the delivery; and it becomes pus quickly; and that treatment does not work, nor is it consolidated with oil.
In all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the treatment of them is the labor and futility of foolish doctors on which they rely.
In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is expected, as I have told you, and what I have proved.
The patient should lie between your hands upon his back and raise the legs into the air, with the hips inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and then you should try to enter the cavity with lead or iron if it is in the fistula, until you know where the probe goes.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you should insert your finger into the neck.
If you feel a resistance while inserting your finger to probe, or if you feel something hard with your finger, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and do not work on that one, because healing does not exist in it, as we said.
But some may say that it heals in some men too.
And the medicine by which healing is expected in that one also involves igniting cautery thinly according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and inserting that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; and then you should apply it twice or thrice until you know that all the tissues adjacent to the fistula that are similar to feathers of birds are completely tightened.
And heal that one with bandages wrapped in cotton until all the tightened tissues can be seen, and heal that one with medicines to generate and consolidate flesh, and if it heals, it is good; and if not, then it is not healed within a certain time by another treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the anus with your finger, and between that and the suspected probe which may be of flesh or tissue, and sometimes the fistula is found in the scrotum where the skin surface is healed, then you should dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying along with the probe, and it should go deep into the fistula until the incision reaches the place where the tip of the probe ends, and through the probe the tissue is released and caught.
And heal those fistulous tissues that are similar to the shaft of a bird's feather and remain without any cause.
But if pus flows out between you and your action when probing those tissues, then burn it with fire or an acute instrument, as cauterizing with fire is useful: it tightens the fistulous tissues, and abscesses the pus through drying of the humors.
And heal that one with bandages wrapped in cotton or in coarse cloth until the wound is covered by scab, and then heal the ulcer with hard flesh generating and consolidating medicines.
And the medicines in which there is stopping and drying: when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has entered into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and probe it.
And if you feel resistance and it is suspected to be tissue or flesh, and it is close to penetration, then do not operate in that one but by faith and hope.
The cause is administered in one of three ways: either you cauterize it as previously mentioned; or you cut it until you obtain the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to enter and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting beyond the scrotum, because if you penetrate the rectum involuntarily, and it causes pain to the patient immediately and without his will; and heal it with what has been mentioned before, which works quickly, or stretch that tissue and clean the pus that dries close to the anus, as previously mentioned, either with a probe or another sharp instrument, and then clean those fistulous tissues in the section below where you can with percrustation; and finally, force yourself to restore the entire ulcer with cutting, and if the abscess pus is not consolidated and remains open in the division of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the side of the anus around the skin surface on the body and near the edge of the scrotum, then you take a sharp probe with perforated tip, similar to an awl for preparing coarse cloth in this form:
And he penetrates into that faithful envelope of five fields or around those areas; and he approaches the fistula, trying to reach its cavity until he achieves it.
If he penetrates into the margin of the anus closely, then you extract the feces from that wound so that you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the feces and adjust both ends evenly, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when the feces penetrates deeper into the flesh, tighten it within until those skins are incised which are between the ends of the feces and that they meet.
Then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, make it penetrate in any way you prepare, except that it is not too wide because it should not injure the ligament; and approach it until it is healed.
The method of spine-shaped spatula for dividing the fistula: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not injure anything unnecessary, as sometimes happens.
Stitching hemorrhoids, where blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds, for they can be in the anus like coal or as if it were a mass of fat. And the small and large ones are those which bleed constantly and are one, and the piles that are multiple, and are outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
But the ones that are outside the anus occur during months with little moisture, from which a clear liquid or a small amount of blood with continuous flow comes out, and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of the one that is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to empty it before the anus becomes raw and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and approach the incision of those, you should cut their roots.
But if the hooks are not present in those because of their moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or cotton or woolen gauze, remove those with your fingers, approach the incision of those and sprinkle some powders containing resins near the incision, to be used instead of cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then cure those with other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not empty, then cauterize the patient with a small bite, and wash it with water that eases bowel movement when the patient squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is light, and it is that you grab those with your nail, or grab those with hooks, and incise them, and cure those with water as we have said until they are healed.
And the one who has an incision, it is necessary to administer suture of them in this manner: take a feather and insert it into the needle and approach the hemorrhoids to the openings above, and make the feather penetrate through the opening of the other part, and envelop both ends of the feather on the side further from the needle, and transversely; tie the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and approach the wound closed and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them, and leave one and do not sew it, so that the excess blood flows from there.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the anus, and place that over the anus and command the patient to rest. And leave it inside until it closes; and when it is healed, cure them with infusions or other treatment until they are healed.
And since they are old and that medicine is not effective in them, it is necessary that you cut those with the point of spatula or your nail until they become wet and the flow is stopped above, which prevents their consolidation; and approach them until they are consolidated.
You remove those that are very violent with the first cautery before any blood flow and they become scabbed; and approach them until they are healed.
Know that anal abscess is essential, and it is not to be ignored according to the color of the body like the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but more in the areas around the feet and chest, and it indicates pain through them.
Therefore, it is necessary to incise what is around the nail and hold it with forceps or hooks, and be exterminated from its root; and approach it until it is healed.
If you want, cauterize the following that is preceded in its chapter.
Warts are small, rough, round elevations on the surface of the body, and they appear mostly in children.
The cure for it is to extend and incise it, or to constrict it with a file or a heated iron tool that fits into it. If you want, cauterize this (the wart), as I said, either with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Ants are small, pitted or large elevations on the body that move in a line and when touched, they sting like an ant bite and swell around the area.
The cure for ants is to take a hollow cane or a reed cane and make sure it's strong. Place the canula over the ant within its circle; then turn your hand with the canula to incise the area around the ant, pressing it onto the skin, and remove the ant from its root.
If you want, do this with a reed or iron rod in the following way:
The part above the canal is to be delicately separated, closed (meaning not perforated), wrapped, and learned about its anatomy and rotation.
And if you want to cauterize the ant using the method as described in the section on cautery of ants.
Concerning the tools that are administered for making an incision.
Some incisions are made using silver or lead or melted or hammered metal; and some incisions are made with small or large instruments depending on those to whom they are administered, as the one given to a child should be small; and the incisions for the elderly or those who have cold and painful areas should be small.
The shape of a large and shallow incision:
The head of the canal above, where the pouch is tied, should be wide according to this method, and it should be clearly distinguished where the pouch is attached in the same manner as sometimes seen.
And the end of the pus below, which penetrates into the anus, should be closed (meaning not opened) in a narrow manner, hidden under subtlety; and in one side there are two cuts, while on the other side one cut, and the width of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the rays and the pus, being smaller for thicker rays and pus.
And the pouch in which medicines from animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed should be about the size of a palm.
And it should be pierced with multiple cuts in such a manner that it is rolled up, and if the space between the cuts is thick, the width of the cut should correspond to the thickness of the finger.
And place it firmly within the strong and sharp needle or surround it; then adjust the pouch accordingly; when the pouch is placed, it should be tight at the head of the incision between two distinct points with a strong constriction, and cauterize each cut: But the quality of cauterizing with this method is that you fill the pouch with medicine that is warmed according to the patient's tolerance; be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Place the patient on their back and elevate their legs, placing a cushion or pillow under them; then anoint the end of the cauterizing instrument with oil, albumen of egg or mustard or similar; insert it into the anus with ease, and administer the pouch, squeezing it with two hands and exerting pressure forcefully until everything inside the incision is evacuated from the hernia; then remove the incision and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine is forced through this method, it should be sufficient; and if it remains in place for an entire night, it is more effective.
But if you cauterize it in cases of abdominal solution and the issuance of it, then you must reapply the cauterizing tool until it is healed.
And if there is diarrhea or painful hemorrhoids in the anus, then make a shallow and narrow incision, using the type of incisions that are given to children.
Concerning the treatment of sores.
I have already said in the section on treating sores what is appropriate for the free person, and I will now explain the treatment with herbs and medicines according to their nature.
Therefore, it is said that afflictions are diverse according to what causes them and according to the place where they occur.
And the causes of various times are those that cause afflictions are such as falling from stones, or incision of space or armor, or striking with a lance, or club, or arrow, or similar to these causes.
But the afflictions that occur in the body are such as an affliction that occurs on the head, neck, feet, stomach, or back, and similar to these members of the body.
And it is recommended for the treatment of certain afflictions to pause that reasoning and rule over other afflictions.
And we begin with simple head afflictions, as the complex ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore it is said that when a simple head affliction and not a fracture occurs, then consider: if it is due to falling from stones or similar, and the patient has already tied the bandage only and it is a large wound and you fear that the patient may have an abscess forming, then you immediately incise the cephalic vein and do not delay; and extract as much blood as possible according to the strength of the vein, unless any other cause prohibits venesection, especially if the blood that is exuded from the wound is little.
The venesection should be on the opposite side of the afflicted part; and keep the patient from reflux, vomiting, and heavy food.
But if any cause prohibits the reduction, then it should be reduced by reducing food and avoiding meat and wine.
And wait for the wound if an abscess forms over it, fill with oil of roses or wine in which it is steeped.
But if you are certain of the abscess, then wait for the wound if it is new and its air has not changed the powder that I recommend applying cautiously.
And if the air has already changed, then wait for some purging until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to incision of space and similar, and the lips are not properly closed, then close them with suture as I recommend for their suture.
But if the wound is exposed to bone and tendon, and it is not bound but only a small suspensioner, then incise it and treat the wound with medicine and restore the flesh properly covered by bandages, and order the patient to be careful about food that contains meat: fish and fowl, and similar until it heals.
And if rot in the bandage putrefaction occurs and does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that protrudes and remove it; and treat it.
But if in these afflictions there is an artery or vein from which blood flow may occur and it has not been severed by medicine, then you examine the artery; and if the unsevered one is found, you incise it with a spatula or ligature; and if necessity forces you to do what I have said, you cauterize until the blood is severed.
And if these afflictions are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder on them, as it will harden before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: Recipe oil from crushed poppy seeds, dragon blood, and ground cumin; mix all together and sieve it, then fill the wound with it, constrict it properly with a good constriction until it adheres to it, and coagulate with blood.
And apply it strongly on top with a poultice and let it rest like that until it is not an abscess, as the medicine does not penetrate until it is healed.
And sometimes do this alone with cauterization, when there are no poppy seeds and dragon blood available.
And now perform this operation on large wounds when it must be paused and tightened, and only on recently formed wounds whose air has not changed.
And if the air has changed them, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to apply this powder, but instead treat them as I have said, that is, wait for some purging or wait for powder made from barley flour and water until they heal; and treat them with other treatment until they are healed.
But if a bone fracture occurs in the wound, which is small, then you extract it with forceps.
And I will say the treatment for head fractures that are poisonous.
On neck afflictions.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is like a simple head wound.
But if the nerves of the neck are incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not engage in its treatment without caution, and avoid any treatment that causes intense stitching, such as zinc and zego which are toxic and harmful to nerves and inhibit healing. And do not place any pressure on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold and its continuation is near the brain, which is the head of all members.
If it is being treated with light medicines, such as washing with sweet water, sometimes immersed in rose oil or not, and when it is washed with sweet water and other remedies are applied according to this method, and gargle with warm water.
But if the wound is large, administer stitching or sew up its edges, and take care of it with powders until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or pus collects in its lower part, then perforate it at the most depressed point.
But if an artery has been cut and there is bleeding in the wound, then separate or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
But if the spinal bones have been cut or not, and the vessels of the neck are saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound on the neck with suturing around the base of the skull and do not touch it; move it gently and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a proper structure, and leave it for several days; take care of it with stimulating and exciting powders until it is healed.
But if the wound has affected bone, then you percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; leave what is not appropriate until the wound dries up, and separate and the granulation of it should be relieved.
And if the wound is recent, sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you. But if a fistula is formed in the wound, treat it with what will come to your memory in its own chapter.
If it is a wound caused by a lance or sword, and sometimes deep, consider whether the wound is accompanied by wind when the patient complains of it; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with little blood, then wait for the first hour to sprinkle powder on it, and do not press it so as not to keep the blood in the depth of it and return to the heart and aggravate the patient, but wait until it has attracted pus, and remove it every other day.
And if the pus is not present, then wait for the orifice of the wound to open up so that the blood can drain from the humors; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in it will settle.
But if three days or more have passed and the patient does not have spasms, tremors of the heart, palpitations, or other good conditions of it, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with heat and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is excused and it has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is caused by a knife or sword, and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what is prescribed before stitching (if large) or powder (if small).
But if the wound has affected bone and there are separated pieces of it, then twist the wound and try to extract those pieces. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound dries up, for the extraction of them is relieved.
And in other accidents on other members, the help in treatment is the same as what has been said.
Of stomach wounds.
The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or medium-sized.
A small disruption can be difficult in other ways, and know that its reduction is more difficult, if you do not take care to introduce it into its place as soon as possible, for it swells up and becomes bloated, making the introduction of it difficult.
And therefore, the best disruption is medium-sized, for in this case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two cases mentioned above.
You should know that abdominal stitching can be done in four ways, but two of them are common and are used for other wounds on the body.
Two other stitching methods are specific to other wounds, but they are more specific to abdominal stitching.
I recommend to you exposure and explanation.
Therefore, you say that if the wound is small and there has been a cause for the intestine by it, and reducing the intestine is difficult, then this can be in one of two ways: either due to the small disruption as mentioned above, or when the intestine has swelled up due to the coldness of the air.
And so when this is the case, it is necessary that you heat up that area and immerse a sponge or damp cloth in hot water alone, or cook it in hot water, and cyperus, spike, and bindings into that which goes inside to resolve the inflammation.
In some cases, this situation is accompanied by stiffness, and it is better that water alone be used to resolve the inflammation.
And since you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water containing elder and mallow, because by this means is the intestinal pain alleviated with little effort.
But if the intestine is excluded from this treatment, then you cut the hernia with a small instrument using which you make incisions into the abscesses.
The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that it not be cut, and there should not be an intention to cut when necessary and lacking resources.
Of the instrument, take its shape:
The sharp angle of the tool should be acute, and the other part should not be blunt. Its tip should be subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula's tip; it should have an obtuse edge to some extent.
And so when the wound is widened and the intestine protrudes, it is necessary that its reduction should be in accordance with its natural form, at its proper location if possible, because this is better.
But when the hernia is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, with their legs bent as far as their head; and if it is above the abdomen, then you should raise the patient's head and legs to the same extent as the affected area.
Similarly, if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should pause your intention and consideration always on this so that the affected area is more elevated than the other.
So it is necessary that you treat both large wounds and small wounds.
In small wounds, pause what is prepared, and make sure that the assistant who will administer it is among your most trusted, who will hold the hernia completely with his hand and adjust the lips of it, and uncover from one side to the other the area where suturing may be required due to another cause.
This is the common method of suturing: one that you take the needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; and approach it from the edge of the hernia of the thumb, tightening the needle one time, without putting thread in both ends of the knot, with two ends of the cord on both sides of the inner parts, penetrating through that part; and you have already tied both ends of the cord and the suturing is made in four orders.
And tighten the thread double around the needle, and sometimes from two sides at once, and gather both lips and the wound through appropriate stitching; and leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, and tie it in the same way as the first needle; do not stop doing this if necessary with needles until you have completed the contraction of the wound.
Needles should be neither too thick nor too thin, because thin needles pierce the flesh lightly; and large needles are difficult to pass through the cord, so therefore they should be of a medium thickness.
It is not necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of the cord closely together, because this would pierce the flesh lightly and the wound would break down before its consolidation.
Do not prolong the suturing so that the wound is prevented from consolidating.
Insert the tips of the needles so as not to hurt the patient while they sleep; and pause on the suture with expanded pulp from all sides, which hold the tips of the needles; leave it until you know that the wound has consolidated.
These types of suturing with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, because they require only one needle or two around the wound.
But the second suture is common: you administer four parts with the suturing, of the cord and two ends of the thread, in one go, with a needle that should be wrapped in both thickness and thinness.
And when you have penetrated these four parts with the needle, reduce the needle from that side of the starting point, so that the thread draws up the inflamed part of the wound towards the healthy part, so that the suture is like a seam with which the cloth is strengthened.
Pause between each stitch the thickness of the little finger.
This suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I sewed up a wound that had occurred in a man's stomach, which was pierced by a knife, and the hernia was larger than one palm, and it had protruded from both sides of the intestine around two palms from the middle part of the member; and after that I reduced it when the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or more, and it was cured and healed; and it lived for many years and was maintained in its condition, and it was convalesced in its dispositions.
The other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; but by miracle, for I did not cure it with the mouth, for it was in a place where no medicine was found nor remedy, but rather it was pressed on the wound twice daily and rinsed frequently with honey water until it healed.
But I will tell you two types of stitching according to the words [of Scripture].
And it is that you begin with the sewing of the linen, and enter the needle from the outside to the inside [of the wound].
And thus, when the needle penetrates into the linen and enters there as instructed and in the length of the entire body, and leaves the head end where you have inserted the needle; and let the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside out through the other end of the thread.
And thus, when you have made it penetrate there [the thread], then make it penetrate another time in the same end of the needle from the inside out to the outside; and leave the head that is there, and let the needle penetrate into the other end from the inside out.
And let it penetrate with your puncture through the head at the end of the needle that is within it [the wound], and let all of it penetrate there.
And then begin from this side and sew the other end of the needle to the head end that is on the other side, and draw out the needle from the linen that penetrated there, and return it to the linen and sew the head end that is on the other side with this end of the needle; and draw out the thread from the linen.
And do it one time and another, and continue doing it until you sew all that is outside according to this example.
And the sum of this method of sewing is that you sew with the skin suturing that sews the hair, so that you sew the head once from the side of the end of the linen, and let go of the other side until it is finished.
But the second type of stitching that I shall tell you, which is called "Gaul" and this one is of great authority and is highly recommended, is that you sew it like a semilunar suture as certain physicians do, namely that they bring together all the parts to their corresponding sides naturally; and they apply the end of one side and the end of the needle to the other end of it, and this is done as I have advised.
It is necessary that the needle be placed at your side of the outside edge, and make it penetrate into the inside edge in the same place, and let go of two head ends; and then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two head ends.
And turn each one of them, and make each one penetrate from the inside out to the outside in two head ends that are opposite to the opposite side.
And this method of sewing is better than common light stitching, and it is the sowing that was mentioned before.
This is the speech of Galenus
And others say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you enter each one of them a thread, and begin with the intromission of the needle that corresponds to you, and let it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who sew the liver.
When disruption occurs in the correct location of the stomach, the suture is more difficult in that place than in other locations of the stomach.
The judgment of medicine for one disease is a judgment for other diseases as well.
The cause is that when you reach the recent pustule before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and cauterize it well, then pause over the carnivorous powder.
And if the air has already altered the pustule, then pause over that alum paste until it hardens and falls off, and heal it in the same way as the treatment of other pustules until it is healed.
But if you are not present with the medicine, then pause over it as soon as possible, because it begins to rot, olden, and change every two days, as you have taught me, until it is healed, for you do not need another medicine in these simple cases.
But if you fear that the pustule may communicate injury to major members, then it is necessary that you immerse linen in dipped oil of quality, or rose oil, and apply it to the areas between the joints and leave it there.
And if there is pain or rot in the intestines, as it often happens, then you must sterilize that with black teppe stiptic vinegar, and especially if the pustule has been reached in the intestine and has made penetration into its cavity.
And know that the one of a large intestine is easier to heal than the one in delicate intestines.
It is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gegunu" does not receive healing from a pustule that occurs there; this is due to the great number of veins present there and the large size of it, as well as the subtlety of its body and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what comes from the pustule is the linen, and you succeed in obtaining it recently, reduce it according to your teaching with which you reduce intestines.
But if it has passed and already become green or black, then you must tighten it with a thread over the affected area of it, because in linen there are veins and arteries that flow blood.
Then insert another ligament there and pause the two ends of the thread hanging from the area around the pustule opening, so that it is relieved of its attraction, you must cut off the linen and release the blood flow from the pustule.
Remember the pustules when they occur in the intestines.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some men, because I saw one who was pustulated in his stomach with the thrust of a lance and the pustule was on the right side of the stomach, and the pustule was old and made a fistula, and it was healed by treatment and wind.
Therefore I continued the healing of it even though it was not yet cured, but I continued to refine it until the fire healed and the area was consolidated.
And I saw the area already consolidated, then examined the patient who had suffered an accident of evil in his stomach; and no one should approach this unfortunate case due to that misfortune and change their diet and drink, but instead stay in bed and exercise according to their words.
And some experienced ones said that when a pustule occurs in the intestine and is small, it is necessary to tie it according to this method: take large bread crumbs; then adjust the two lips of the pustule and place one of them on its mouth over the two lips of the pustule; thus, when you take hold of it and tighten its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then pause another bread crumb next to the first one, and do not continue making them one after the other according to the size of the entire pustule.
Then reduce it and heal the pustule; and leave the attached heads in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient with any injury.
And it is possible to tie the intestine with a very fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, because it is finer; and take the end of these threads of intestines, and make them quite bare, and tie the end of it with another thread, wrapped, and insert that thread into needles and sew it with that the intestine, and reduce the disruption.
This method of stitching with needles is not only based on trust and hope.
If the wound is large and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle hernias, then not only is surgery required but also not complete healing will occur.
Treatise on ulcers and fistulas.
Know that any wound or boil that becomes old and chronic, and does not heal and bleeds continuously without being cured, is universally referred to as a fistula and we call it an ulcer.
A fistula is a hard, nodular, white lesion that is not painful and has a concave shape like the shape of an ulcer caused by a bird's peck; for this reason it is called a cicatricial ulcer.
In a man with an ulcer that bleeds, the pus is often purged in some hours. Sometimes this pus becomes thickened, scanty, and slimy.
I have already shown all these causes, their symptoms and the treatment with medications in the classification.
And so, you should know that the healing of fistulas is done through surgical treatment with the hand.
You should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body, as they reach large veins and arteries, nerves, spleen, intestines, bladder, one of the ribs, one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed like the hand and foot; and those are the ones that provide proximity to the main member and similar areas.
Therefore, the fistula that occurs in this manner is one of the difficult-to-heal diseases and does not receive treatment, with the occupation being labor and ignorance.
If one of the fistulas has such depth that it does not reach the places mentioned and you hope for its healing and believe in its treatment, but wish to find out more about it, then take a probe or iron, and if the fistula is straight, use it to explore it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with lead wire, because lead has the property of lightness in its body and will alleviate and correct the twist.
If the fistula has horrible movements (spasms), it is not possible for you to probe it.
Therefore close the orifices with its own orifices, because the moisture that you use to close one will pass through the others and run out of them.
Then proceed with extreme care, for it is important to know if you have bone or nerve here, and whether the fistula is long or short, or if it is one that has horrible movements and is all around the entirety of your strength, your questioning, the examination of the patient, and the discovery of pain, you should use compression on the area with your hand and similar to the symptoms and causes of an abscess.
And when you have considered all these causes with certainty, then go to the treatment according to confidence: it is that you consider if it is an apparent fistula near salt, long away from joints, or of nerves, arteries, veins, or one of the places which I told you.
Then you dry out the fistula as it was said in its description, and remove what is in that filtration and corrupted flesh, and what is born from the orifices of the skin, or nails and similar, and cure it within where it is healed.
But if the fistula is deep, and as it should be, you must incise it up to where it is possible for you, and clean out all its corrupted flesh; and administer warm poultices wrapped in medicines, and insert these into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with an iron.
And do this for some time until the acute medicine burns all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to its corruption.
And place a healthy dressing on it, which generates healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by that, you must cauterize it as you have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify that, then you investigate it and dry it out as you have recommended, but do not prevent any cause of a vein or nerve or main member as I have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness in it, you cut into it until the corruption is completely contained; and heal it with something that causes it to regenerate until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and continues to discharge pus like before, you should know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you dig further and proceed with great care and cleanliness, and restore it.
And so if it is healed, that is good; and if not, you should know that the corruption is deep in the body, which has not been reached, and therefore there is no hope of healing it.
And if the corrupted bone is small and it is possible to remove it with forceps, then you remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if the bones are moving, you must perform the extraction of all of them with great care, and do not leave any cause of resistance with your strength.
But if any cause of the humors opposes you, and in its incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise the membranes or flesh where they are, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then wait for the wound to heal, and leave it surrounded by flesh and membranes, and guard the wound so that it is not consolidated and the section which you have incised in your operation is constricted.
Therefore, if you fear, wait for the wound to become dry after being immersed in olive oil or in a strong Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green dressings, because when those membranes dry out, the separation of the bones is facilitated and the attraction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the femur or thigh or similar, and what is rotten is only on its surface, then you remove that with resin only to the point of removing the blackness and corruption, and restore the wound.
But if what is rotten is a large part and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and cut into it until the point where the corruption is found, and heal it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which befits a man in his chest, namely, to place it as an example and aid on your operation.
Find a young man about the age of thirty who has pain in his chest, and from the inside parts, there is a bad smell near the matter inside the body up to where the matter reaches the chest, and it is matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and not caused externally.
And then the time was extended due to the error of the physicians until the abscess has been drained, and I ran for materials, and its healing was delayed until the wound became fistulated, and it was filled with pus and the moistures of the body.
For then the treatment of many physicians lasted around two years, and they were not wise but skilled, until I was called.
I saw the wound of him and the materials flowing from those ulcers due to large holes; and his body was completely solidified, and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those ulcers and it reached the bone.
Then I approached and examined all the ulcers, and found that they were spreading in every direction from the wound.
And then I cut myself open and incised over one of the ulcers into which I discovered a portion of bone, and found that it was rotten, and already it was putrefied and corrupted; and a part of the wound had already penetrated to the marrow.
And then I cut out what I had uncovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I cut out that which was not bone but corruption which I had excised and removed, and I had already drained it.
And I placed the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And then I continued to cut and uncover the bone again over the initial discovery, and found continuing corruption with the bone.
And I cut out that which appeared from that corruption, and then I was perforated to make the healing and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I continued to cut and uncover further and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and made the healing and restoration of it, but it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with the marrow, and then restored it with medicines, and it healed and consolidated lightly.
The operation and section of it were not necessary, but only for the looseness of it and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because to him it happened at all times due to excessive evacuation of bad syncopes.
And thus it heals completely, and nothing remains in place of the bone; and its position is arranged well within his body and restores its virtue; and it converts in its dispositions, and does not harm him in any way nor cause any damage in any circumstance.
But if the bone protrudes in a place of the body that has been injured, then it is necessary that you cut it according to this method: and it is that you grab it firmly at its extremity, and order someone to stretch it out; and bind it tightly with linen thicker than the first binding; and hold it over the skin that was left behind, and extend its edge so that you pull the skin apart from the sides, and you uncover the skin over the place where you want to cut so that the cut does not harm the skin.
And stop a board or table beside the bone decently, because when you do this it is not prohibited to cut the corrupted flesh with the knife.
And it is necessary that the cut be over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the rotten bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then perhaps the cut of the other side should be made.
And if the bone is rotten and not protruding, it has a continuous division with the other, and the corruption is in one or some parts of it; then you uncover the entire skin; and stop a board beside it, and then cut the first part where the corruption continues until the cutting of the other part is continued.
The cut should be according to the location of the corruption as I have said.
And if the corruption is in a joint, incise that corrupted joint and cut the bone where it continues with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but deceitful.
And if the corruption is in the hand or foot, it is difficult; but it is necessary that you investigate the corruption according to your method and cut it open, and clean it according to each disposal which is possible for you, and with each deceit rectify yourself, so that it does not harm a vein or nerve.
And know what the saws and knives are for cutting these bones according to their position, and the preparation of them, and the thickness of them, and their subtlety or coarseness and their smallness or large size; therefore it is necessary that you prepare all kinds of operations suitable instruments for that operation.
And know that this operation means for you the kind of tool that is required; when with you it is great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness to the methods of diseases, then you already have what is appropriate for the tools to all diseases.
You are forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use as simple ones with which you will proceed in your prohibition, which you will experience on others. Cutting instrument (scissors):
Another cutting instrument (knife):
Large cutting instrument (saw):
Measuring tool (rule): Let the head of this rule be shaped like a cross-headed nail and its points be shaped like the points on a nail.
And it is not appropriate except when the joint heads are crushed because they are corrupt, or the opening is wide.
Small form of razors (scissors):
Long form of razors (forceps):
Form of another saw properly made: shall be arched upward and the edge of iron sharp, and the limbs of the handles properly formed. Form of the body:
Curved form of the razors (scissors):
Another thin form of razors (scalpel):
Another form of curved-tipped razors (forceps):
Small form of the scissors resembling tweezers:
Another small form of bone cutters (pliers):
Form of another bone cutter that resembles a ruler and has a saw-like edge that is used in many places during the cutting of bones:
Form of rule for measuring the holes made in the bones:
And the edge is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian steel and similar to all the causes we have mentioned about scissors, bone cutters, and saws.
Of incision and of the setting of bones.
If the incision is made due to an internal or external cause, or if you have already treated the corruption with medicines and the treatment does not work, or if the corruption persists without any apparent cause, then it is necessary that you make an incision in that member to the depth of the corruption, so that the patient may escape by that way either from death or from a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of that patient is that the member becomes black before it is burned, or if it swells around the black area until the gangrene enters that member and consumes the entire body, therefore take care to make an incision on that.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by poison from certain venomous animals such as scorpions, vipers or rattlesnakes and others.
And if the corruption or the injury is at the end of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not leave space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
And similarly, if you access the hand, then you cut it at the wrist and do not leave space for the corruption to enter into the arm.
If the patient's joint swells, then make an incision in the arm into the shoulder at the joint.
If corruption occurs and the joint swells, then it is the death of the patient; administering another cause in treatment is as effective as nothing.
Similar to the foot when corruption swells the aforementioned part of the foot, then you should make an incision into one of the toes.
If there is a lump on the foot, then you should make an incision along the entire foot. But if it grows into the calf, then you should make an incision into the calf at the joint.
If corruption has already reached the calf, there is no remedy but to release it and allow the patient to die.
The method of incising a limb or sewing it up is to tighten the ligament beyond the part you wish to incise, and then tighten another ligament at the site; extend a ligament below, and extend another ligament above; separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; and then make the incision or sew it up.
It is necessary to place gauze on all the parts to keep them dry, and bring the dressing and cautery to the patient adjusted and sterile.
But if bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the site or apply some hemostatic powder to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment when it is complete.
Then bind the affected limb with a ligament appropriate to the injury, and care for it until it heals.
This pain in the man's foot, which occurs due to an event similar to burning coal, you and I recommend that he apply this remedy we mention.
This initial corruption tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
Therefore, that man should prepare himself by applying heat to the affected foot with intensity sufficient to relieve the pain and burning sensation, and immerse the foot in hot water, allowing it to heal.
For a long time, that remedy will have caused the corruption in the affected hand as well.
Therefore, go to me and have that excess remedy removed from the hand, and perform cleansing on the body, so as not to let the excess spread to the other foot before it started in the hand.
He called upon me to amputate his hand, but I did not wish to do so, fearing the spread of that excess and moreover dreading the death of the patient due to his poor condition.
But when he gave up on me, he returned to his land and informed me that the man prepared and had his entire hand amputated, and he was healed.
I have not related this narrative without purpose, but to offer assistance on the matter of this disease, and as a signification by which it may be recognized and treated accordingly.
Regarding care for the anus and quality of cleansing with medications.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged before drainage occurs, it should be broken and perforated, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving a cavity similar to a vessel, covered with fine linen, and not allowed to become corrupted again or press on bone, nerve, or ligament. This condition is called a sinus and is not referred to as a fistula.
However, if the space becomes prolonged before corruption sets in any member, it is then called a fistula and not recognized as such.
The treatment is that the cavity should be completely removed and especially when it is made thin like fabric, ensuring that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cavity adheres and that the corruption has not yet been completed, and in the cavity there is a swelling of the face, then you should treat it with an enema.
You should consider the sinus and if it is large and emits a fetid odor, then enema with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and garlic, which has been divided into portions and placed in a container, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes a rosy color and achieves its specific effect.
You should take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; then enema with that solution the sinus, and tighten the orifices of it, and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.
You should also remove that with care; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the odor is eliminated.
Sometimes it is enema with ashes water when this medicine is not present, and you should take the ash from the wood, put it in the water, and then strain that and enema it into the sinus until you feel assured that the sinus has been sealed.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then enema with honey and garlic juice diluted, or wine and honey mixed, for honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when the wine contains excess strength and dryness.
And as you do this for several days and feel assured that the sinus has been healed, then perform an enema with a solution that makes the flesh grow in it.
You should take digestive oil of roses and dissolve it in a mixture of white wine and tincture of spices, or perform an enema with various medications and remedies that I have mentioned in the treatise on enemas.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula for the enema, you should gradually widen it with a small iron tool, and pause when you feel that it has been expanded enough, covered with Egyptian oil or basilica oil until it is fully expanded.
Similarly, if the orifice is wide, you should sew the lips of it with stitches and leave a quantity within it that does not allow the enema to flow out.
If the orifice of the sinus from which the fistula comes is raised at the ends above it, you should dry that area where the pus collects so that the fistula can run out below, for when the fistula is blocked in the sinus, the flesh will grow there.
If it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone as desired, you should be prepared that you will prepare the member with the preparation needed for the fistula to run out easily as appropriate and without being retained by any cause of the fistula.
The one that is over the sinus orifice should be washed at all times to prevent anything that is near the arm from becoming infected. And so you may know if what comes out of the arm is little or much, whether it digests, or does not digest.
And so you must consider the location of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that has been discharged from the sinus already adheres or becomes attached to it, then you should loosen or separate it on the third day, and when you separate the wound, you change the cloth for another and renew the dressing.
However, if the sinus has a wide space and there is a subtle virus, do not despair of adherence from it, for healing occurs, for some people have slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and those are the ones in whom it happens contrary to this.
And if the sinus has been discharged for many days and the arm is not digesting, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, you should dry out the medications, and if the medications are wet in their substance and in their effect, they become as drying as ointments like diaphinicon when they are applied excessively.
And the last thing is that you take diaphinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and add an ancient remedy for the stomach to its substance, and combine this with the previous one, and use it.
And it seems like this action when there is no arm, use diaphinicon ointment, honey that is cooked until thickened and apply it; or take myrrh, aloe and sage, crush them all and powderize over the heated honey, and line this over cloth and strengthen it on the sinus; and line this with the honey that you have heated until thickened, and powderize over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered with long aristolochia and celestial root (and this is the celestial root) and erysipelas flour and centaury, and use these simple herbs or compound them, crush them and sieve them, and powderize over the honey that has been recommended; and hush it with it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed with this treatment, you should know that corruption is in its bone, and you must investigate the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
Treatment of breadcrumbs, nail filing and cutting the finger nail, and incision.
Breadcrumbs are an abscess that comes from the nail of the finger on the hand or foot, and it is strong in other places, and when it is prolonged and its cure is expensive, or it becomes an abscess cauterized, or corrupted, and discharges pus into the arm until it rots the root of the nail, and it corrupts completely, and it carries its corruption to the bone until it smells fetid, and the end of the finger becomes rotten, and the color of it is made dark.
Therefore, when you have that with what I have said in the division and it does not respond to your treatment, then you must incise all the superfluous matter that remains of the nail and apply cautery to the wound near it, for cauterization is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail compress the flesh at its joints, it begins to swell and inflame, then you must stop the pus that comes out near the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and apply a thin needle under the nail that pierces the flesh, and press it out with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines until it is all washed away; and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone and remove it, for there is no healing that occurs when the bone is corrupted.
And if you see that the corruption and corruption is spreading in the tooth, you must incise it in one of its roots according to its memory, and treat it until it is healed.
But if the nail is pierced by percussion or attrition, and pain is very intense, then you must at first numb the patient, and cut the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse section from above to below, and be careful that the incision does not reach into the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient intense pain, and it may cause the generation of superfluous flesh in the area; and treat the area with what reduces pain.
A more adjusted one, born in the hands of some men, it is very fatty throughout the flesh, and it is very fatty in its bones, or it is very fatty in its nails.
And some of them are born near the joint [or hinge], or their nature is in some knuckles of the mentioned ones. But the one that is born in the knuckles of the finger is not ill, and the one that is born near the joint is very ill.
And of those that are fleshy, the section [incision] is easy, and it is necessary for you to dissect its nature with a lancet.
But the healing of the one that is born near the joint section is difficult; therefore beware of the abscessing of it.
In the one that is born in the finger (or knuckles), you must incise the flesh of it at the beginning with an oval lancet, and you should use a suitable saw for this, and take care to cure it until it heals.
Consolidation that happens in the mentioned joints between their observed motes or by nature of the man who is born thus, or by consolidation of wounds or burning with fire, or similar things, therefore it is necessary to incise that consolidation until the mentioned ones return to their natural form.
And place a barrier between their cloths soaked in red oil to prevent them from consolidating easily, and separate them or place a thin layer of lead between them until it is consolidated as necessary.
Similarly, if there is consolidation in some of the mentioned ones with the palm, then you must incise that consolidation as prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
The incision of blemishes are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are varicosities, and they are thick enveloped veins full of melancholic fluids that come in the motes of the members of the body, and the greater danger is in the legs, especially in the legs of the itinerants, the laborers, and the carriers.
Therefore it is necessary to administer purge of the body from black bile some observed times with strong expulsion, and also let the patient bleed from the basilic vein.
The healing of theirs with iron is according to two methods: the first is that it is incised and the black blood is drawn out, and the second method is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The incision of it is according to this method: at the beginning you bind the leg with warm water into which the thick blood is resolved, that is feculent from the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg at the upper part of the thigh towards the lower part of the crotch with a bandage, and then incise the vein in one place or two or three places with a wide incision, and raise the black blood with the strongest force of the hand from below the leg towards above, until the amount that you want to extract and have taken has been removed, and this will remove the power of the illness.
And tell him (the patient) to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the healing by phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
The elevation of theirs is according to this method: you must raise the leg of the patient, if there are motes in it, and place him in a warm bath and bind his leg with warm water until it swells and the veins are overflowing; or exercise it with strong exercises, if bath is not available, until the member is heated.
And incise the sheath on the right side of the vein for an incision along its length or in its lower part you must remove the codena, or at the bottom you must remove the talon.
And open the sheath with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you must perceive that it is black in color when it darkens.
And therefore if you perceive that the sheath is white, it is a cord.
And place a small rod under it so that it is elevated and removed from the sheath, and suspend it with a pair of tongs.
And incise another incision opposite that incision for three fingers, and strip the sheath from above the vein until it appears.
And lift it and incise the lower incision, and extract it and raise it until it is removed through the second incision, and extract it from the incision that is above it.
And do this until the sheath is extracted from the upper incision or any of the incisions, until it is completely removed; and then incise it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce an awl with a double-edged needle and tie it, or introduce below it the rod and rotate your hand all around until it is removed. And be careful not to incise it; for if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate the mot and comes upon the patient as harm from it.
And when the whole thing is completely removed, then place a bandage soaked in wine and red oil on the wound and heal it until it heals.
And if the life is contracted with tortuosity in which there is envelopment at the divisions, and it is not as it should be according to what we have said, then it is necessary that you cut through that entire tortuosity of it and the places of its envelopment, and suspend it with sutures inside until it is raised.
And beware that you do not incise the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; use your prudence in this matter.
Make an incision with which the life is cut off:
It should not be as with the sutures or be of sharp extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein because of its subtlety; having excessive thickness as has been said.
Extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is born in the thighs in cold lands such as Egypt in the lands of Arabs and in the southern and arid lands of India, where there is little water and where neither herbs nor wheat grow.
And it is strongly born in other places of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation is of putrefaction that comes from the intestines such as venom from within the body, snakes and worms and scabies and worms growing between the intestine and the flesh.
A sign of its susceptibility to the onset of this condition is that of this vein which occurs in the thigh inflammation; and approach the place; and as the vein begins to flow from the site of that swelling, it seems like a plant.
When the limb becomes apparent, it is necessary that you wrap a weight of lead around it, equal to two drachms. Immerse it in water and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
And as long as there is any cause at the divisions outside of it, cover this with lead and tie it up. And if the motion is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover what remains; do not incise that which seems to be inside until it is outside, for if you incise it, it is contracted and enters the flesh and causes an abscess and pus formation in the area and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it must be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely outside and there remains no cause of it in the body.
And from this vein have come out in some men whose length is five palms (about 150 cm) and has been reported to me that one of twenty palms (about 600 cm) has come out.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, you insert the rod into it and penetrate it with a long rod through the body until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and treat it as an abscess.
This vein sometimes moves quickly, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it moves out through many openings, and is often born from each opening.
Therefore treat this as has been said in the division and with what has been said above.
Of the section over worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called bovine disease in some places because it often enters into cattle and is a worm that is born between the intestine and the flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, and is manifested by sensation of member to member until it bursts the intestine and comes out.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some fluids such as worms, snakes, lice and scabies in the abdomen.
And it is feared because of the malice of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the brain, then strong evil smells enter it and destroy the brain, and this often happens.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, do not do so unless its movement and manifestation in the body by sensation are known, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is over it and what is underneath it with ligation and compression, and approach it dry and extract it.
And if it is attached to the flesh and does not atrophy, you pause a cautery with fire over the place until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the area as has been said.
If you see this arrive at the head near the brain, strengthen over the forehead with strong compression, and approach it dry, and extract it; and it is necessary that the patient uses purification of his body with medicines evacuating putrid fluids and guard himself from foods causing putrefaction.
From section on swelling of the navelf (or navel)
This disease is known in our land as the "navelf," and it causes pain in various body parts, which can spread from one member to another.
And you have already seen what I am about to recommend. I was called to a sick woman in a village, where I found that her arm had swollen and there was a small inflammation in the basilic vein of her arm, which had burst for an hour, and then I saw this inflammation go up like living silver moving from place to place.
Then wait for the pain to subside in that location and settle into the muscle, and stay there for an hour.
And correct any other faults found in the opposite shoulder towards the other arm.
I recommend that you rotate the entire body as I saw, and it was very surprising to see how the exchange and speed of limbs took place. I have seen before in the highest heavens such exchange as described by this method, but I have also seen others who suffer pain from the exchange of limbs. But I do not see this happening in women as I described before.
And I do not think that this is the case unless the woman was old, where the body and veins were dry, and in this situation, the sensation of windiness becomes apparent.
It is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are indulgent and have bodies with moist veins weakened.
If you want to cure that condition and the patient feels pain, do not perform this procedure in the manner I described before, but rather strengthen it slightly and dry it internally until the constriction of the windiness subsides, then cauterize the area.
But if you do not see this happening in your veins, then you cure that condition through the use of excision of the body and the expulsion of windiness, and administer pills made with wormwood and Serapion root, among others.
On extracting boils.
Boils are differentiated according to their species, and the areas of the body where they occur, as they have different shapes: some with large points, small, concave, sunken, solid ones; others with three angles, those that have tongues; and those that are stalks.
And as for the symptoms of the skull, when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, and exits at the base which is above the brain, this happens violently with headaches, blindness, dizziness, fever in the cheeks, inflammation and fever of the tongue, convulsions and confusion of thought, vomiting of bile, and the word is easily lost and the voice destroyed, and there is discharge from the wound of white pus similar to powder, and eyes like water from the flesh.
Therefore, if such symptoms appear to you, then do not attempt treatment or extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
However, the symptoms of an arrow in the heart, which is near the left nipple and feels hard to touch, are not empty but filled; the movement of the arrow feels like the movement of a pulse, blood flows from the wound that is black, there is coldness at the extremities, excessive sweating, and fainting; therefore, you know that death approaches quickly.
The symptoms of an arrow in the lung are primarily sputum from the wound that is frothy blood, and the vessels near the neck are compressed, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily and demand cold air.
If the arrow strikes the membrane located in the foot, and the pain is mainly in the small ribs, it causes severe pain with deep breathing and sighing, and not all of the member's muscles are affected.
If the arrow strikes the stomach, then a foul-smelling discharge comes from the wound.
If the arrow strikes the abdomen and is buried inside, there may be a hole in the wound, or tissues such as intestines or hernias that have been torn apart, and there is no hope for recovery from extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow strikes the bladder and comes out with urine, and there are signs of bleeding outside, and strong pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
However, other members such as the head, neck, throat, shoulders and joints, spine, cervical vertebrae, pelvis, hips, and their similar parts of the body can be saved if the arrow does not pierce a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
I recommend that you pay attention to the nature of these arrows, as this indicates the method of treatment.
The reason is that when an arrow hits a man in the tear duct of the eye at the root of the nose, and it is extracted from the other side, leaving the eyelash behind, healing occurs and no harm is done to the eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew who had been hit in the eye at the root, leaving behind the eyelid, and the arrow had already been hidden, but could only be found by a small tip attached to its shaft, and it was a sharp arrow of Turkish arrows with lion-shaped heads without feathers.
The Jew was saved, and no harm was done to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Christian who had been hit in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers; therefore, I made two incisions on each side of the throat, and the arrow was already submerged in the throat of the patient; then I softened it and carefully extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been hit in the stomach, and I thought he would die because of it; but since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition due to his disposition, I made an incision on it and cut into it, and he recovered, and no further harm came to him.
I saw another man who had been hit by an arrow in the back, and the wound had healed over time, and after about six years it came out through the opening of the spine.
I saw a woman who had been hit by an arrow in the stomach, and the wound healed over time, but it did not change in any of her natural functions, and she suffered no harm in any of her operations.
I saw another man who had been hit by an arrow in the face, and the wound healed over time, but the arrow was removed without causing further pain, and similar symptoms occurred.
And I extracted the arrow from the nose of the prince of the king, which was in the middle of his nostril and had declined slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
You were summoned for treatment near the casement of the arrow for three days.
Then you probed the wound of the arrow, but it was narrow and you did not feel it; however, you felt the puncture below the right ear, so you suspected that the puncture was from the tip of the arrow.
You spread the area with an ointment containing attracting and digestive properties, so that it would indicate the location of the arrow for me, so I could cut through it.
I did not find an accident that indicated the location of the arrow; I continued to apply the ointment for many days, but did not find an indication; however, the wound healed in the meantime, and after several days the patient felt the arrow in his nose and reported this to me.
And then you cover the wound with a strong corrosive medicine for several days until pus comes out; and with the probe you can feel if it is thin, and then extract the tip of the arrow which is attached to the shaft.
Then you carefully arrange the opening of the wound with that strong corrosive medicine until it is visible to me the tip of the arrow, and wait for my instructions for the period of time up to four months.
And when the wound has become swollen and it is possible for me to insert forceps into it, you hold it in place without moving, and I will not stop trying to extract it using various methods of engineering until one day I begin to use forceps designed specifically for this purpose to pull it out gently as described at the end of the chapter; and then restore the wound.
Some physicians thought that the cartilage of the nose was not restored and I restored it, and the wound healed completely, and the patient recovered without any complications.
And I recommend the method of extracting certain arrows according to this rule and this explanation, which does not cover everything that I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the difficulties of it are not understood through narration or reading these books.
The wise artisan understands much with little; and from what is presented, he understands about what is absent; and it is necessary to adapt operations and new instruments when unexpected problems occur in the course of the art.
And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the limbs where they are inserted, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the location of the wound; or by the opposite side of the other part.
And an arrow that is shot into a location where it entered will either be made of flesh or bone and will be shot and forgotten.
And if you do not catch it immediately at the time of shooting, it is necessary that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it can be cut and the attraction and exit reduced.
And if it is shot into bone and you do not catch it immediately, it is necessary to leave it for several days and move it with attraction every day until it is forgotten.
If you do not catch it immediately, it is necessary that after several days, you perforate around the arrow in all parts of the bone with a very fine drill until the area is expanded by the arrow, and then extract it.
But if the arrow has already been hidden in the body and is no longer felt, you probe it with a probe, and if you feel it, you shoot it out with appropriate instruments for attraction.
If you cannot get above it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and here is not bone or nerve or vein, you make an incision over the wound until it is expanded enough to extract the arrow.
And if the ears are inflamed and must be treated, then you should release the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with every tool you can use; and devise on this, if you cannot on the evacuation of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and twisting of them until it becomes necessary.
And when you perform the removal of the splinter in any place where it is, then you should use twisting of your hand with forceps on all sides until it becomes necessary; and carefully with delicate subtlety ensure that the splinter is not broken, and made to be difficult for it to escape and for that extraction.
And if you cannot perform that at your time, then you should leave it for several days until the surrounding parts can heal, and apply something that will alleviate it. However, if the flow of blood occurs contrary to this, then you should administer what has been mentioned for treatment in its own chapter.
Keep your skill in the incision of veins or nerves, or tendons, and provide all possible means for the evacuation of the splinter; do this with ease, calmness, patience, and firmness as I and you recommend.
Therefore, you should oppose the splinter so that the patient is positioned according to the figure in which the splinter should be extracted, as it is more beneficial. However, if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
However, if the splinters are situated on the opposite side of another part, or if they have caused damage to surrounding parts, or if there is inflammation outside the wound and it becomes apparent; then you should seek out that area; and make an incision according to the size that forceps can grasp, and apply pressure on it, as it will be made to emerge easily.
However, if it is held in the bone, then you should twist the knife counterclockwise until the splinter enters the bone, and widen the area around it, and apply pressure to extract it.
Otherwise, leave it for several days and apply something over it until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the splinter is in that one, then you should push it out with something.
However, if the shaft is cut and you wish to administer impulse, then insert it and push it down, if it is numb, strike a concave instrument into it so that it enters the concavity of the splinter and apply pressure on it with something.
However, if the splinter is convex, then you should push it out with a strong instrument that penetrates it, as the splinter will be relieved by this.
And if the splinter is entangled, then you must flatten all the flesh around it, if this is possible for you, and apply something to it that is appropriate.
And if the needle catches in the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the ribs, and it is near to the point that you can touch it with the probe and it is possible for you to extract it, then extract it and guard against incision of vein or nerve, and suture the wound if necessary, and heal it until it is healed.
Use a pair of forceps to draw out the needles:
Make them like the beaks of birds, made with saw when they are grasped onto the needle so that it is not lost.
And from those are made small, large, few or many, depending on the size and scantiness of the needle, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Make a hole in the concave part of the needle, and push it through with the rod.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, which are customarily bled through the cube.30. which are located in the head, sixteenth part of a cubit. So are two pulsating veins that are near the ears, say this: these are the two herbs that are apparent in both temples; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the eyes called 'aspient' veins; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two glands that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called 'anglic' veins; and these are the veins that are below the tongue. The veins that are to be lanced in the arms are .v. (vena basilica) For one of those is a cephalic, and it must be let blood with wild lettuce; the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is deaf, and it is a superficial vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is let blood in the domestic artery, and is named "cubital", and the vulgar people call it "vein of the belly"; the biceps brachii, and is located on the cubital fossa, and is the one that is punctured, and is the one that appears above the pulse for a clear appearance; and the cephalic vein, and it is between the greater and lesser cubital veins.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins: one of those is below the bend of the cubital fossa; the second is saphenous, and the location of it is below the bend of the domestic artery; the sciatic vein, and the location of it is below the bend of the cubital fossa; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The advantage of the veins that are near the ears is that they help with ancient catarrhs, migraines, headaches, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what I recommend for you: it should be scraped the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed in the occipital region where both veins are located with a clean cloth with good friction; hold the patient's neck tightly with a bandage so that they appear in two places on each side of the head; and seek those with your own hand, and if you feel the pulse of those with your own hand, here is the test.
Take the cutting lancet, which is sharp-pointed, and insert it below the vein into the cavity until blood flows out of the bone. And lift your hand with the vein and the cavity towards the joint above it, and incise (puncture) the vein with an incision. And let the length of the incision be adjusted to two fingers, or around that amount; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
And hold it firmly with your fingers and press it until it is healed.
And it has been previously mentioned at the beginning of this treatise the incision of those and their cauterization (sealing with heat or caustic agents).
But from the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the advantage of bloodletting is for old chronic migraines and maladies of the eyes, and ailments of the head with acute fluid accumulation around the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those is according to what I recommend for you: constrain the patient's neck and move it until both veins appear clearly and manifestly, and demonstrate the pulse of them with your own hand; then perform the test (venipuncture).
Approach you raise the bandage above the vein at the groin as indicated, insert the lancet into the incised area below, lift the vein upwards; and incise it in the same manner as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
Approach you release the patient's arterial constriction, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place your hand over that area and knead it firmly, leaving it in place until it is healed.
Here is the translation: And now let us remember them, and mark their incision, and draw attention to the beginning of the treatise.
Therefore, the treatment of venous lancet for the vein of the forehead is similar to the treatment of the superficial temporal vein in ancient facial diseases such as migraines, headaches, abscesses and putrid ulcers.
And the quality of lancing is according to what I recommend to you; namely, that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a trepan which has this shape:
Place the puncture point at the end of the trepan on the vein and strike it downwards or in another manner as described, allowing the blood to flow according to the quantity you desire; then release the perforation of the patient and leave it until it is healed.
On some occasions it is opened with a lancet, but it is not necessary that the lancet be of an acute tip like other lancets; rather, it should have a blunt tip, and lance it transversely, for the bone is close and strong, so if the lancet is thin, it may break the bone when it is sharp.
But the treatment of the two veins that are in the eyelids due to scabs from the eyes caused by migraines and abscesses in the eyes, and facial diseases.
And the quality of lancing is that the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, and you should lance them, and you should be standing over his head.
And the lancing should be done transversely across a small area and with few strokes, for there is not much flesh in that location; if the lancet is thin, it may break its tip.
Allow the blood to flow as much as you need, press on that area and hold it for a short time, then release it.
But the lancing of the nasal vein is given for acute fever and strong sweating, as well as facial diseases, migraines, and abscesses that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of lancing is that the patient tightens his neck and approaches your left hand to his nose, and takes a thin, long lancet and places it in the middle of the nostril as directed, for the vein is not felt here, and blood begins to flow immediately.
You should close the wound little by little and allow the blood to flow according to your need; then hold it for a short time, as the wound heals easily.
But the treatment of lancing both eyes leads to constriction, leprosy beginning, and various other diseases and infections, as well as corrosive ulcers such as herpes.
And the quality of lancing those is that the patient tightens each one in his neck loosely; and the craftsman should be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a chair.
And make a long incision on the vein with a wide, shallow lancet; and extract blood according to measured quantity or as necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
And release the ligaments and tighten both veins with moderate constriction so that the patient is not overheated, and leave it to mature until the wound is healed.
The treatment of lancing veins in the area near the ear confers small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, decay of gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of lancing those is that you should place the patient facing you, tighten his neck with a bandage, retract his lips and observe both veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more so because around those veins there are small black veins; and then incise each one with an incision.
But if you are uncertain, and do not know which one it is, then incise the larger of the two, and from the pus present.
And make them similar to the veins in the upper lip.
The two veins that are placed nearby the tongue assist in phlebotomy of the carotid artery during prophylaxis for epilepsy and in the treatment of diseases of the uvula, as well as mouth diseases.
The quality of phlebotomy in this case is that the patient lies down with their head slightly elevated and their tongue lowered, and you should look at the vein from one side and the other side, and the color of each vein is darkening towards blackness.
Then phlebotomize each vein, and be careful not to pierce through them as they are arteries.
The veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those in which there is blood flow for all men, and the method of phlebotomy for them is done in two ways, either with a mirtilat or olive mixture made thinly; or by cutting with a phlebotomizing knife, and it is called alnessil, and this is its form:
The first sentence is: "If the pulses are as large and visible as often happens, it is necessary to open the concave veins full of blood that appear swollen, and to these which contain thick clotted blood."
And this lancing is smaller and with a thin tip, and it is necessary to perform fine vein lancing that contains thin citrus juice blood.
Furthermore, the lancing of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, drains the blood from the sick areas that are located in the neck and back, and of that which purifies the feet and abdomen.
It is necessary for the lancer to be cautious when performing lancing, as there is an artery nearby, and if it should be touched or punctured during lancing, the artery will be cut and blood will flow, so it must not be lanced with a sharp instrument, but rather sliced like a slice of bread.
If the basilic vein does not appear due to a clear manifestation, then it is necessary that you locate it and switch to another one or search for its branches; or lance in the area at the end of the arm, as this is visible; slice it with a lancing instrument like a slice of bread as mentioned before.
If you want to lance the median cubital vein, then it is necessary to be in front of the bend of the arm and find the location between where you know the pulse is located, and hold it with a cloth; place your hand on it and locate the vein with a concave incision using a lancing instrument like a slice of bread as mentioned before, and be careful not to miss the area near the artery.
And when you feel the tenderness of the pulse, press in the location that you have marked with a cloth, and that pressure is on the artery, so it swells and should be avoided.
If you see blood flow during the lancing like the urine of a child, and the blood is thin and red, then you know it is from an artery; place your thumb and forefinger on it for a long time; remove your thumb, and if the blood is severed, as it often happens, tighten the arm and let go.
Take care of the patient to avoid wetting them, be cautious with them and do not let them move for several days until they are healed.
If the blood is not severed and there is no medicine available, then you should cut the artery if it appears; as its end will contract and the blood will be cut off; or take scissors, cut the wound, and take a piece of cloth and tightly compress the area near the vein with pressure and pulse for another day.
If the blood is severed, that's good; and if it is not, then take care of it with the remedy that follows the location of the powders causing bleeding.
The draining of blood from the wound is difficult due to its small size and the possibility of the arm's pulse.
Lancing the dark vein is beneficial as it drains blood from the supracranial portion of the head and the region below the chest; since it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, as mentioned before.
It is necessary for the lancer to be cautious during the lancing of a vein, as there is a nerve nearby; and if it touches or punctures the nerve during lancing, it will result in numbness, which makes healing difficult and recovery slow; sometimes this nerve appears with sensation, and if it is hidden in some people and is thin and not easily visible, it is necessary to pause the lancing using a slicing instrument, avoiding the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then you should make an incision along its length.
The benefit of lancing the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and relieves headaches.
In this way, if you want to lance using a lancing instrument for an olive or a myrtle, as all the blood is saved, since there is neither an artery nor a nerve present.
However, a hard lump may appear in some people when it is not lanced during the first percussion, but it will not be noticed in the recurrence.
The first of these is that you must know that lancing is not administered except for the preservation of health and with hope for improvement and caution against illness, and that lancing should be performed on one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting during spring and autumn, and in winter near meals, when there are signs of swelling.
And if it is to be done, let there be phlebotomy [bloodletting] on the third day or at the first pulse that has occurred after three hours have passed from the day.
But it should be administered when there is a need for it, or whether it is night or day, in any hour and at any time.
It is necessary that the child should not be bled before it has reached 14 years of age, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bled except during the fourth month up to the seventh, and old women should not be bled who have already passed 60 years.
And when someone wants to be bled in any way, it is necessary to clean the intestines before bleeding with a lion's clyster [enema], if there is an open wound retained, so that the superfluous fluid does not enter the veins during the bleeding of the intestines, which are pure, and that they do not go to the main organs.
And it should not be bled those who are ill with seasickness or gluttony, nor those afflicted by illness or drunkenness until the ailment has passed, nor someone suffering from dropsy, but rather bleeding should be feared in relation to colic pain and vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplication of sexual desire and labor, exercise of fasting or vigils, and any cause that weakens strength, either bodily or animal.
And in consideration of the subtlety of the fluids beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drinks, and with medications if it is possible to do so.
And enter into the bath if there is no cause to prevent it, or exercise for any exercise to make the blood thin.
Stop bleeding from the legs during the day, namely around third hour, just as has been said.
And perform that the foot should be guarded on that day from all animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear and from all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain and sexual desire and similar to them.
And in the case of a woman, let there be present the causes for which it is customary among men to use aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar to these according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the one who is to be bled with a pulse or that of the patient who needs to be bled.
And extract the arm, and feel it with your own hand, the one who is to be bled, two or three times; and tighten the ligature with ropes or bands and wrap it twice.
And the ligature should be tightened, for if the ligature is not tight enough, or the ligature is excessive, then prevent blood flow; or if it is softening, then immediately prevent the heart from beating.
And the ligature, it is necessary that the one who needs to be bled feel his own hands between them until the veins are inflamed and can be felt.
And the one who is to bleed anoints his bleeding spot with a little of ancient oil specifically; and pause your left hand on that vein, over the place where the bloodletting is to be done, so that a small amount of blood flows out, and the percussion should cease because some of the veins behave like cords and flee when the bleeding is to be done, and those are the ones that are filled with vitality and when you pause the bleeding over them, they contract and are discovered; and the bloodletting does not open the vein, and if it opens, that is tightened.
Therefore, it is necessary that the one who is to bleed should be fixed and carefully considered in all these matters.
And pause the bleeding, but if the vein is cut in one examination, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat the examination a little later, or quickly if the location is not marked.
And if the location is marked or the patient feels pain, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the ligature, because excessive heat will cause an abscess to form, nor enter into the bath.
And repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the opening is small and the blood flows thinly, and you fear that there will not be enough blood, then you repeat the bloodletting in the same place according to the rule and adjust the opening a little, and do so quickly before the location is marked, because when it is marked in many men, make only a few incisions.
But if it has already been marked, then do not repeat on the same place, for there is no excuse to you in any cause; and pause over some part of the oil incision, because it relieves the heart of blood. And it is better at this location with oil than with other oils.
And administer an oil incision in all bloodletting where you are prohibited from beating the heart, and do it tracheotomy (tyriaca) when it is stopped on one of them over the location, for the blood is made thin and is turned when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of bloodletting, which often happens, and more so in one who has not been bled for some time or in the incision of a vein with little opening, then take cotton, and pour sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, over it and tighten it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And it must be done to bring the yellowish part of that vein or another vein into contact with it.
If a black or green discoloration remains in the area for some days, do not notice it; and if you wish, apply some cause of alienation and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamint or something similar to it.
And many times abscesses and protrusions occur, you must perform a lancing of the basilica.
And therefore place your hand on it, and if you notice that the area becomes soft, you must apply pressure to it; if the protrusion is bad and malicious, then be careful to place some cause of what has been mentioned on it, because strong blood will flow from the artery.
Apply a plaster with a substance that has astringent properties, so that the area is hardened; and care for it with another remedy until it is healed.
It is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of its virtue and the color it takes on in the blood, depending on what appears.
If the blood is black, you must allow it to settle until it turns red; if the blood appears thick, you must allow it to settle until it becomes thin; and if it is sharp (acute), you must preserve its sharpness.
To the person who is full and strong and has a need for bloodletting on a certain day, the lancing of the vein should be made larger, and the lancet should be long.
In a weak person, the opposite of that should be done; and in that case, bloodletting should be performed too often, and the instrument used to let blood should be tight.
The best method for venous lancing is a transverse section rather than a puncture.
This method of venous lancing avoids blood flow and nerve injury, and is safer than lancing according to latitude (north-south) and longitude (east-west).
When fainting is likely to occur, venous lancing should be done; and before doing so, you must treat the person with a small amount of pennyroyal infusion in white vinegar or simple warm scalded oxymel, and let blood three or four times.
If there is congestion in the chest, you must take something before venous lancing to infuse with myrrh syrup or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or with aromatic and fragrant syrup and oil.
If fainting occurs, venous lancing should be done, and the cause of this is likely due to too much blood; in that case, you must drink water from meat and a subtle fragrant syrup; use aromatics in some way, and limit their weight on your feet with it.
Use the other causes that were mentioned in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
If someone wants to reduce the size of their arm and dissolve their blood every day, it is necessary for that person who requires venous lancing as a strong evacuation method, and its virtue is gentle; it will gradually dissolve blood according to the quantity of its virtue in consecutive days.
But if someone wants to reduce the size of their arm and expel blood several times, and their body is strong, do so approximately seven or eight hours after the first venous lancing.
But if someone wants to direct the blood from their body in the opposite direction of where it normally flows, it must be done on the second or third day.
But in a body where there is already much hot blood that is sharp and causes fever, it must be expelled from the body once and a large amount must be expelled with an enlarged opening until fainting occurs; then you will have preserved all the conditions of venous lancing, and you should place your hand on the pulse of the blood to prevent death in the event of fainting. However, several times it happens when the person performing venous lancing is ignorant and negligent.
When you wish to release the arm and drain the blood as observed, since the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to draw blood, press firmly upon that area while gently extending it, for that is very harmful.
Leave it be until it is ready for second venesection; or let the vein's coagulation of blood in the orifice subside; or pause over that with a lancet, or leech, and apply a light compression to it until the blood has come out.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not touch it until the swelling subsides.
If there is a need to draw blood a second time and it is not an excuse, then make an incision on that area or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "the cord of the arm" is venesectioned at the crook or the basilica, when it is not shrunken or hidden, for it consists of these two.
The quality of the venesection is that the patient immerses his hand in warm water until the needle becomes swollen and the vein appears prominently.
Then apply pressure firmly with a tight bandage and make the venesection transversely, not longitudinally or obliquely.
The incision should be wide and your venesection on that joint of the hand, make it small.
And if the flow of blood is forbidden, immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the days of summer, you are exempt from immersing your hand in warm water, and the flow of blood during winter is stopped by immersing the body in warm water.
And the venesection of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there is neither a pulsating vein nor a nerve nearby.
The venesection of the cephalic vein of the right hand is beneficial for liver disease.
The quality of the venesection is that you apply pressure to the hand firmly or with your other hand, after it has been immersed in warm water, until the vein swells and becomes clearly visible to the eye; and make the incision transversely; and if it is not possible to find the vein completely, this will still be beneficial.
And remember not to injure your hand with the lancet, for it is where the tendons of the fingers are exposed without flesh.
Then immerse your hand in warm water and let the blood flow from it, for if you do not immerse your hand in warm water, the blood will clot in the vein's orifice, and the flow is forbidden.
And when blood is drawn according to the required quantity, let it be paused on olive oil and salt so that it does not coagulate quickly; and similarly, this must be done in all narrow passages.
But the benefit of venesection from that of the left hand is for gallbladder disease.
Do the same in the venesection of this as you did in the other.
And the benefit of the saphenous vein's venesection is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as uterine disease, retention of menstruation, and diseases of the nose and ulcers of the chest and abdomen, and similar to these conditions.
The quality of the venesection is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and makes friction over it until the veins become visible; and on the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein must be pointed out, and from there it should be followed to the face of the foot towards many branches.
Therefore, venesection should be performed widely along the arm or towards the leg, for it is better and more effective.
And if you perform venesection on the face of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your venesection with the incision you make transversely, as if you were about to make an oblique incision.
Let the venesections be circular.
But if the flow of blood is forbidden, immerse your foot in warm water and let the blood flow from it until it is drained.
And if the venesector makes a mistake in the first observation, immerse it again with the lancet in the same place, for the location is safe; and do not fear the trickery, but be careful of the nerves as previously said.
And similarly do the same with the other foot as well.
And for the sciatic vein, the location should be similarly as we said, the heel must be placed under the wild thigh-bone.
The assistance for the lancing of it is for back pain when due to blood clots.
The quality of the lancing is that the patient immerses in bath, and then tightens the back muscles from the lower part of the spine to the heel, four fingers' width above it, under a long, thin bandage, as it will not appear otherwise.
Therefore, when it appears, you do the lancing according to your skill and depending on the transverse direction, and that is better; or insert it with an incision or cut it with a section, as the place is dry.
It is in many men who are not weakened; and if that disappears without being felt, you do the lancing of a branch of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the ear and the ankle.
Be careful with the nerves, and make the blood flow as much as you want.
Release the constriction and place on the site of the lancing, pressing the area, as it heals easily.
Of ventosection and of the qualities of using those.
Ventosections are for corns, or eruptions, or verrucae.
Ventosection is performed in two ways: one of them is by scoring and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosection without scoring.
The ventosection without scoring can be done in two ways: either with fire or without fire.
The ventosections with scoring and extraction of blood are in twelve parts of the body, among which one where ventosections are applied is the ankle, and it is the last part of the leg; and the middle part of the neck; and ventosections of the chin just below the jawbone; and ventosections of both arms; and ventosections of the shoulder; and ventosections of two feet; and ventosections of two shins; and ventosections of two thighs.
Ventosection does not extract blood from the veins, but rather from the small scattered vessels in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the effect as achieved by lancing; nor is it necessary that ventosection be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by repletion before the entire body is evacuated.
However, if it is necessary due to disease or constipation, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at some time.
Therefore, when it happens in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth decade of the month, you command that ventosection be performed more than two or three hours after the day has passed.
And the assistance for ventosection of the neck is that when it causes gravity in the head and causes sinking into the eyes; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventosection is at the site of lancing of the cephalic vein.
And it is not appropriate to use that which is of complete purge, or in which there is catarrh, as it causes great harm.
And therefore, it is not necessary to use that for the elderly or those with diseases of the head.
However, for those who continue to suffer from it, it is done by forgetting; and therefore you command the ventosector to pause his hand a little on the ventosection at the sites, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
However, ventosection of the alveolar is at the site of lancing of the vein radialis and basilica: and therefore it causes asthma, constriction of the chest and scissuring of the stoma of the chest, coughing, repletion.
And it is necessary to be cautious with the ventosection of the alveolar, as if it is left alone, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And ventosection of the alveolar causes headaches and migraines, dizziness, nausea, pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of lancing of the vein basilica.
And it is necessary to command the ventosector not to press his hand with scoring so as not to incise the artery and cause blood flow.
Swelling of the lower jaw is treated with alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, resembling diseases that are in the mouth, and they are located near incision for alveolar puncture on both lips.
The swelling that is made on both cheeks is treated with cataplan, which is made by heating.
The swelling of the two cavities inside the eyelids is also treated with phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, falcata and cephalica, for it attracts the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and these small veins from other large veins enter until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
The command is given to the one who performs swelling not to proceed with scratching, because the area is denuded of skin, and there are nerves and arteries there.
This is a swelling which is made on the buttocks and is used to treat hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers.
It is necessary that you command the one who performs swelling that it should be a large swelling, and that it should be made of horsehair, because the area needs deep incision; and strong blunt swellings are better than subtle swellings, and it should be scratched with scratching.
But swellings on the small joints are made for minor manifestations, because they attract blood from the entire body, and they are used to treat old pains in the throat and the mother, and the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and are used to stop bleeding and swelling; and they are located near incision of two veins, and in this way they can be drained, and of two cavities.
However, it should not weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
And from the swellings that can be drained, the remedy for the swellings on two joints is close to it.
The quality of the position of swellings is that you press the swelling at the beginning and suck it out with timely suction, and do not prolong the position of the swellings, but lightly release them and remain there constantly, and that humors come to the area by accident. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area redden and swell, and the pus appears.
Then you scratch and repeat the suction little by little, and pay attention to the position of the body.
Because that man who has tender skin with rare pores, it is necessary that you scratch once and do not go further, so that the area is not ulcerated.
Command the one who performs swelling to increase the scratching and make a small incision, and suck the pus with ease.
And if the pus is thick, it is necessary that you scratch twice, because in the first scratching the path of subtlety to the blood and water is opened up. But in the second, during the thorough examination, the vigorous extraction of the thick pus takes place.
And if the blood is very foul-smelling, a third scratching should be made to achieve the goal.
Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or in small amounts, it suffices for us with one scratching.
If we want to extract a lot of blood, scratch with deep scratching; if we know that the blood is thick, it is necessary to make a strong scratching.
The term "scratching" only refers to the depth of the incision.
If the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites of the swellings be lubricated with a more lenient and resolving oil; if it is in summer, for example with olive oil or violet oil, or sesame oil from coarse grain, or if it is in winter, use oil of garlic, oil of lily, camomile oil, or blood oil, and those similar.
If the excess is thick, fry oil of amaranth or balsam, oil of olive, oil of dill, and those similar.
But if the one who performs swelling has wide pores of tender skin, it is necessary that oil be prohibited, and it should be washed with water or hot water from solanum, or coarse grain water, or bitter water, and those similar to these.
And if the one whose blood is of great moisture, wash your swellings with vinegar or bitter water from myrtle and sumac and those similar.
And for that person whose superfluities are thick, wash their boils with old wine or water of roses, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or camomile, and similar things.
It is necessary to keep the boil covered before washing it; it is necessary that it be administered immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it is necessary that they sleep near the boil.
It is necessary that the sandbag (ventosandus) be tied with a leech (phlebotomatus) before bloodletting (ventosationem).
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person who will lance or is to perform bloodletting is choleric and has hot blood and inflammation, it is necessary that you take cooling substances, such as mustard, vinegar, lemons, and shallots, and bind them, and use julep and similar things.
Stop their food, such as potatoes, and meat from sparrows, and food seasoned with sour things, and similar things to them.
For that person whose complexion is cold, it is necessary to take elixir of almonds or elixir of anise seeds, sumac, and a moderately-scented spice between winter and spring; and it should be commanded to use little drink and eat less, and stop consuming potatoes, cabbage, fish, and small birds and doves.
And on the day of boil lancing and bloodletting, let them drink more than they eat.
And it should be given to drink in some hours alpharac tyrionic or musk medicine, that is musk, or celery before the boil lancing or bloodletting, or near them to comfort the main members and to make the blood thin; and it is not necessary for them to take that scald.
However, boils that are not incised are boils that are stopped in the liver, and on the spleen, and in the umbilicus, in the joints of the fingers, and the pit of the ankle, because these members cannot bear incision on them.
And it is not desired for those but the attraction of blood from a member, such as stopping a boil on the nipple in sickness of bleeding of the nose's blood; and they use that to dissolve cold and thickened boils in the member, such as stopping on the stomach and umbilicus; because that thins the member and scalds it, relieving pain, as it resolves boils.
And when it occurs in their opening or eruption, it is stopped on the nose because, by the strength of attraction, it weakens the opening and eradicates the eruption from its location.
And similarly, when it is stopped on the liver and spleen, boils are trapped in those locations.
These boils are administered with juice only, but some are administered with heat.
Some are administered full of boiling water in sickness of the spleen.
This is why the boil should be filled with pus and be large, which means boiling water alone or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
The form of boil administered with heat: the width of the opening should be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of pus should be the size of a palm; and in the depth, in the location that is in the circumference, the depth should be the size of a finger, the hole should be small according to the quantity that can fit an awl.
Make a mixture of rose oil or lemon, large pieces of leon (possibly an old spelling for lion's tooth, a type of root), ginger and pepper to prevent the member from slipping from its position.
And let a thin transverse iron bar be placed over it (the affected area), on which a candle is held alight.
And this (plaster or poultice) should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and less in amount according to the severity of the illness and the state of the patient using it.
And (plasters or poultices for) children and weak people should be different from those of strong young adults.
The quality of applying this plaster with fire on the member is that it extends the meat with fire properly, but only a little bit of wax candle should be placed under it, and it should be placed on the middle of the transverse iron bar at the middle of the plaster, so that the fire is ignited around the edges to prevent burning the body of the patient.
And let it be applied to the member of the patient, and the hot plaster should be placed on top of the stick that we have mentioned, until when we have applied the plasters and do not need the heat and let the vapor rise over the stick, then the plaster will dissolve quickly.
And cook the meat according to its method, and repeat if necessary.
However, in the case of plaster for pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs), it is not applied with fire, as there is no transverse iron bar or stick. Instead, it is filled with water and applied only to the member (affected area).
And this is its form: The larger the plaster, the better, because it can receive more water.
Chapter 75.
Sanguisuga is not administered to other members except to those members where it is impossible to apply plasters due to their small size, such as gums and similar areas; or in a member deprived of skin, such as the nose and similar places.
And the quality of using those (plasters) where you have found Sanguisuga is to use them in thick muddy waters.
And they should be soaked in muddy water for a day and night until they become soft, and there is no remaining cause in their stomachs; and they should be evacuated from the body at first with phlebotomy (bloodletting) and with plasters; and the member of the patient should be bathed until it becomes red; and they should be applied to it.
And when they are full and soft.
If it is possible to suck the liquid from the area with a plaster, it is more beneficial in addition.
And if not, wash the area with vinegar and add coarse water to it; and rub and squeeze it.
If the duration of blood in the wound is prolonged due to Sanguisuga, and it begins to ooze, then put a cloth on it in cold water, and place another cloth over it until the oozing stops.
If there is excessive bleeding, sprinkle it with powdered vitriol triturated or similar stiptic substances over it until the blood is absorbed; or apply freshly cooked broad beans to the area and let them adhere to it, and the blood will be absorbed.
And if necessary, repetition of Sanguisuga, when possible, should be changed.
If the use of Sanguisuga is forbidden for suspension, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the area until it bleeds; and apply plasters because those that feel any bleeding will soon stick to it.
And when you want them to adhere, sprinkle a little bit of aloe vera powder, salt or ash on them and immediately apply.
Similarly, the process of the third division begins: restoration. This chapter is mostly concerned with the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations due to accidents.
Or son, my child, aware that this chapter is scorned by foolish physicians and the common people and those who do not pay attention to ancient books nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scholars on earth is hidden; and I have not forgotten it at any time; but I have not applied what follows, except after a long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of them, until I extracted the science from them.
And let us direct our attention to experiments and studies for the duration of our lives.
I have already described in this chapter everything that contains the main science and about which experiments were carried out; since here I abbreviate it for you and relieve it of unnecessary elaboration; and abbreviate it in the end of abbreviation; and show it in the end of explanation; and form various shapes of the instruments used in that, as is done by adding an explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections of the nature of bone fractures, from which a preliminary is necessary before we begin the restoration of broken limbs and those of various types for each one. Recognize that I must declare in the introduction of this chapter the main points of the discourse; and the chapters that follow will be filled by craftsmen and placed in accordance with the truth of those matters; therefore, it is for you and those who are eager to learn or master this noble art.
And so, say that when any fracture or dislocation or twist or break occurs, it is necessary at first to use trephining or an incision, or whatever may be appropriate, except for any reason prohibited, such as debilitation of virtue, or if the patient is unconscious, or an old person in decay, or the time of intense heat or intense cold.
And let it be satisfied with food consisting of leeks and birds such as sparrows and thrushes; and prohibit thick meats and fill with any food that fills the veins with blood, until you are certain of a cauterized abscess, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to his original regime according to what was customary for him.
And when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed with nutritious foods consisting of soft and thick food that has viscosity, such as wheat porridge made with water, rice, peas, beans, beef, fresh fish, large vegetables and similar, and with this diet coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily.
And know that when bones are fractured in men who are elderly or in the first youth, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and tightens around the broken bone in every way some similar to glue in which swelling occurs that adheres and hardens it until it is also consolidated and joined together, until the end of the softness and firmness come, such as fire at the beginning, unless you prohibit any cause of its operation.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the food of the patient, food that is heavy and viscous and thick as we said earlier.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, since the fracture of the thigh bone is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the hand; and similarly all other members are different from one another.
And I return with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
The diversity of fractures is important. Fractures of bones are diverse in their manifestations; since it is called a curved fracture when it occurs at the joints; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone: and those that occur in the shaft and splintering, whether they are present or absent such as when the hand is prepared to write, and is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and is a fissured fracture.
And every type of fracture has its own pain or torment in the healing process, as will be explained in its separate chapters.
Sign of fracture of the bone. By this is known the fracture of the bone: it is a deformity and prominence of the bone that can be felt, and it is that which you compress with your hand.
And therefore, if there is no apparent deformity or it is not felt when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel much pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that there may be a deformity or small fissure, in which case you must press it with your hand and compress it completely; stop on the medicine of which there will be a reminder at this moment appropriate for the location; and apply tightness by gentle compression.
Know that the location which is arched and not divided into two or something else that does not occur in satiety, such as the entire circumference of its part, requires correction from your time of applying a cauterizing aposteme.
If a cauterizing aposteme has occurred, leave it for several days until the aposteme stops; and hold it down with any method that you can of lifting and binding.
Know that restoration of the location and puncturing of it is easier than in the bone where this satiety occurs.
Then strengthen the area as the memory of it returns.
But if in the bone there is satiety, it is necessary to perform an extension of this broken member from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
Place your position alongside the broken member as it is in its natural form, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, and then perform that you make the additions return to their places with ingenuity and any method that you can use in their places.
Be careful not to cause harm or injury to the patient by your operation or treatment; and perform it as best you can apply one bone to another in the best forms.
It is necessary that at that time you touch it with your hand, and if you find any other cause, correct it and bind it with the amount of your strength.
Be careful of excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause apostemes or contractions in the limb through their operations, or you have seen this happen through the operations of their watchful eyes.
And the quality of the tightening of the broken member is the one I recommend; therefore, know that the broken members are diverse in their smallness and size and in the shape of these.
And for those that are small such as the arm and the hand and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of thin fabric.
But for those that are large such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary that there be a hard and thick wrapping, because the tight lacing connects the large member and strengthens it all over with tightening, so that no mold enters it.
And begin with a suitable adjustment of the tightening, place a convenient number of wrappings, three or four according to the member's need; and strengthen your hand slightly with the lacing.
And approach that at the elevated part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen as much as possible without injuring the tightening you have already applied to the location of the fracture. And approach the wrapping of the location of the fracture slightly, and soften the slight tightening little by little, until you take a large part of it.
And take another bandage and wrap it over the broken location with the wrapping, and approach the wrappings to the part below the fracture; and let your operation be in tightening the wrapping and softening it as I have said in the primary wrapping above.
And approach the wrappings of leather or fabric that straighten the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and do not place any cause elsewhere.
And approach the other bandage, and bind over these well-made wrappings as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or cauterizing aposteme in that location, and then place it on the site of the aposteme and stop the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and you strengthen over the stitches.
And the stitches are of hard cane race, well-formed; or of pine wood; or of palm rinds; and each stitch should be the same size as follows and in this form:
However, the splint placed on that fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, but not too much, and the length of the splint should correspond to the size and smallness of the member; and apply tension on the splint with another band according to your first tying; and tie it above the splint as decently as you said in the previous tying instruction, and this tying should be according to the location of the fracture more, and when it is farther from the fracture, the tying should be smaller.
However, the threads should be moderate in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people using coarse ropes to tie their wounds, it is a great error, when the tying is not equal.
And very thin threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve tightness with such thin threads, and it is not necessary that there be space of one finger's width between the splints.
If the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints near the tying in those places, then place some leather or woolen padding under it until it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a wound, and there is rupture in the skin, and I will come to remember it in that chapter according to its specificity.
And you should know that every broken limb is not straightened with splints on the first day; this is because when the member is large, it does not need to be splinted immediately, but rather after 5 or 7 days, depending on your confidence in the avoidance of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the ancients used to restore, which were applied to fractures and dislocations and twists.
The common method of plaster applied for the restoration of fractures is suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, as it is about which no heat or cold is needed; and you should take powder from milled grain, and this is the marrow of the flour that comes out of the movement of the millstone in the walls of the mill.
And prepare it in this way, but first strain it through linen cloth, and the consistency of the plaster should not be too thick or thin; and apply it with that.
Another method of healing fractures, dislocations and twists: recipe for asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, gum myrrh, migrach (which is a kind of wild frankincense), equal to one thousand drachms; of myrrh and aloe equal to fifty drachms; aloeswood equal to two hundred drachms; all are sieved and powdered and mixed with either alum water or egg white if the patient's complexion is scalded; use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones gently, and benefits many people.
Another method of healing fractures and twists: recipe for migrach (wild frankincense) and clay mixture equal to one hundred drachms; myrrh and aloeswood equal to fifty drachms; acacia equal to six drachms; Armenian pitch equal to twenty drachms.
All are ground into a paste with pestle and mortar, sieved, and mixed with water or linen cloth and administered.
Method of plaster for joints and separated bones from their places, and to relieve pain in those areas and wounds and fractures: take wool soaked in sour wine and olive oil and place it on the location.
In this plaster, there is no virtue for restoration, abscess healing or the expulsion of pain itself.
Another method of plaster that restores fractured bones: take leaves of wild opium poppy and leaves of fig tree; mix everything to make a plaster of them.
Method of plaster applied for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want resolution of abscesses: make a paste with white alum, chamomile, violet flowers, wild rye flour, all ground separately. All are ground and mixed with wine if the member is not scaly.
But if it is scaly, then prepare it with water from crushed colander or with water and use that.
Another strong method for the resolution of long-lasting abscesses when the member needs restoration: make a paste with white alum and its seeds, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all ground separately and crushed nettle or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the member and the rest of the color.
However, Hippocrates does not state in his book that a splint should be placed on the broken member for its restoration, but rather a small wax seal made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and it should be moderate between thick and thin.
A Gualia it is seen that points are made over the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is excessive dryness with little heat, as is the case with myrrh, ashes, and those similar to them, which we have mentioned previously.
A salve for wounds and pain: a recipe of poppy seeds, celery seeds, ground human hairs or feathers from an eagle, althea, and salt, ground together; they are to be strained and sieved, then cooked, and made into a plaster.
The amount according to which the wound must remain open and be dressed, is that you consider if there is not pain or discharge, nor if the bone is broken from its place, then you do not remove it for many days. And if there occurs intense pain or discharge or swelling at the location, then you should either press or remove it at that time, and apply a plaster to it.
Take cloth and sea sponge, soak it in warm water, then use that to wash the location where the discharge or pain has ceased, and let the member rest for an hour; then place a linen cloth dipped in sour wine or oil or rose oil on top of it, and leave it there overnight to ensure that the abscess is cauterized and the swelling of the member subsides, and the pain of it is alleviated.
Approach that subtle stricture with a thin and gentle plaster and do not strain it with your initial constriction, and be gentle until it is healed.
And if the abscess, redness, pain, swelling and all these symptoms have already subsided completely, and you no longer require plaster and constriction, then you treat it as you did at the beginning of the healing process.
And if there occurs no cause to the member of those mentioned, then do not remove it for three or four or seven days. And for some days all of this is left to rest for twenty days according to the appearance of the member during removal, as mentioned, until the fracture heals and the flesh adheres to it.
And then you adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction and tighten the swelling of the patient's food supply as directed in the previous instructions.
If you see the location of the fracture already drying and extending more than necessary, then know that nutrition must not reach it; therefore wrap it with warm water for three days to prevent this; and gradually loosen the constriction, and through this operation allow the member to receive its nutrients, and heal gently.
If what the false healers of a fractured member do after it has not healed at the beginning, as is required, and restore it crookedly, according to their operation, and in great fear, if this were correct, they would have enlarged upon it according to the Ancients in their books.
I have not seen any of them do this, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are multiple, and the shapes of them are various, and their causes are distinct, because some fracture is caused by blunt force that breaks all the bone and leaves only the marrow as in the case of the thigh, and this type of fracture is called comminuted; or the blow cuts a part of the bone, and cuts through the flesh but does not pass beyond its surface; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the wound of these two types of fractures can be large or small, and the nature of the fracture is either contracted or stretched; and its cause is blunt force with a hammer or cudgel on stone, and their similar.
This fracture can either be penetrating and close to the panniculus which is left of the bone; or it can be on the face of the bone, and the wound of these two types of fractures can be large or small.
And a fracture that is narrowed in the bone, in its small hollow, and by this is called this type of fracture hairline.
A fracture that is caused by cudgel or blunt force on stone, which makes a layer of bone enter the joints inside, and occurs in the concave areas such as in the knees when it is struck and split open and enters into the joints inside.
And this occurs in soft bones like those of infants.
And all these types of fractures are treated similarly, like separate stars. I will return to the topic in its place.
We should be familiar with all these types of fractures through detection and investigation by probing and examination of rotten flesh that is on them.
The hairline fracture is recognized by this that it appears on the bone and is abscessed, then becomes thin over it through probing, because the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider at first the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through clear signs that they indicate fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of consciousness, abscesses in the mouth, fainting, acute fever, sores on the hands or redness of these areas, and similar symptoms in greater dispositions, do not doubt it is not healed.
If you see non-recurrent accidents (incidents), you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if it is struck at the beginning as it is struck and that is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study the placement of the bone before the twelfth day according to all precautions.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary that you remove the bone before the seventh day, knowing that what remains of the bone is rotten from the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the fracture has reached the panniculus covering the brain, and is in small pieces and shattered, then it is necessary that you incise the fragmented and shattered parts, as I will advise you.
And it is that you shave the head of the struck patient, and expose the bone according to custom and your ability according to the figure of the injury, and it should be easy for the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you, you must detect the bone, drain blood or an abscess, then oppose yourself to it with what is necessary, and it is that you moisten the area with cloths soaked in wine and rose oil, make the injury rest until the abscess subsides, and ensure that there is no bleeding; and then begin with the circumnision of the bone and removal of it.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And the first method is that you incise the bone with a narrow incision tool, and this is its form: Then administer another incision tool of slightly greater width; and this is its form:
Then apply the incision tool wider than the second one.
It is necessary that you have several different incision tools, some of which are wider than others, and some shorter than the others and with sharp tips at the end, and made of iron or steel.
Use them with ease when striking the incision tool so as not to harm the skull and pierce it.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary that you pierce around it before administering the incision tools with stirrups, which are called non-penetrating stirrups.
They are not called so, but rather that the stirrup does not reach the end of the bone from above, because at the tip of the stirrup is a round extremity or edge similar to a rim or small circle, which prohibits it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is appropriate that you take a large number of these stirrups, the amount of which corresponds to the thickness of each bone, but only when it is present in all parts of the skull, the tip of which is sharp, the quantity in length and width should correspond to the thickness of the skull.
This is the form of three types of stirrups: The method of piercing around the broken bone is to place the stirrup on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then move the stirrup to another location, and stop at a point where the total thickness of the ray or environment is reached.
Then incise the bone using incision tools between each crack, making it as thin as possible at the end of the cut, as we have said, until you extract the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by means of certain instruments that you will prepare for this, such as tweezers and forceps.
It is necessary that you take care so that the incision tool does not touch any nerve of the skull.
Therefore, as you perforate the bone and separate it from the skull if it is continuous with it, and extract it, then shave and smooth it on the roughness of the bone with another instrument similar to an incision tool, but rather thin and more delicate than the others.
And if any small pieces and shattered bones remain, then take them with ease with what is necessary from the instruments; and then cure the injury with liniments and ointments that we have mentioned.
The second method of operation is light and distant from fear, which is called the Gallic method and has great praise; and this is its meaning: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture in the place where the fracture is most vehement and manifest, until when you have discovered that fracture and stopped at its tip, the end of the incision tool should be long and gentle. Its form is as follows:
The concave fracture is lean and does not incise any cause, and the acute fracture is flat from two sides forward in length, sometimes; that the concave fracture should be adjacent to the skull with its edge sharp, incising the bone aggressively.
Approach with caution and strike the incision of a fracture with a small hammer inside where the bone is visible and easily accessible, ensuring that the panicum (fat) does not occur in the area you fear may cause complications. If the surgeon was the most foolish and ignorant of all men and asleep, certainly, he would do so.
If there is any attached cause of the bone by fat in certain locations of the bone, you will make an incision along its edge with a round chisel, releasing it easily and safely, because it has been released from harm and fear.
If the fracture does not penetrate into the fat, and what is separated or remains from the bone is a face, it remains rough and has subtle protuberances, then you must smooth that roughness and remove those protrusions with fine razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places the most suitable and correct ones for that broken bone and its shape.
It is necessary to administer the treatment with the razor that you use at the beginning of the procedure, close to the very subtle fat, and do not stop until you have finished administering all the fat and the fine layer of all of them.
Furthermore, in other small capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer treatment according to what you learned during correction.
It is because it is not suitable for all those who have studied in that art. It stands on what we have written about large fractures.
If the fat is rectangular when you remove the bone, then you must take cloth of it according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and lightly apply the plaster on it that you can without causing injury; and administer the liniment to it with a wide spread, but not too strong, only according to the size of the wound.
Leave that with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of cauterization; and remove it and administer medicines with which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as lime rind and wheat flour, and powder of incense and Aristolochia, and similar to those.
It is that you make powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, so that they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine with a property that prevents adherence and does not irritate.
Keep in mind your virtue that the wound in your treatment should be clean; and do not leave it in dirt or anything else; nor let virulence accumulate there; because when it is in contact with brain fat, it corrupts it and poisons it, and causes a malicious mischief to the patient.
It happens in the healing of the head, as the bone is clarified and especially when the treatment of it is administered, it becomes blackened on its surface; and therefore, consider whether the patient experiences the complications that we have mentioned, knowing that they are harmful with every precaution.
If it does not become blackened due to the medicine applied on it, and is in the nature of that medicine that makes it blacken, then you must take honey one part and three parts of rose oil. And with those liniments take a cloth, and place it on the healing area; and treat it with the appropriate medicines for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On restoration of the nose when broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into one piece but two pieces lifted up or one of them is observed because in it there are two bones, where the lower part is cartilaginous and is not actually broken but is bent, twisted, and swollen.
However, if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert a small probe into its nose and guide that fracture inside with your finger and outside with a spoon handle until the nose returns to its natural shape. Make sure it is done easily, and be careful that your procedure does not harm the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not extend to that, then it is necessary to align it with the end of the bone where there is a slight bulge.
If the fracture is in two parts, you should do the same thing.
Take care of it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait for the seventh or tenth day for the cauterization of the wound to heal.
Insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or insert two calipers if the fracture is in two parts, and make sure they are as thick as to fill the hole in the nose.
As some of the ancient restorers did, calipers should be wrapped in bandages and left on all day, but I have not seen it; however, it is necessary that the cloth should be wrapped in alum-oil emulsion with powdered millstone, and leave it in until the bone has set and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes it should be inserted in the nose, in place of the nostril, for fear that a foreign body has penetrated it, wrapped in lion cloth; and if the patient's nose fracture is visible and obvious, and they are not forbidden to breathe.
This phrase does not concern you; if it pleases you, do this, and if it pleases you, perform cauterization. (Note: "cauteras de punt" refers to a heated metal probe used for cauterizing wounds.)
And if another boil appears, cauterize the nose with a horn or a piece of cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with alum. (Note: alum is a mineral used as an astringent.)
But if the boil does not appear, then apply powder of chalk and cinnamon with alum on it, place your hand over it (the nose), and do not let anything come out from the nose.
But if the bones of the nose are fractured and small or comminuted (crushed into many pieces), then you should break them apart and remove them with instruments suitable for the case; and sew up the wound, and care for it with a dressing that promotes healing and consolidation, and with appropriate ointments.
If a plague occurs inside the nose, then you should care for it with warm compresses and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed. (Note: "canulas de plom" refers to lead tubes used to drain pus.)
Chapter IV. (Note: in medieval manuscripts, each chapter was often preceded by its number, usually in Roman numerals.)
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is fractured. (Note: "mandibula" refers to the lower jawbone.)
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not associated with a plague, consider first whether the fracture is only on the outside, and if it is not broken in two and is curved at the edges inside, then its diagnosis is easy. (Note: "plagua" refers to an infection or ulcer.)
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jawbone, you should insert your index finger (left hand) into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, you should insert the index finger of your right hand; and you should press gently inward at the inner part of the fracture, while applying pressure outward on the edges of the bone with your other hand; doing this with care and evenly pressing both hands.
If the jawbone fracture has already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension of both parts so that their alignment can be achieved as much as possible.
If there is commotion of teeth to disruption (loose teeth), you should bind those that you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or gut; and place cotton over the fractured jawbone, and a double layer of cloth, and a broad strip of well-made cloth, or a single piece of gauze the length of the jawbone; and tie it up as necessary for the healing process, so that it is not destroyed. (Note: "cot" refers to cotton.)
And tell the patient to rest and remain calm, and restrict their intake of sour foods (lemon).
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then examine it and loosen it on the third day; and correct any deformity with powder of milled rice, alum, or chalk flour (calcium carbonate); as you have removed the cotton, place wool over the dressing. (Note: "terra" refers to clay.)
And thus, when the dressing has been applied and the bone alignment is not altered, leave it in place until it is healed and strengthened (the fracture), as this fracture often takes three weeks to heal.
If another boil appears again, administer the same treatment as previously described until it is healed and the boil is drained. (Note: "remaugut" refers to drainage.)
If the fracture is associated with a plague, consider whether it is a bone fragment separated or osteitis (inflammation of the bone), and carefully remove those fragments with instruments suitable for the removal of such fragments.
If the orifices of the plague are narrow, you should enlarge them with a leeches (medieval medical instrument used for bloodletting) according to your need.
And when you have removed the fragments, and there is no more pus draining from them, you should sew up the orifices of the plague if they are wide; otherwise, cover it with one of the dressings suitable for that purpose and let it heal.
Chapter V. (Note: in medieval manuscripts, each chapter was often preceded by its number, usually in Roman numerals.)
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured. (Note: "furcula" refers to the clavicle bone.)
For some time, the clavicle is broken at the front edge and this fracture can occur in one of three ways. (Note: "manieyra" refers to a way or manner.)
Because it is broken (fractured), separated, or separated into two parts other than osteitis (inflammation of the bone); and it is easy to restore; or because it occurs with osteitis, and restoration is difficult; or because the fracture is associated with a plague.
And the operation in that, when the fracture is without wound, is that you make two ministers present, so that one holds the assistance and follows the broken neck, and the other extends the neck to that parted side.
Then align the fracture with the teeth that the form may be made according to its shape, and it should not be in a hollow or concave position.
If more extension is needed, then it is necessary that you place a support of fabric or wool over the patient's chest, and its size should be according to your need; stretch, lift and compress the neck and press the chest with your hand toward the fracture until it is aligned as required.
If you cannot pull the fracture's end out through the partition outside, which is necessary for the traction, then it is necessary that the patient is supine on their neck, and place a large size thumb or hand on one of the muscles.
And the servant presses the muscle of it on the outside of the fracture until the bone of the neck is lifted to the traction point above, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the teeth.
If symptoms of the neck (pain) and swelling are felt, it is necessary that you cut through it and extract those symptoms with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, you make an incision through it with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this purpose, as you had placed the saw on the neck that serves for the chisel; and it is a chisel made of wood or iron, and its shape is like:
And it is similar to the shape of a chisel, with its concavity facing downward; and let its width be according to your need, depending on the size of the bone or the hollowness of it.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible in the operation; that it has two ends like this, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
If the wound caused by the incision that you made when extracting the swelling of the bone is wide and certain of pus, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
If the wound is small or you fear pus, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
If pus occurs, then you pour wine vinegar and rose oil over it.
And in addition, the stick should not be harmful to the fractured bone; and therefore, you must examine the patient every day, as when the swelling is reduced or the stick is removed, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
And place the patient's head on a pillow or bolster and sleep with their head slightly elevated, so that the support under their neck is also elevated, which raises the fracture of the neck to an elevation of the muscle; or it may be that their arms are placed on their neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless pus or pressure sores occur in the area before twelve days.
And renew the plaster if you see any signs of infection in the area, and adjust it in the bandage and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the neck is coagulated.
And it should be strengthened and comforted according to the usual period of twenty-eight days, and in some cases in men, it is done within the month's time of that.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of shoulder fracture.
The spatula is broken at its middle part and not completely, but only at the edges.
Therefore when it is broken in its middle part, and not completely, but only at the edges, it is recognized by touch alone. Then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare for its reduction and align it in accordance with its natural position in any possible way that you can.
Place powdered poppy seeds mixed with white of egg and stopper lion; place double-fold cloth over it; place on the steel rod of thin table according to the size of the spatula or a little more.
But if the rod is concave at one of the parts of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with stopper lion and adjust the rod accordingly.
Place strong and long human hair over it, with tight constriction and secure the rod inside so that it does not protrude from its place.
Consider the bandage every day; and every time it becomes soft, replace it with a new one and tighten and adjust the rod if it protrudes from its place.
Wash the patient over his own bed.
The spatula will heal in 20 days or a little more.
Therefore when this number is completed, you should remove the bandage and be sure that the bones from which it began have healed and their dissolution is not feared.
And if there is pressure on the bone and you see swelling, then cut it open and remove it, and proceed as previously mentioned in the cervical fracture treatment or cauterize the abscess if an abscess occurs here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in its middle part and it heals by itself; but the ends move which are swollen and crushed.
The signs that the middle part is broken are that it inclines towards the sides and a great pain occurs, difficulty in breathing, coughing, high fever and vomiting; and it is visible in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
The treatment of this is that the patient lies on his back, a cushion placed between his shoulder blades; and press the muscles of it, adjust the ribs of it with both hands and be careful during the operation and in the alignment according to any possible method that is appropriate and convenient, until the shape of the bone returns as it should.
Place a plaster and stopper on it, and place a thin steel rod of willow or walnut and its equivalent in weight, then wrap it; be careful not to damage the broken bone; move it slowly according to the curvature of the back for some time, and tighten it with proper constriction; consider the position at all times, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again.
And if necessary, you should cause its removal due to corrosion or prussic acid, pain, or abscess that occurs in the area; then cut and release it, remove the plaster and correct any problems caused by it with methods of healing it; and replace the plaster as needed; and adjust its tightness until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs in large parts and not near the spine; and at the ends of these divisions, it does not occur due to compression but because they are cartilaginous. And the detection of this is not hidden from sensation, so you should investigate it with questions.
And the treatment is to fill the fracture with questions according to any possible method until it is filled as necessary, and then apply a plaster and tighten the broken bone with a rod, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the sides, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture, like the pain that occurs in those who have pleurisy, and for this reason the lining of the lung should be applied; and there will be difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting with blood; and this is difficult to heal.
The ancients were skilled in that area with many ingenious methods.
And they said: it is necessary to stop the food of the patient that produces inflammation and wind, so that his stomach may be inflated and extended, and the fracture should be pushed towards the sides outside.
But we should avoid this as much as possible to prevent the formation of abscess, if not necessary; and if it occurs, help with it immediately.
Some of them said it should be stopped above the bladder and that urine should be expelled; this is like reasoning, but it is feared that the bladder may attract impurities to the area due to its weakness.
Some of them said: it should be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil, and powder should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, and the position should be aligned when wrapping it according to its curvature; and the patient should be treated with pleurisy diet and medicine.
And if the patient is experiencing intense constriction which they cannot bear, and their bones press on a tender spot through puncture, fear for the patient arises. Therefore, it is necessary to make an incision at that location, expose the fractured rib, cover it with the instrument mentioned before (which preserves the opening), remember its recall, and cut the bone easily, then extract it.
And then we adjust the two lips of the wound (if it is large), sew them up with sutures, and care for it with plasters until it heals.
If there is an abscess inside (a collection of pus), then you must make an incision and pour warm oil on the affected area, wait for it to heal, and take care of the patient with whatever is required for an internal abscess.
The person should lie down on their side on the affected side until they recover.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of the fracture of the spine and neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck and soon thereafter cause their adhesion, similar to fractures of the spine in the back. And if you want to know whether a fracture will heal or not, consider that if the muscles around it are already softened and stiffened and dead and cannot be strengthened or extended, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in this case, it is fatal within a month.
And if the muscles are bad and feel constriction when pressed or pricked with a needle, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved, and the patient will recover with treatment.
If you see a fracture of the spine in the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, consider the position of the legs (paralysis).
If you see that they are already softened (meaning the fracture has healed), then apply whatever is appropriate for such cases, and when they lie on their back, they vomit involuntarily and have a feeling of restlessness and sometimes lie on their chest and cannot urinate, then you know it is fatal, and do not bother with its treatment.
But if none of these occur, the cause is better and easier to manage.
The treatment for this is to perform the incision of the abscess with a warm cautery applied to the adhered spine, or with mullein leaves soaked in oil; apply it several times a day until the abscess is healed.
Then apply a comforting and healing plaster, strengthen it with lint, and command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the affected side until it heals.
And if it is necessary to adhere the bone to the cartilage or any cause that has been separated from it, then you must dry the affected area and remove the bone; then adjust the two lips of the wound (if it is large), sew them up with sutures; and cover it with a dressing made of ointment until it heals.
But if the joint of the bone at the ankle is broken and the end of the tendon is affected, then you must insert your left hand into the buttocks, grab the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by equalizing it, and cover it with a plaster and splint if necessary, and strengthen it.
If you feel broken joints in it (the patient), then cut them open, remove the bone, and treat the wound with the treatment prescribed until it heals.
Chapter X.
On the restoration of the inguinal hernia.
The bones of the inguinal area are usually broken, and if they break, their fracture is not a true fracture but rather a dislocation at the extremity that is pushed inwards and goes through the length and slope towards the affected side; and when the patient feels pain in that area and pressure or pricking with a needle, the hernia swells when it is broken.
The restoration of this is to stretch your hand over it until it covers the fracture, which is the shape of the hernia.
If the fracture is only at the end of it (the hernia), then you grab it as much as possible according to what is appropriate for equalizing it, until it resembles its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the length or slopes towards the affected side, then you have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of the fracture is prepared. And when you have grabbed it, apply a plaster to it, and cover it with a wooden or cloth splint, and strengthen it by tying it tightly, without fear of causing further fracture or removal of the splint.
Grab the concavity with what fills it until it tightens evenly, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their healthy side.
But if an abscess forms (a collection of pus), you stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is healed, and cover it with whatever is appropriate to heal it; then return to the restoration of the hernia, and strengthen it as necessary.
And if this happens in the bones at the joints or they are fractured, you treat them.
Title. XI.
On the Restoration of Adjuvant Bone Fractures.
The adjutor is that which is between the shoulder and the neck.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is done in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a flat piece of lead of medium thickness according to this form:
And attach them at both ends with straps, and place it in a raised location.
Follow the patient over a seat, and throw his broken arm into the hole up to the handle, which is in the middle of where the curve of the pole is attached.
And suspend it for some serious reason, or the minister extends it to the outside; and have the doctor and his assistants near where the fracture is, until the fracture returns as needed.
And the other method is that the patient lies on his back and suspends his arm from his neck with a strap, and commands two assistants to one of them to hold what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other to hold the pillow below him; and each one extends to their side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, you must pull on the fracture with a strap and on the other side with another strap, and each of the two assistants extends to their sides.
And therefore if the fracture is close to the muscle's edge, it is necessary that half of the strap be placed on the handle and the other half on the side of the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, it is necessary that the strap be placed at that location and on that joint.
Tie it with ease and without effort, and apply it as necessary and in good alignment, then pull on it if an abscess does not develop.
But if an abscess forms, leave the tightening for seven days and apply wool soaked in warm vinegar and rose oil over it until the abscess subsides, then pull on it.
And the method of strengthening it is to apply plaster on the fracture, and place a cover of thick cloth over the plaster; and adjust the arm on that support, and place his hand open on the muscle.
And hold the cloth and pull on the support for the arm to be in a stable position, unless there is any reason that prevents it due to the broken bone.
And you use splints.
And you place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture than the others; and between each splint leave the width of a finger, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an addition of three digits in total.
And pull on the splints with the tightening mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And your tightening on the site of the fracture should be tighter. And as the fracture becomes longer, the tightening should become smaller.
And therefore if the situation of the splints and the tightening is as described at the time when you restore the limb to its position, then do it.
And if you fear an abscess, leave the tightening and splints for seven days as described.
And consider the strap in all parts for three days so that there is no immediate or inflammation at the site, or food is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening of the strap; and therefore correct everything as described.
But if you are certain that there will be no problem with this, do not remove the ligature until at least three days or more.
The patient's sleep should be on his back, and his hands on his stomach.
And place a hot cooked splint full of woolen bandage on the injured limb, and consider at all times of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb should not be loosened or dissolved, or that the straps are softened; therefore correct everything with your judgment.
The patient's food should be according to the order that was previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is subtle at first until it becomes stronger; and therefore you must make it coarse.
In custom of the assistant and bedside, they are strengthened for forty days; and then it is necessary that they be discontinued and a bath given, and medicine administered with oil, which corrects [the condition].
And if the fracture is open, then you do not remove the ligament and splint immediately, but leave it for days or up to two months.
12th Chapter
On the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two focils; one is small, and it is the one that is referred to as the little head, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the small one, from the lower part of the arm.
And when only the large bone (focal major) is broken or both are fractured together.
And when the small bone (focal minor) is broken above, the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is more easy.
And when the bone below (the larger one) is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse if both bones are fractured together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, it is appropriate for the doctor to make a small extension with ease before the wound is sewn up.
But if the large bone is fractured, a more forceful extension is necessary.
And if both bones are fractured together, you must make the extraction less forcefully.
You must make the figure of the hand with the restoration and extension stretched out on a cushion, and place the fingers at the edges above, as all others have said, and the ear (auricular) should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie down centred over a low couch.
And place a cushion in front of him at his height or inclined to him, so that the patient does not suffer labor.
And bring the minister (assistant) to stretch out the arm from above to below with his hand or a ligament, and another minister should do the same above.
And bring the doctor to sew up the bone inside so that he reduces it according to the best shape possible.
And if there is a fissure in the bone, you must carefully reduce all things in their place with your skill.
And if a fissure appears separated that pierces the skin and is not hopeful for restoration of it, then you make an incision over it and remove it according to the manner we have described above.
But if the fracture is with an ulcer, then refer to the special chapter we have already discussed, and thus take care of it.
And if an abscess arises at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a suture made of rose oil and white wax, which is moderate in thickness and strength, and stretch the cloth over it with a subtle string until the abscess is softened; then remove the suture and apply an emplaster prepared from milled powder with clay of huou, and place splints; and let the splint that is placed over the fracture be firm and strong.
And you should know that the number of splints for the arm is seven in the major positions, or if the fracture is in one bone or two bones together.
And place your string over the location of the fracture firmly and forcefully, and when the extraction is to the edges above or below the fracture, place the string a little less tight according to the reminder given at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or harsh, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of moderate thickness, as we have recommended above.
Consider the limb (arm) and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as a swelling on the limb, then you must bind the limb with warm water until it ceases.
Unbind the limb and let it rest until it is healed, and then replace the string.
And if the extraction has been softened and the bone has healed and appears similar to others, then correct everything with your skill.
Consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess binding, for then it is necessary to soften it slightly and leave it for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and strengthen it.
But if there is no such cause for the patient as we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove it before about twenty days or more after that.
And let the hand of the patient be suspended by its ability to move agitatedly, and place it to sleep on its own back.
You know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 40 days, or it heals quickly in 28 days, and all of this depends on the complexity of the case and the properties of the individual.
Chapter XIII.
On the healing of a finger fracture and thumb fracture.
You know that a finger fracture or thumb sprain can lead to a fracture, but it does not occur unless excessive movement is observed.
When the finger or thumb is fractured or sprained, it is necessary that the patient remains immobilized and elevated at an angle equal to the elbow, and place a pad under the affected area.
Then the assistant should extend the fractured bones, and the doctor will align them properly using good alignment.
It is necessary to apply a plaster and padding, unless an abscess occurs; place a steel splint as needed over the affected area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
However, if the fracture is in the palm area, you should place a bandage around it and instruct the patient to grasp the broken part with their other hand. The bandage should be tightened with a long strip of cloth.
The splint should be made of wood or some other material that allows for elevation, so that the palm is in contact with it and the splint should be tightened as necessary.
If the fracture is in the fingers outside of the palm, you should place a splint above and another below the finger on the palm side to open and straighten the hand. Then apply a tight bandage as needed, like wrapping the hand around the wrist using linen strips.
If a toe or knuckle of the finger is fractured, if possible, immerse it in warm water and align it as necessary and tighten with a small straight splint to raise the fracture and prevent it from worsening.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger or index finger or thumb or ring finger, immerse it in warm water and align it with the affected digit or all of them together if possible, which is better; or place a small splint over it as mentioned earlier for the toe.
Consider in your treatment the disposal of an abscess and its prevention with proper operations, as well as what should be done when any cause of this occurs, according to the narrative provided.
Chapter XIV.
On the healing of a hip bone fracture.
A fractured hip bone is recognized by the feeling in the affected area and swelling above and below the groin.
The healing process involves wrapping a bandage around the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies on their back with their legs raised.
The assistant should extend the bandage over the entire affected area when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the dislocation of the hip joint is suspected, apply a bandage to the lower area around the pubic bone, so that the extension covers above, and another bandage below the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is suspected to be in the lower area, apply a bandage near the pubic bone and let the extension reach the areas below.
The doctor should align the bone with both hands inside and reduce it as naturally as possible so that the bone is properly aligned and joined well by good joining; then apply a plaster and bandage, unless an abscess occurs in the affected limb. If an abscess occurs, leave it for several days until the abscess has been treated, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be applied like this: wrap a firm bandage around the fracture, fold it over two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap a cloth around the affected limb up to the ankle and hip joint.
Insert a long probe between the thigh and hip close to the pelvis at the dividing point, and let the ends of the probe extend from the lower division more than from both parts, then roll it back and forth over the thigh and hip so that the excess of the bandage is removed.
Then pause on the thigh at the location of that fracture, and place one steel rod on the bone of the hip.
Then fill the empty spaces between thigh and pelvis with much cloth, to coagulate the extrusion.
Begin with a strong bandage around the middle at the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you get further from the location of the fracture, your bandage should be lighter and less wet.
Extend the ends of the probe to the dividing points on both sides of the foot until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen the ends of the rods from the other side so that the bandage does not slip out of its place.
Lay the bandage on that which does not cause corrosion of the member, nor cauterization abscess or swelling and resemble those; and if any such occurrence arises, then immediately remove it, and correct whatever occurred in an appropriate manner, as I have said many times before.
But if there is pain in the bone that you have set, then it is necessary for you to immobilize it as much as possible; and if you cannot do so, fumigate it and remove it, and heal it with what follows the memory of the cure until it heals.
This fracture of the thigh is strengthened more than those that are set with rods, as I have said in the assistant and arm.
But in the treatment of this fracture in such a manner does not cause the patient's limping; and if it is treated alone, another thigh must be applied to it, then it is necessary for the one affected to always limp.
Know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months or a few weeks, and all of this depends on the diversity of complications and other circumstances.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment of the fracture of the heel bone.
Know that the fracture of the heel bone heals more slowly than in many observed cases.
But if there is a fracture, then it is only a fissure or crack in its divisions, and that is with one or two plagues, and all of this is with the sensation.
The treatment of it is such that what is broken in its divisions should be immobilized until it is united and consolidated as much as possible by means of easy, simple, and convenient materials.
Then apply plaster and place a round rod on it if necessary; and strengthen above with bandage as appropriate.
And consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as cauterization abscess and similar to these as long as they oppose any accident that is appropriate for it until it heals.
Chapter XVI.
On the treatment of a hip fracture.
Know that in the hip there are two bones of which one is large and is called the pelvis; and the other is thin, and is called the acetabulum.
And if there are any of the species of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm, and its treatment is done as in the treatment of the arm by immobilization, and the operation is one.
And if the bones are crushed together, the pelvis is converted into all divisions.
And if the thin bone is crushed, the pelvis is converted to the anterior divisions.
And if the large bone is crushed, move it backwards, and it is due to those causes that you are not familiar with.
And apply extension, alignment, and ligature of the rods according to the immobilization.
But if the pelvis fracture is shallow and has many cavities, then the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your skill.
In the pelvis is any cause for operation on the arm, and it occurs when you immobilize the rods and complete all the necessary procedures, then you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes that are already cushioned with soles, and they are made in exactly the same way as branches of palm; alleviate those with a small amount of coarseness, and it should not be too thick, and the length of these should correspond to the length of the pelvis from the hip to the heel.
Then cover each one with two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one on the dividing line of the pelvis of one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the hip to the heel of the foot.
And place the two rods in three locations of both ends and in the middle location, because with this bandage the pelvis is prevented from clinking on the left and right sides, and it is a good position.
And apply a splint of wood according to the length of the pelvis; it should be placed on the pelvis to prevent movement.
And moreover, you must do this for a fracture, and when it is indeed an open wound.
And daily observe the wound and study it further, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those occur, then apply what is necessary until it heals.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the heel bone and the bones of the foot, and on the toes.
Not every part of the heel bone suffers a fracture; instead, certain bones in the foot may experience fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely experience fractures, except for strains during the months of discomfort.
And if the bones of the foot undergo a fracture and the bone fragments are elevated above their original position, then the patient should place his/her foot on a prepared surface such as when walking.
The patient should place one foot on the elevated bone and apply pressure, push, and hold it in place until it returns to its original position.
The patient should place a plaster and a pad on top of it, and under the foot, place a small table with two hollow spaces.
And bind that part of the foot in a downward position with bandages, as you have already wrapped it using various methods.
And after three or four days, you should remove the bandages because you will observe the bones that are held in place, either broken or dislocated, and the operation in such cases is as follows.
But if the toes are broken, then you should set them, and hold them in place as I have previously recommended for the restoration of the hand's fingers. And place the broken toe in the position it was before, slightly wider than its original width; and under the foot, place the table that I have recommended to you, and bind it with appropriate bandages.
But if the fracture involves more than two or three bones, then you should place a splint on each toe of its appropriate size wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the table under the heel of the foot, with it standing on one of the table's legs to keep it stable.
And be careful to remember that you should not overlook all the causes mentioned in previous discussions on fractures of the various accidents that have been described; and always apply remedies for any such occurrence.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of the coccyx in women, the pelvis bone, and the sacrum in men.
When the coccyx of a woman is broken, you should cause it to heal in a fallen position, and incline it slightly towards the posterior part, and hold it behind.
The midwife should pack the coccyx with cotton, and apply it in the same way as usual; and the woman should be shaken, and gradually raise her hips slightly, for everything will heal behind the coccyx until it is in front of the split bone, and the broken bone returns to its original position.
Place poultices on the hips and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton with ease and allow her to urinate; then return it in the same way as you initially applied it, and then return the poultice to its original position.
Do this for seven days or until it heals, as it is restored.
And if desired, take an oval bladder and bind it over the bone with a reed tube; insert the entire bladder into the coccyx, and inflate the tube with air until the bladder is inflated inside the coccyx, for the fracture will return.
And fill it with cotton and keep it as I have recommended until it heals.
When the pelvic bone in a man or woman is broken, administer the remedy and treatment for healing and reduction that I have recommended for the hip bone.
And do not hide these remedies in the treatment of such fractures, as they are few and far between, especially for those who have studied medicine, are familiar with my book, and understand its meaning; for this fracture indicates to you that the correct path towards healing and binding lies in its restoration and stricture, and therefore beware.
But in the case of male sacrum fracture, take guarguamela root, place it on the sacrum; and then bind it with linen cloth, and bandage it for three days or until it heals.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is open.
It is necessary for those who experience a fracture with an open wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, or similar, to cauterize and probe it as soon as possible under conditions of cauterization that you or your witnesses have described previously.
And if the wound exudes blood, you should take measures to stop its flow until you apply powdered zeja triturate or use another means if necessary.
Then begins the restoration of the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it if there is no abscess.
If there is an abscess, leave the restoration of it for up to ten days, until the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third and fourth day altogether, because you will cause bad consequences.
If the broken bone protrudes above the skin opening, it is necessary that you force yourself to reduce and bind it with your hands as easily and with as little extension as possible.
If the extension is not well prepared and the position of it with your hands, you reduce it with these tools; and this tool is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers or according to the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the doctor to take one of these three or four depending on the quantity that is needed for the treatment in all types of fractures.
And it should be round, and not too thick so that it is not bent during the operation.
It should have a sharp tip at the end and be thick on top, and of moderate size between the parts.
This is its shape:
It is named in Greek "labre voluntas atelarem", which means a small palette.
Because it is necessary to be placed the tip of it raised above the end of the bone that protrudes.
Press it into a position and bind it with some kind of fixation.
Therefore, bind the fracture ends together, and if the broken end is thin, do not use the tool for good reason, but you must insert the tip of the bone into it until the instrument has enough power over it.
If you cannot reduce the bone completely with this tool, then insert it as far as the chisels we mentioned; or it will be with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
Remove that which remains in the bone, rough and full of small notches.
When the bone is reduced, and the patient suddenly feels strong pain again, you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; then do what will bring great benefit to the patient.
When your treatment of the bone is completed, immerse a piece of black stiptic cloth in vinegar, and it must be done in summer, and do not wait over the wound or any other cause where there is oil, because it will not allow pus and corruption to occur.
Then administer steel in the time of your completion of the bone treatment, and leave the wound open so that you insert a probe with forceps and bandages according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to strain the wound with the fracture, because many times false doctors have done this, causing death or rotting and weakening of their patients, which is sinful. If the tightness is loose, soft, different from the tightness in other types of fractures.
If the wound is large or a bad one, and you fear the bad consequences that we have mentioned, and there is pain in the area, it is not necessary to wait for stitches, but rather use a hard bandage instead of stitches and tighten it with them.
And when a day or two after the wound begins to form pus, which may be due to a bruise, you remove the cloth that you placed over it with vinegar and apply warm poultices, and according to our custom, we treat wounds with poultices such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
It is necessary for you to remove the dressing and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and the limb must be prepared in such a way that the pus flows out of it easily towards the parts outside.
If the wound passes more than a few days and is not consolidated or abscessed from the bruise, you know that it is a sign of smallpox, so you must examine the wound with caution. Of those signs that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and place the limb and cause pain, pierce them as possible for you.
If the wound festers or puts out pus, it is styes, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, you must wait for one of them according to what is necessary in the treatment of which is described in its chapter.
And in the case where it is necessary that you make the main point and present your decision: when a large bone is broken, protrude it over the limb like the bones of the hip and thigh and similar ones of the larger members, but do not presume to attract or extract it because many times this causes death; leave it until pus can form, since strong pus will fall from it in about 20 to 30 days. Treat the wound if seen by you, and do not leave it unattended.
When the urine is green or of a dark color, as well as when the kidneys are affected, it is called dropsy. But if the member which is affected is the liver or spleen, then it should be called hydropsy. Moreover, there are four types of this disease. The first, called edema, occurs when humidity collects in one part of the body and the skin is swollen. The second, known as scirrhus, happens when a hard tumor forms under the skin. The third type, which is called hydrothorax, occurs when water accumulates in the chest. Finally, there is the fourth kind, called hydrocele, which takes place when the testicles or other parts of the body swell due to an excessive accumulation of fluid.
On the treatment of nodes that occur at the site of a fracture.
Many times this node occurs at the site of healing of a fracture, and especially near the joints, and it is formed by the figure of the member; and often it hinders the member from performing its natural operation.
Therefore, consider whether the node is recent and administer medications that have astringent properties such as alum, mastic, mirra (commiphora myrrha), sarcocolla (gum resin from Boswellia serrata tree), and similar ones; take some or all of these and compress them on the node with lint and bind it tightly with good bandage.
And release the extraction (of the pus) that does not drain for many days; then loosen it and apply another one until the node is gone; or place a lead plate firmly over it, because lead has the property of keeping anything inflamed in the limbs.
But if the node has become hard and tight and it is necessary to remove it constantly, then cut it through the superficial incision of the wound, excise the excess and prominent parts, or remove it with sharp scissors until it is gone; and treat it until it heals.
When a tumor forms under the skin that does not move when touched, or if it moves slowly, it may be cancerous. If there are any signs of bleeding or pus discharge, this is indicative of inflammation. And when the limb has been affected for a long time and the cancer spreads to the bones, then it is considered incurable.
When the bone has healed and the member is restored, support it with a splint according to its nature.
When the fracture of the bone is healed, support it with a splint only when necessary: for one reason being an excessive amount of swelling and the improper application of bandages or slings; or due to excess tightness of the bandages before the nutrients are prohibited from reaching the member; or due to excessive embrocation (massaging); or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to insufficient blood flow in the patient's body and debility.
And the treatment of it is to feed the patient and make his body tender until the blood is multiplied in him; administer baths, and give him warmth and comfort over him.
Then apply a poultice on the member to draw out the pus so that the pus attracts more nutrients, or continue massaging the member with warm water until the nutrients flow and return to its natural shape.
The following chapter discusses the treatment of wounds caused by a sharp object that has pierced the skin deeply, but has not penetrated through it completely. First, cleanse the wound well with warm water and use a poultice to draw out the pus and any other foreign matter from it. Then cover it with lint and bind it tightly with bandages. After several days have passed, if the wound does not heal on its own or becomes inflamed, then make an incision in it, cleanse it well, and apply a new poultice to promote healing. If the pus continues to accumulate, apply warm compresses to help it drain.
When broken bones are healed crookedly, prevent any further operation on them as necessary.
When the member has been healed and there is a crookedness or prominence of the broken bone and node, it may be due to the shape of the limb, but nevertheless do not prohibit the natural operation of the limb; however, it is necessary that you receive the opinion of one who knows whether the limb was recently fractured.
But there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is highly condemned as causing great harm and even death.
But if the limpness and node are recent, they should be massaged with warm water containing soft herbs such as althea (marsh mallow), daisy leaves, melilotus (sweet clover), and similar ones; and it should be made into a poultice using a softening agent like dyalliquilon (an ancient emollient used in medicine); or a mucilage of althea root should be prepared and moistened with gum arabic or camphor oil, and applied to the area; or figs should be mashed and mixed with pigeon feces, and similar medicines known as "amermans consolidation" (bitter remedies for healing).
And sometimes it is resolved by persistent light friction with the most humid materials, and movement of the limb in all directions at all times.
But if crookedness has already advanced and is made hard and turned into stone and is necessitated for treatment with iron, then it is necessary to remove the pus over the affected area and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved; and make an incision in it using fine scissors and remove any excess from the node of that area, and administer ease and comfort to it with warm compresses.
Title (or Chapter) XXIII
On speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is simply one of the joints of the body that cannot move due to its dislocation, and it distorts the shape of the limb, causing pain and severe injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when an event occurs with a dislocation, it is necessary to perform reduction immediately, and not to delay its reduction, because if delayed, the limb becomes necrotic, and reduction of dislocation becomes difficult.
And for this reason, it is necessary that the limb be neither numb nor stretched at the time of necrosis, because many times it causes spasms and painful swelling.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you apply cautery to the patient, and quickly stop the necrosis; and cover the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it easily.
And treat all parts with the remedy that will return in its place.
And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation as previously described in fractures; from the upper to lower parts of the body.
Title (or Chapter) XXIV.
On treatment of mandible dislocation below.
If both mandibles are dislocated, it should not be prolonged; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they remain stuck in their places due to little movement, and are slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated, so that they must be mollified at the junction until saliva from the patient's mouth flows out and he cannot take it or close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
But if the dislocation is slight, then it returns by itself with minimal intervention.
If the dislocation is complete and prolonged, it is necessary to perform a reduction of it gently, without delay.
And the minister must place the head of the patient, and enter his hand into the mouth of the dislocated mandible to manipulate it, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he enters both hands together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the patient's jaw outside with their hands, guiding him; and commands the patient to stop moving his jaws and separate them from each side; and the doctor guides the mandible and wraps it in a cloth until it returns to its place.
If reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated, administer warm water with oil, until it becomes easy to reduce both without delay, as we have said.
And therefore, when they return and are wrapped up, and the patient's mouth is closed and not mollified, pause over those pieces of cloth with wax, make it with wax and rose oil, and apply it gently with a cloth.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be kept between two pillows to prevent him from moving to the right or left; and do not make him swallow any solid food; having his own provisions, let them be forbidden lion meat, until when the pain subsides and the mandibles are mollified, you may give what is desired.
And it should be given gently, and avoid forcing the opening of the mouth, with regard to food, drink and speech, until the mandible is mollified and healed.
If reduction of two mandibles is difficult when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, it frequently occurs that fevers and sodium follow, and the patient's abdomen becomes bloated, and strong winds and pure vomiting occur.
And when you see this, you know it is a disaster; and many times the patient who experiences this dies within ten days.
Title (or Chapter) XXV:
On reduction of the dislocation of the neck and the extremity of the muscle.
The neck is not dislocated from the side due to its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the junction outside, and this can be diagnosed by feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And cover the location with your hand with firm compression, because it will return.
And pause over that plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
The dislocated extremity that is connected and continuous with another one, is not displaced in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and fixed as previously said and as you are equipped to do so.
Then press on that wound, and apply powder, ointment, and bandage, and order the patient to observe tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this method of healing, the dislocated extremity of the muscle should be reduced when it is separated from its location.
Chapter XXVI
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated at the upper part (tibial tuberosity) and another at the lower part (distal end).
And the second is that it may be dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, but this rarely occurs; it is not dislocated at the back part by the shoulder, and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
Furthermore, it is more commonly dislocated and extruded at the lower parts of the tibia (distal end), especially in those with less flesh; but in those with thicker flesh, it tends to be extruded with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men due to blows or accidents that the muscle is separated from its sheath and treated with a cauterizing ointment, which is then cleaned as it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you should find out what treatment the patient needs, and then proceed with his healing process.
The dislocation at the lower parts of the tibia (distal end) is known; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the non-dislocated one, as there are clear differences between them. You should find the bulge in the head of the muscle, and below the tibial tuberosity, touch the bulge on the head of the muscle like a hump, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the bony prominence or move it at all.
If the dislocation is at the foot or ankle, you should find a clear touch, and it should not be hidden.
And from this dislocation, easy reduction occurs when it is fresh and the patient is young.
The reduction of it is that the attendant raises their hand above the dislocation; then they place their thumbs below the tibial tuberosity and elevate the joint with strength to its location, and the attendant raises the patient's hand and extends it; and they place it down again because it returns easily.
But if it does not return with the method described above, and the dislocation has persisted for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered a broth made of chamomile, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
And place the patient on their back and support their feet below the tibial tuberosity with pillows, so that there is a gentle but firm pressure. The physician should place their foot on top of the dislocation and elevate the head of the muscle with force, pulling the patient's hand towards the upper part to prevent it from moving away from the dislocated area, while another attendant holds the patient's head so that it does not move from the dislocated area. This will help the dislocation return to its location as soon as possible.
And if you wish, reduce it in this way: find a man who is taller than the patient and stands on their side, enters his muscle below the tibial tuberosity of the patient and elevates it to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air, and another attendant pulls the patient's hand from the lower part of their abdomen. But if the patient is lightweight, it should be suspended by some means so that the cause of the dislocation is relieved, as the dislocation will return quickly.
And it is reduced in the same way: place a long pole (about the length of the patient) with its cap round on the ground, not too thick or too thin, and support the patient below it; then place lionskins over the top of the pole, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and their hand is extended to the other side. Extend the body of the patient from the other side with force, as the joint will return to its location quickly.
And if reduction (of the affected part) is difficult due to all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: you should take a stick of length equal to two forearms and width of four fingers, and reduce its thickness at the tip in the shape shown below:
Then place a lion's skin (cloth) on the round head of the stick to prevent the stick from hurting the patient.
And place the patient's finger at the tip of the stick, and stretch your hand or arm over the stick up to the division (joint), and hold the stick with both hands and the end of the hand.
Then place the arms on a ladder (or step) according to its width, and extend your hand up to the division, and whatever else is required should be suspended from the other side, as the joints are near together.
Once the instrument (for manipulation) is completed in any way possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place a reed (or small stick) covered with wool of appropriate size; and apply plaster prepared from powder of mullien (herb) and alum over all the muscles, thus revolved (around), and strengthen the tip with appropriate sutures; and let the ligament be revolved over the plaster, and let the hand of it (the affected part) be annected to its neck, and let it hang loosely, and do not move the hand for 7 days.
It is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient sparingly, until the member (affected part) is comforted, as it is more vulnerable to healing.
And give the diet less or very little food and encourage exercise (movement); so if it is kept firm and not softened, then it will heal (or recover).
However, if the joint is dislocated more than three times due to moisture that occurs in it or for another reason, then it is necessary to administer cautery with three cuts, as described in the section on cauteries.
If all of the above is done and the ligament is not loosened for seven days and the joint remains unhealed, and the plaster and sutures are reduced several times without healing and cannot lift the arm up to the division above, then you should know that the nerves of it (the affected part), which are located at the head of the muscle, have become injured or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
In the case of a dislocation that has been done, you should apply pressure and extension to the feet and breasts or the posterior parts, reduction is performed with force and extension until it returns.
And administer another suture there (to the affected joint), and take care of it until it heals.
And if there is severe healing delay and slowness in the movement of the member (affected part), then have the patient use baths several times until that gravity (symptoms) is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, and more so in front of the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it appears crooked or misshapen depending on which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated shoulder using a rod, that is clearly evident to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch the muscle with it.
And you should take care that the dislocation is not caught, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to an abscess (cyst) with caution, for if it reaches an abscess, reducing the dislocation becomes difficult, and recovery is incomplete; moreover, when it occurs at the back, all other types of dislocations are worse, and more painful, and many times that leads to death.
The restoration of it (the dislocated shoulder), when possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it should be stretched out with both hands and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the shoulder and below it, and he should push the joint with his thumbs or the edge of his palm towards its place.
However, if the dislocation is at the front, then return it by bending the arm with its own hand until it strikes the shoulder with the edge of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And two attendants should stretch the arm, and there should be another two attendants to prevent the extension from being too much.
And let the arm be rotated entirely, because it is wrapped in doubled cloth or ligament around its hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil to help with the lubrication of the joint and ease the reduction; and then push the joint vigorously until it returns.
Approach the reduction of that member which should be placed on top of the plaster in which there is stiffness and swelling accompanied by albumin of the egg white, and it should be drained with a descending stricture, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
Approach its removal; therefore, if the joint is formed at its location, then you remove the ligament and leave it (the dislocated part) there.
If the joint is not stronger, then you massage the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is drained; then remove it (the dislocated part).
If gravity occurs with the reduction of the joint and its position is moving, then administer moisture in bathing and subtle friction, and press, until it is relieved; or rest on the dislocated joint, if it is a heavy one; and tie it, and leave it (the dislocated part) on the bone for a day and a night. Then remove the dislocated part, and put it in bath; when it subsides, then scald the joint with hot friction, and apply pressure on it (the dislocated part), if it is a round one, several times, and the third, and the fourth time. corruption has reached the denouement of bathing, until it is limited.
If you wish, press on the cow's wet and scalded wound with tweezers and strengthen it (the dislocated part); do this several times, for it is wet and will reduce to its position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder joint (meaning arm), which is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder joint (meaning arm) is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation of it is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints, nevertheless, it is necessary to be quick in reducing it at the time of dislocation before the location becomes swollen or a cautery apostema occurs.
The reduction of the dislocation is that you place the patient's arm on a table and extend it (the affected arm), and then place your hand or palm over the proximity of the joint, and push it back into its location until it returns to its original position.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed on the abdomen of the hand, in this case, the patient should place their two hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation precedes, then the position of the hand of the affected person should be intrinsically on the table so that the doctor's hand can rest on the proximity of the joint.
Therefore, if it returns immediately, that's good; and if not, strengthen it (the dislocated part) with a plaster, allowing the apostema to form, and leave it; do not massage it, as otherwise, it will not bear or endure pressure on the reduction of it until after several days have passed.
However, the joint may retain its twisting; and do not inform the patient of any cause, but only soften the hand so that it cannot strengthen any cause; in this case, know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and therefore, do not engage (meaning attempt to set) it unless it is strengthened with a strong cautery for the relief of the condition.
Therefore, when the shoulder joint (meaning arm) is returned, then rest on the plaster that you have recommended, and leave it and strengthen it for 5 days; then remove it and leave the arm free to exercise.
However, if there is no movement in it and a gravity occurs, then soften it (the dislocated part) with warm water and gentle friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes, fingers are completely dislocated.
And when a finger of those is dislocated either at the base of the palm or in the middle of it, then seize the finger and gently push to correct its dislocation until it returns to its proper position.
Then hold the head of the finger and suspend the area where it is dislocated for two days.
Then suspend and stretch that area until it is properly aligned on the specified day.
When the night comes, follow that procedure, and do not stop moving or massaging it during the day and exercise at night; do this for several days until it becomes strong.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist and place it in that position, and perform the same procedure as previously described until it heals.
Similarly, do the same for dislocations in other places.
Chapter 30.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae in the spine.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and several vertebrae move from their places, there is no treatment for this condition because death approaches the patient.
A sign of this condition is that the patient's excretion is outside his control and cannot be retained; many parts of his body or two limbs, or one arm; or a vertebra has moved from its place, because in many cases a vertebra moves and in many cases it is removed from four directions.
Therefore, it has been removed in several directions and is known as syringomyelia.
But the treatment of this condition is to consider whether syringomyelia occurs in infancy because there is no treatment or healing for it.
But in cases that occur due to an accident, injury or similar situations, the ancients described methods of treatment in a lengthy manner; I will now condense and simplify what remains from their extensive discourse on the subject, while preserving its essence and presenting it with new tools for the same purpose.
Only that syringomyelia caused directly by the spine can be cured with what I will recommend.
The patient should be extended on his back, with the affected area close to the wall, and the rest of the body supported by a soft mattress or pillows so that the feet are not restricted.
A straight pole should be placed, stuck into the ground at the end of the head of the patient, and another pole should be placed at the other end to support their feet.
The attendant holds the pole, ensuring that it is not fixed in a pit; another attendant holds the other end according to the same arrangement.
A cloth should be wrapped around the patient's head and tied tightly with a cord, then extend one end of the rope to the pole that supports the head and secure it there; another rope should be stretched over the lower back of the patient from the hips to the chest, and the mattresses under them; finally, adjust all the ropes and secure them on the other pole that supports the feet.
The attendant extends each rope to the pole and ensures that both poles and their ropes are not removed from their places where they are anchored, but are not fixed as previously mentioned.
The doctor should place his hands firmly on the vertebra with strength until it returns or rests them on a table and adjusts his feet on it until it heals.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is the same as three arms, and carve a hole in the wall on which the patient's head rests at the end of the table. And you place a cushion on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and tightly press until the vertebra is dislocated and returns to its place.
If you want to turn the part that is twisted with your hand, you must kneel before the patient's head at the end of his feet, and the length between each foot should be one arm, and both heads of the feet should be at the same distance from you; let the distance between each foot be a palm, and make a hole in each foot where the vein runs through, and each one should be tightly fixed to the ground so that it is not damaged.
Let there be a rope looped around the dislocated area, and turn it in both holes of the two feet.
And at the end of it, there is a hole in which the rope is formed, whose length is one palm and a bit more; the other ropes are similar to this one.
Then tightly bind the ropes that you have tied around the patient's feet in the hole where his head should be, and the ropes that you have tied around the chest in the loop where his legs are.
You should place each vertebra with a servant who twists it with his hand, and the doctor ties the spine as previously mentioned.
After the vertebra has been returned and the hole is covered, it is necessary to place a dry paste made with alum and egg white, and then cover it with a linen cloth; then place a wooden stick over the paste, whose width should be three fingers or more, and the length should be as long as the distance between the swelling, and on top of the vertebra.
And use the thin rope that we mentioned earlier, and feed the patient with subtle nourishment until he is cured.
If there remains any danger in the place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and smooth with prolonged administration of the tablets, which we have recommended, and a lead sheet has been applied in that place.
Sometimes, there remains danger in the lower vertebra of the back due to dislocation, and it is feared that this bone will cause further damage; therefore, it is necessary to provide an opportunity for healing with this medicine because a large amount could lead to death.
Chapter .xxx1.
On the treatment of a dislocated pelvis.
Know that the joint of the pelvis and the joint of the muscle do not dislocate but only move, and this does not occur in those who suffer from other dislocations due to minor displacement and concavity.
And the joint of the pelvis can be dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated inside at the dividing lines, or outside at the dividing lines, or in front at the dividing lines, or behind at the dividing lines.
Moreover, it is more often dislocated internally, but less so in front or behind.
The sign of the internal dislocation is that when you align the healthy and diseased thighs together, the healthy one appears longer and the affected one shorter, and the patient cannot bend his knee; this area should be cauterized with a small cautery to prevent further infection since the tip of the abscess has already been reached.
The sign of external dislocation is that the symptoms of the affected area are opposite to those we have described.
The sign of anterior dislocation is that the thigh expands according to its nature, but does not bend without pain in the front, and if it is perforated and cannot be moved forward; urine is retained and the abscess is drained, and walking should be done on the heel.
The displacement of that person who experiences dislocation at the rear parts is indicated by the fact that it does not expand the anus, nor can it bend the anterior part that bends the posterior one, and the leg is shorter than the other, and the dislocation is softened, and the head of the dislocated joint is to be placed in that location.
The reduction of the type of this dislocation that you are considering is as follows: if the dislocation is old and long-standing, which has already become ossified, then you administer the reduction of it and leave it in its position, but this is not the entire cure; therefore, it is not necessary to perform an operation on it.
However, in the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you should try to reposition the joint and extend it between the thighs both inside and outside, on the right and left, forcibly returning it and not requiring any other treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, you must then prepare and administer strong medicine, extending the leg of the affected thigh farther down or holding it with a ligament that is attached above the anus; and another person should extend the hand of the dislocated limb upwards to place its other end lower on the thighs; and another person should apply strong pressure with a rope on the side of the dislocated joint, and another person should hold taut the end of the rope.
The extension of the leg or thigh between the anus to the front of the neck, or from the back thigh to the chest.
The extension should be made in one move so that the patient is raised with their own body from the ground and remains hanging.
This type of extension is common to all four types.
And if the dislocation returns with the method described earlier, it is good; but if not, it is necessary for all types of cases to follow the method I have described for treatment.
In the reduction of the dislocation, if it is in the thighs, it is necessary that the patient lies on their side; and place the ligaments on the side of the dislocated joint at the location between the head of the joint and the point where the ligament is to be placed; and extend the ligament above the part of the anus to the frontmost part of the neck.
And another strong person should grab the arms of the dislocated limb, and press hard on the thick part of the patient's dislocated joint, and extend it outwardly by forceful extension, as it will return to its place.
This type of reduction is easier to cure than other types for this affected limb.
However, if the patient is excused and does not agree to this type of treatment for all cases, you must then bind both feet of the patient with a strong, light ligament, around both ankles and both buttocks.
Let the length of each one be the number of four fingers, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by a distance of two fingers.
And let the patient be suspended from the top of the post and hang down as far as possible; and let the length of the rope from the ground be two arms.
And command a strong young man to push the head of the joint, and let another strong young man be suspended with the patient, and the third strong young man should pull on the joint forcefully, as the joint will return to its place quickly.
However, in the reduction of the dislocation if it is outside the thigh, you must let the patient walk on crutches as I have recommended earlier; and apply strong pressure to the affected leg itself and its feet.
And let two posts be placed, one at the feet of the patient, and the other at the head; and let two ropes be tied to the middle of each post that are adjusted so that drapes with wet cloth are wrapped around them, so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the backside is not narrow.
And let each person extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to art (medical practice).
And if the dislocation is in front of the thighs, you must gently extend the leg as described earlier on the pole; and the doctor places his right palm on the affected leg, and another person compresses it with the other hand, and with that compression, the person extends the leg to the backside to the anus.
And if the dislocation is in back of the thighs, it is not necessary to extend the leg outwards, and the patient should be elevated above the ground; you must lie down on a hard surface, as it is necessary to do so for the dislocation of the hips as I have said earlier, with the patient lying between two hard surfaces; and the face and the ligaments should be extended, as described earlier, without any improvement.
It is necessary to administer a compression on a table at the location of the joint.
In order to perform the reduction, you must first extend two blankets of the patient and when you see that the intestine has relaxed and the patient opens their blanket and expands it without excuse, then you know which member is being reduced  and then you adjust two cushions and apply a paste with a bandage so that it is not too wide in any of the parts; and keep the patient resting for three or four days.
Then unbind and remove the bandage, compare one blanket to the other.
If you see that the intestine is in its proper place, then you know that the dislocation has been closed, and let the patient rest.
If you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to it, and let it rest according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
Then unbind that one, and have him walk slowly on each side for several days, until he is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle can be dislocated in three ways: either at the outside parts, the inside parts, the front parts (more so than the back parts); but it is not dislocated at the front parts.
The sign of ankle dislocation is when you ask the patient to apply their blanket to the affected limb, and then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
The restoration of all the ways of ankle dislocation is to place the patient correctly, so that they extend their blanket if possible; hold your hands on the sides of it, and keep their foot between your feet; and bring the ankle towards you with your palms, and hold it there until it returns to its proper location, and another servant extends their foot until the ankle is back in place.
The sign of reduction of the ankle is when the blanket adheres to the affected limb without any effort.
Then apply a poultice to it and have the blanket adhere to the affected limb, and bind it for three or four days, then unbind it.
Do not let the patient walk for several days until he is healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the ankle is not possible for you, then administer strong traction with bandages as described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
Treatise on the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle may occasionally be dislocated by a slight movement, and occasionally by a blow, and the dislocation of the ankle can occur on the inside parts or the outside parts.
The sign of dislocation is that sometimes the thigh appears swollen, leading to separation at the point where it is dislocated.
The cure for dislocation is easy reduction and that it should be extended with ease and guided back into place.
In the treatment of a dislocated joint following the principle of complement, it is necessary to immobilize the patient and have a strong and skilled assistant from behind the hip in the same location.
Then place your right hand on the top of the foot and your left hand on the lower part of the leg in the hip area (pelvis).
Then pull the foot toward you with your right hand, pull it twice more with your left hand, extend it with your left hand and push the leg's thigh against the bed with your right hand.
Do this repeatedly as previously mentioned.
Then push the leg's thigh against the bed on the third pull and you are in the pelvis area.
If it returns in one or two attempts using this method and if the foot is guided back, that's good; otherwise, continue with the operation since it will return again.
If reduction of the joint is prohibited by the patient's condition as previously recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, spread out a flat stone on the firm ground and have the patient lie down with their feet in the box, and you have already wrapped them in cloth to prevent injury to the patient.
The assistant should hold the patient's feet and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or use ropes to keep it on top of the neck; each assistant should then extend that limb in the same direction, and the stone should remain between the patient's legs to prevent the body from being pulled apart at the joints.
The doctor should guide the dislocation back with their hands and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the joints since the dislocation returns easily.
Therefore, when the dislocation returns and is declared as the reduction of the joint, you should stop applying plaster and pull it off firmly, and tie the foot to the bed.
You must be careful or protect the nerves that are behind the thigh to ensure that the ropes around it are not tight and do not injure it.
Then leave the patient for two or three days; if the ropes become soaked, change them.
Then release the patient on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. If the patient is forced to move in that space, it is not guaranteed that the dislocation will not be dissolved and damaged, and that it will not receive treatment.
If an abscess forms due to cauterization, you must administer the treatment mentioned in our narrative in another location for healing and dressing until it heals.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
It is necessary that the dislocated joint be guided back gently without force; this should not be difficult and can be easily done.
If the dislocation is in one of the toes on the hip, it is necessary to immobilize the patient's foot on a flat surface or table and keep them as if they were walking.
Stand on one foot, and place the other foot on an object that supports the joints, and press down with your other foot until it returns, ensuring it is guided back properly without appearing in a prominent position.
Place the pelvis of the foot on a table that supports the entire foot with two legs, and tighten it securely with a suitable structure for three days; then release it and allow it to rest from walking for several days until it is strengthened and the reduction is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation that are caused by injury or fracture, or any combination thereof.
When such a cause occurs and you proceed with the treatment of that injury and restoration, many times death ensues.
Therefore, in the treatment of that injury, one must not presume but be knowledgeable and experienced in the art, long practice, mercy, compassion, patience, prudence, and humility; use only cauterizing medicines at first, leave the patient to divine judgment, but help those who hope for salvation from perdition with relief from the illness, and where there is any hope. And then forcefully perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess appears cauterized.
If the limb returns as desired, then administer the regimen which will cause the abscess to subside and heal the wound with whatever is appropriate for dry soothing agents.
If a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and separated fragments, then you perform the treatment for them, and do what we have said in simple fractures, but before that in their locations.
Be careful and avoid as much as possible the instrument within the fearful paths according to your ability, for that is better for you to obey your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more healthy to your true body in your times. In this way, the words of Al-Zahrawi are completed perfectly, may God be praised. Amen.
