After I have finished with you, my son, this book, which is the most recent of my works in medicine, I have completed it after having finished explaining and describing it, and I have done so in order to complete it with this treatise which is a part of surgery, that is, medicine with the hand.
Since surgery is a work of the hand which is being practiced in our age and time, and since its secrets have been completely forgotten, except for a few passing references in the ancient books which have been altered by the hands of men: and because of this there has arisen both error and hesitation until its intentions have been closed and its purpose extended: it seemed to me good to write this treatise according to the order of this book, and in accordance with its declarations and abbreviations: and that I should speak of the forms of the instruments of cautery and other implements which are used in the work, as is done in accordance with the declarations and their preparation which is necessary
However, because a good practitioner of this work with his hand is not to be found in our age, it is because the art of medicine is long, and the author must exercise himself beforehand in the science of anatomy as Galen has said, until he knows the functions of the limbs, their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and lacerations, and the number of each, and their exit, and the pulsation of the veins, and the quietness and location of the exits of the veins.
For this reason Hippocrates said that the name is much more important than the work, and that it is especially so in the art of the hand.
We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is ignorant of what we have said concerning anatomy will fall into error, and will endanger men’s lives: as I have seen many of them who have formed themselves in this science without knowledge and without experiment
What is this, since the doctor has secured the scrofula in the woman's neck with a stolidum, and it has injured some arteries in the neck: why does blood flow from the woman, until it dies between her hands?
And the doctor has also said that he should extract a stone from the bladder, which had become enlarged, and the stone was large. So it came to pass that he extracted it with the bladder stone And the man died on the third day.
And I too was called to extract it: and I saw from the greatness of the stone, and the condition of the patient, that he would die
And the doctor saw another case where a certain Duke of our land was taken ill because of a medicine: and it happened to his black slave that was with him, that he fractured his leg near the ankle: and the doctor, with his ignorance, did not know how to treat it, and he bound the fracture with barley straw and nails, and with great tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And he died according to his desires. Then he dismissed him for a few days, and commanded him not to move his ligament: and he stood thus until the swelling of his leg, foot and ankle had gone down.
I was called to him again: and I set about resolving the ligament: and there was peace, and he was relieved of his pain
But it was confirmed that the corruption was in the limb: and I was unable to restrain it
So the corruption ceased to walk in the limb until it died
And behold the physician who hath performed an incision upon a cancerous swelling: and it is ulcerated after days, until the malice thereof hath been magnified with the lord himself.
When the cancer is pure of black bile, it must not be sutured up with an iron hook, except in that limb which can tolerate it, that the whole of it may be excised.
And therefore, my son, you must know that an operation is divided into two parts: namely, that which is associated with health, and that which is associated with peril in various dispositions
I am grieved throughout all this book in every place where an operation is mentioned, in which there is terror and fear.
For it is necessary for you to be cautious of this, and to show discretion: that they do not learn to speak insolently, and to be dishonest.
Receive therefore measure with care and protection, and the sick with facility and firmness, and use the gentler way that leads to greater glory to God for health and praiseworthy succession: and banish from you the terrifying diseases that are difficult to heal: and take away the spirits of those who make you fear, so that there may be confidence in your faith and comfort in your heart.
For there remains in this world a remaining glory to us, and a sublimity, and ultimately a greatness of spirit
Galenus indeed has said in some of his admonitions. Do not make the physician the author of evil: do not call the physician by a bad name.
I have indeed divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter One.
On cautery with fire, and on cautery with acute medicine, capitulated, and ordained from head to feet, concerning the forms of instruments, and of the instruments of cautery: and all that is necessary for the operation.
Chapter Two.
Concerning incision and perforation, phlebotomy and enucleation, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and things of that kind: and all in all concerning the forms of instruments
Chapter Three.
Concerning restoration, and dislocation, and the treatment of torsion, and things of that kind: capitulated, ordained from head to feet, concerning the forms of instruments.
However before any operation be undertaken with this, it is necessary to state the qualities of the instruments, and the preparation of the wound: and in what complexion it should be used
I say therefore that the discourse concerning the quality of the cautery instrument, and its preparation, is a lengthy, subtle, scientific, and hidden secret.
And many learned men have spoken on this, and they have differed in their opinions: and indeed little is to be gained from their discourses, fearing the length of the matter
I say therefore that cautery is useful for all complexions, which is with matter and without matter: except for two complexions which are the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
Complexionis autem calida et sicca cum materia dissenserunt. Heat and dryness are complexed with the loosening of material things. Some say that the Cauterium is useful in this case, while others deny it, because it is not suitable for heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is heat, and it is unsuitable to remove heat and dryness by means of heat and dryness.
And others say that the Cauterium makes an ointment in all heat and dry humours that happen in the bodies of men: for when you compare the body of a man, and moisten it, to the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
I also say this from experience which I have had of it.
It is true that it does not suffice to say that it is useful for this or that, except that it has been proved by experience, and exercised in the last exercise of the Cauterium, and has learned the different humours of men, and their disposition, and the causes of these, and their accidents, and the time of their action.
Except for these humours, there is no fear of them: and especially in cold and wet humours. For all the doctors agree on this: and they do not deny the use of the Cauterium in these things.
And behold, the sons say that from the secret of the Cauterium with fire, and from its goodness, it is better than the Cauterium with burning medicine: for fire is simple, whose action does not endure, except upon that which it is cauterized: and it does not harm any other member connected with it, except for a slight wound.
Action of inflammation extends beyond the limits of the limb: and it may cause difficulty in healing of the limb itself, or even destruction.
Fire, on account of its subtle nature and the excellence of its substance, does not cause this, except in excess.</start_of_turn>
I have learned from experience, through the length of my service and the study of the art, and by observation of things: and for this reason I make excuse for the length of the speech.</start_of_turn
And even if it were not permitted for this book of mine, I would tell you a secret of fire, and the quality of its operation in the body, which expels diseases with philosophical demonstrations that confirm them in the minds of the learned.</start_of_turn>
And behold, the learned men themselves disagree in the time when it is proper to use fire as a cauterium, and they approve of a better time for its use.</start_of_turn>
I say, indeed, that cauterium is useful at all times: for in its action the document is enveloped in fat, which is drawn out with the cauterium.</start_of_turn> Especially if the cauterium is for severe and urgent pains, which do not bear delay: for they fear that from the delay there may arise an evil which is greater than the small amount of the document which is lost by the passage of time.</start_of_turn>
And let no one in the audience, or anyone who has any knowledge of medicine, think that because the physician does not immediately apply the cauterium to every disease that it is not an efficacious treatment: for indeed, the cauterium changes the complexion and dries up humors which are the cause of many diseases.</start_of_turn
The burn indeed supersedes the medicine by its swiftness of action, its skill in surgery, and its might: and it is possible that the ailment will vanish at some later time according to the complexion of the patient, the location of the ailment, and its skill. And that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluous humors in it, and that which comes to him from food and things of a like nature, except in the case of an ailment in which cauterium is administered.
A slight ailment in a limb with few superfluous humors and moisture, like the burn of a tooth, on account of pain, and things of a like nature, is possible that it will not return in it in that pain But this is in few cases.
Indeed, to tell the truth, that cauterium is the most recent of medicines, is a right statement: not because of what they wish for it themselves in this matter, for they believe that there is no cure which can be compared with medicine, nor with anything else following the occasion of cauterization.
But the thing is contrary to this, and the intention that cauterium is the most recent of medicines is not except when we administer modes of treatment in some ailment, and they do not confer that medicine: then we administer cauterium at the end of all, and it confers: thus indeed does the cauterium become the most recent of medicines, not according to the intention which the vulgar people and the multitude of doctors understand
The ancients indeed said that cauterium is better with gold than with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold and the fineness of its substance: and they said that it does not make pus at the place of cauterization. This is not absolutely true: for I myself have seen this to be false, and have found that it does not make pus in some bodies without other things.
The cautery is good with itself, better than with iron, as they say. When you ignite the cautery with fire from gold, you must not be aware of its quantity, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the flesh, and if you add more fire to it, it will melt in the fire and turn into flakes.
Therefore the craftsman departs from this with regard to the work of surgery: and because of this, the cautery with iron is more rapid and closer to the operation than with fire.
And I have set out this chapter on Cautery, according to the chapters: and I have set out from the head to the feet: that they may provide what anyone desires from it.
(The provided text does not include any additional sentences following this one, so the translation ends here.)
Here the cautery is applied to the mastery of humidity and cold over the brain: which are two causes of sweat, and of the multitude of flows of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and of the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain: and generally of all diseases, which arise from cold, such as paralysis, and sweat, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar ones to these diseases.
The method of cautery is as follows: it must be applied immediately before the patient with a resolving medicine for the head, three or four times, according to the nature of the patient's disease, age, and habit
Then order him to make his head bleed with a needle. Then make him sit between your hands square, so that which hand he has placed upon his belly will be between his knees.
Then place the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever his middle finger reaches, that is the place of the burn with the cautery
Then ignite the Cautery Oil: this is its form.</start_of_turn>
Then place it upon the place which has been signed with the cautery, descending gradually, until it is grasped by your hand, and then you withdraw it.</start_of_turn> Then lift your hand quickly, and look at the place.</start_of_turn
If you see that there is still some bone or quantity of hair remaining, then lift your hand again.</start_of_turn And if not, repeat the process with the iron itself, or with something else if it is cold: until you see the bone, which I told you of.</start_of_turn>
Then take some salt, and dissolve it in water, and drink it in this way, and apply it to the place: and keep it there for three days.</start_of_turn
Then apply butter soaked in the drink to the place, and keep the burn covered with the flame until the eschar is consumed.</start_of_turn Then care for it with ointment of four herbs, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
I have said that the more open the wound is, the more pus will be emitted: which is better and more healing.</start_of_turn
And some people say that the skin should be cauterized until the bone is reached: and keep the Cautery until something of the thickness of bone is burnt.</start_of_turn
Then it is bound after that which has been taken from the bone, then it is cured.
Others say that it is necessary for the cautery to continue until it has made an imprint on the bone like the print of a knife: thus the bone will break like burnt metal. Or they put an instrument filled with a small letter into the wound, and they extract the letter when the wound has healed.
Then it is cured, until it is consolidated
To me, however, two kinds of cautery are not useful in any man except in some cases of fear.
And throw it away: for me it is better to be saved than to be cured.
The head suffers from weakness from the continuity of its natural solution: as we have testified in other limbs: and especially when the head is weak by nature: and the first kind of cautery is more beneficial for health and more useful than the second kind, which is painful.
Head Chapter III
When there is chronic pain in the whole head: and it lasts for a long time in a sickly person, and it is used by hyeresis, and cooks, and poultices, and oils, and other remedies And especially if only one kind of cautery has been used which we mentioned, and nothing else has been added to it: then consider it For if the head is strong by nature and not weak, and has a cold sweat: then cauterize with another kind under the former slightly Then burn it over every horn of the head with the cautery, without piercing the skin, and uncover from the bone the quantity which we have mentioned. Then burn it with the cautery once in the back of the head in the place which is called the uas: and this is the place where the windpipe is placed. Raise your head high in this and do not uncover the bone. For in this place it is found to cause pain which is different from the pain of the other burns of the head all around
And I say this: this is the Cautery in its place: and it must be a cautery which burns the horns of the head and the back of the head more finely, so that the middle of the head is burned.
Chapter IIII.
When there is pain and swelling in a part of the head, or if the pain extends as far as the eye, and it is evacuated with the physicians who make the head better, and the rest of the treatment is administered as I have said in the discourse on diseases, and it does not suffice: then the cautery is done in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with an iron
But the cautery with acute burning medicine is like this: you take a tooth from another person and burn it, and you remove the extremities of it from both sides Then cut the place of pain at the same time as the wide phlebotomy, until there is under the skin in that place where the tooth of the head is taken
Introduce the instrument into the cavity until it reaches the eye: then stretch over it with a loop of constriction of a moderate degree, and leave it in position for fifteen hours. Then remove the instrument and extract the eye, and leave it out for two or three days. Afterwards place over the eye a pad soaked in butter, until the cavity produces pus: then care for the eye with unguents until it is healed.
And if you wish to do this as some physicians of fire do, whom I have written about in the twelfth tractate on Medical Burners.
The cautery of it with iron is done in this manner The iron cautery, which is shaped like this
It is called Clavus: because its shape is like that of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion
Then place it over the place and hold your hand: and draw the iron slowly with velocity: and the amount which should be cauterized is half of the thickness of the skin And lift your hand, so that the artery beneath does not get cauterized and the blood flow does not increase
Then soak the wound in salt water, and place over the place, and leave it out for three days: then place the wound with butter: afterwards care for it with unguents until it is healed
And if you wish, cauterize this hemipelvis with the second extremity of the knife of the Cautery. And burn from the incision of the artery in this hemipelvis, not directly on its own.
In this way you cauterize in the ancient hemipelvis.
When you are treating a haemorrhage, when you have done what we said in the preceding chapter concerning the treatment of diseases, and when the cure has not been effected: then you must extract the cause of the disease, which is not enough for it which we said at the first treatment with medicine, or with fire; then you must cauterise the vessel with a knife until it has bled after the sign has appeared on the place of pain with a line whose length is half of a digit, or like that. And then put your hand away from it once and tighten the ligature until you have cut through the artery, and keep it until you reach the bone.
It is necessary indeed that you should cauterise the continuation of the mandible, which moves during mastication, so that it does not become hardened at the side, or the nerve which moves itself, from which the spasm arises.
And take care of the safeguard, and of the danger of the flow of blood from the artery which has been cut off For in its cutting there is danger, especially for him who is ignorant of this and is not studious or experienced: and he sends away the operation at the first.
And I come with the reminder of the method of treatment of the accident of the flow of blood which is due to the artery, according to my custom, and in this place of my book.
If you have extracted the cause of the disease, which is not enough for this Cauterium, and if you have extracted the body of the patient who tolerates Cauterium in the middle of the head, as we have said, then you must bind up the wound, until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer Cauterium, which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with Cauterium having two knives. The cauterization is better here than elsewhere and brings about a greater effect.
The manner of cauterization in the pain of the ears is as follows...
When it happens in the ear a pain from cold, and it is cured with salves, and the rest of the cure as we said before, and the pain does not go away, then one must cauterize: and that is what is called the Punctum, which has this shape.
Then one must make the Punctum with fire around the whole ear, as it is rolled about: or around both, if the pain is in both. And extend the Cauterization from the root of the ear outwards, after you have marked the place with soot: and let the quantity of Cauterization be ten points in each ear, and like that.
Then care for the place until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The manner of cauterization in torture is as follows...
Chapter VII
Torture that is cured by cauterization is not except for those which happen from phlegmas, as we said in the discussions of diseases.</start_of_turn>
And you must cauterize the species which happen from dehydration and spasm of the nerve.</start_of_turn
When you have cured this species of torture with urine and head-purgers, and hiccups, and these do not bring about your cure, then you must cauterize the patient three times with the Cauterium: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little lower from the temporal bone, and the third at the junction of the two lips.</start_of_turn>
And place your cautery from the opposite side of the lower part. For the cautery must not be applied to the sound part of the body.
The cautery should be applied in a direct line from the outer angle of the upper ear to the back of the head, and also in the temple, its length being equal to the length of the thumb And place your hand with the cautery until the middle part of the skin has been consumed by the flame
This is the shape of the cautery, which is like a knife, and its form is not delicate like a needle: and it must be held so that the blade is not too thick
Then take care of the place which has been cauterized: until it is healed.
Thus the cautery is used in ancient apoplexy
When the ancient apoplexy has occurred, and when you have treated it as we have said, and if the medicine does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over every angle of his head, and with one in the middle of the head, as we have said, and with one in the back of the head, as above: and the manner of cautery should be as above described.</start_of_turn>
And cauterize with the cautery over the stomach bone: and this is the last thing to do.</start_of_turn
Then care for the patient, as above described.</start_of_turn
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the first instance of a severe wound of the great thigh, poppy seeds be placed in wine and the mixture be administered as a medicine for the head.
Then the whole head of the patient should be bandaged, and upon the head a plaster should be placed as described in the treatise on plasters: and let some of the plaster remain.
This is the manner of the Cauterium: and do this according to the order that I have mentioned elsewhere.
If therefore it is healed by this, it is good. If not: then make three incisions at the back of his head, which extend from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and let the width of every incision be the thickness of a finger
Then take care of the Cauterium, as has been said before
If however you wish to add something, and the patient is able to tolerate it: then make a Cauterium in the middle. If you wish to add something further: then cauterize the two horns.
Then take care of it until it is healed: and let the Cauterium be repeated according to its form, as has been mentioned before.
In the case of palsy and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary to proceed with the treatment of the head with wine and as has been mentioned before
Then bandage the head of the patient: then cauterize the middle of the head, and the cauterize over every horn, and cauterize over the back of the head, and three times over the vertebrae of the neck
If, however, the patient is unable to bear the pain of the body in its entirety, and the infirmity is tolerant, and the disease is strong: then cauterize four times over the vertebrae of the back, and the last with the fourth cauterization, until it burns through most of its substance, and raise your hand. Then care for it until it heals: and thus cauterize according to Oliveire.
Thus cauterize in epilepsy.
An epileptic patient should not be cauterized, except for one whose epilepsy is from phlegm.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary therefore that you temper the brain of him in the first place with hydrargyrum, and with the other treatments which we mentioned in the preceding discourse: when the patient is great, or is tolerant of the medicines.</start_of_turn
If, however, he is a child, who does not tolerate the medicines, then is administered gargling and nourishing bites of food which temper the brain, for many days before the benefit of the food.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of his head, afterwards cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head, as we said before in the manner: and with another cautery on the nape of his neck, and on every horn of his head put a cautery.</start_of_turn And if the patient be strong, and be tolerant: then cauterize it with the cauteries which I said in having palsy, and mollification of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back: and let the cautery be according to Oliveire.</start_of_turn
If he be a child, then put the cautery under the skin, according to this manner.</start_of_turn
On the manner of cauterizing in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cautery, as we have said in paralysis
When the cause of melancholy is excessive wetness causing paralysis, and the body is soft and wet, then take from it what will temper the brain; as has been said before in dissection. Then take hold of the head of the patient, and make a circle from the intestines outwards with thread.
Then place it in the middle of the head; and the patient sitting upright is held fast by all sides.
Then apply linimentum. And it is better from old butter or oil And heat it over a tempered fire, as the finger can tolerate when it enters it Then evacuate it in the middle of the head in a circle, and hold it until it is cold to the touch
Do this to the patient every week once, with the rest of his treatment being good, until he is healed
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small punctures, more than by keeping your hand on the cautery: for it gives off an odor
For this kind of cautery hydrates the brain with its quality.
Then put over it a soaked cushion of butter, or fat from a hen
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the water in the eye is declared finished by the signs which I mentioned in the previous discourse, then you should begin to give the patient water, until such time as it makes an alteration in his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath, for a few days at a time.
Then command him to raise his head, and cauterize in the middle of his head. Then cauterize on both sides of the two temples with two cautery instruments, if there is a falling down of water in both eyes simultaneously: or from one side only, if there is a falling down of water in one eye only: and cut through with the cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let there be cautery marks in them of a length equal to the width of the temples: and burn from the flow of blood.
And if anything escapes from this, then immediately cut it out with whatever medicine is possible: and I shall come with my wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting out of them, and care for the flow of blood.
And when you have cauterized in the hollow of the cheek, under two bones, with two final cautery instruments.
In this way cauterize in the ancient tear ducts.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, sticky: and are on the veins and arteries which are in the exterior of the head, it is verified that this is from the superfluities of cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same instrument which I mentioned in the beginning of the falling down of water, the cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cautery instruments on both sides of the two temples, and with two cautery instruments in the hollow of the cheek under two bones. If digestion fails, then cauterize it everywhere cautiously around the eye, above the brow’s extremity with a small cautery.
If digestion fails, then cauterize it everywhere cautiously around the eye, above the brow’s extremity with a small cautery.
When you are treating this, when that which we mentioned in digestion does not confer benefit: then prepare it, and give in the bath of the sickly man three nights: then take its head and cauterize it with a middle cautery, with olive oil. Then cauterize it with two cauteries, each with two flames, above two eyebrows under the hair slightly
And guard the artery, lest you pierce it.
This is the form of cauterization for the eyebrows.
How to cauterize for the softening of the Palpebrae.
When the Palpebra of the eye is softened by the heat of the sun, or moisture: then cauterize the Palpebra with a single cautery, like a lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in every part: and stretch it out for two times: and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not touch your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity which is to be cauterized of the third of the Palpebrae
How to cauterize the Palpebrum with pins when the eyes are pierced with needles.
There are two methods for cauterization: either with fire or with burning medicine.
When cauterizing with fire, the patient should first remove any hair that is moving over the area. It should be prolonged until it becomes equal If, however, the eyes have been pierced at their root: then bind the eyes shut with silk so that they do not move, until they have healed
When they have healed and are equal in length, then place the patient's head on your lap: then mark over the Palpebrum of the eyes with cautery, using the figure of a myrtle leaf. The mark should begin near the hair
Then put a soaked sponge in albumin or on the hair of the eye.
And then burn with the cautery, which is of this shape.
Then cauterize over the figure which you have made gradually in many veins, until the surface of the skin, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, is burned through.
The sign that the work is finished is when if you press the Palpebrum of the eye it contracts and the hair is raised at the puncture of the eye
Then remove your hand and leave it for three days.
Then put over it a sponge with butter, until the eschar has disappeared Then care for it with unguent until it has healed.
If any hair remains after an hour, and the eyelids are softened: repeat the Cauterium over the affected area, as you did at first.
If the hair on the lower eyelid remains: then cauterize the eyelid itself until the hair returns to its natural place: and make sure that the hair does not pierce the eye
It is necessary to shave the patient beforehand, so that the hair may be prolonged and equalized.</start_of_turn> Make from a piece of parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf.</start_of_turn
Then take from the boiled soap a quantity the size of a single barleycorn or somewhat less: then mix these together with a little friction, and make it so that it does not become cold.</start_of_turn Then take from the sponge the thing you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf and put it over the eyelid of one eye, or both.</start_of_turn And put under the eye a piece of cotton soaked in urine: and keep the patient's head in your lap.</start_of_turn>
And put your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly.</start_of_turn And you should move it whenever the patient feels the medicine biting: because its bite is like fire.</start_of_turn
When you have finished doing this, then remove the medicine and move the sponge with your finger.</start_of_turn When the bite has subsided, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.</start_of_turn
Consider then, if you touch the eyeball with a needle, as it rises with the contraction of fire, or with an incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat over the medicine upon the place where medicine does not reach, and does not insult, until your operation is equal, and the eye is contracted.
Then put over it the bandage with butter, until the skin of the wound has been eradicated. Then care for it with ointment of diaphanicon, or something else, until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you keep the last care after the operation, that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye
Which if the eyeball softens after a day, and something from the hair gets into the eye, then repeat the medicine upon the place which softens from the eyeball itself, as you did at the beginning Then care for it until it is healed
This is the form of the myrtus leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and proportion Therefore take into consideration this: and do not obscure the rightness of this art, which is the study of this craft
With regard to cauterizing in the tear duct.
When you are treating the fistula, when even after that you have done what we said in the treatise on the causes of disease, and the cure does not take hold: then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method
Command the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold his head between your hands like this, so that it does not move, and does not shake with his head
Then put the clot into the abscess or on the mucus of the hair above his eye: then apply the Cauterium, which is shaped like this.
Then put the clot into the abscess or on the hair mucus above his eye: then apply the Cauterium, which is shaped like a sickle
Then put the clot into the abscess or on the hair mucus above his eye: then apply the Cauterium, which is shaped like a sickle. It is better to make it concave for your work.
Then squeeze out the fistula, if it is open, and draw out the pus from it, and dry up the same: and if it is not open, then open it up and draw out its pus.
Then put the Cauterium on the wound, which makes a cold flame.
And keep your hand close to the Cauterium from the eye to the nose, so that your hand does not move, or that it does not touch the patient: and put the Cauterium on the fat of the eye and burn it up
If you persist with the Cauterium at the beginning until it reaches the bone, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the Cauterium once or twice, if you do not digest it with that: and leave it for three days
Then put the clot with butter, and care for it with an ointment of drying, until it heals
If after forty days it has not healed: then put on its surface an acute corrosive medicine, until the bone is dissolved: and then remove it according to what is written in its chapter.
And there is another method of Cauterizing the fistula, which some of the first men said. Direct your hand to the location of the fistula, and find it: then place within the same opening a cushion of cotton wool, that is, a small cannula, whose form is like this. Direct your hand to the location of the fistula, and find it: then place within the same opening a cushion of cotton wool, that is, a small cannula, whose form is like this. Then pour into it an amount of liquid lead equal to a drachma, and keep your hand steady with good retention of the cannula, and do not move the patient in any way, so that it does not run, or cause the liquid lead to reach his eye.
And it is necessary that you place above the eye of the patient a cushion of lint soaked in alum or in water.
Lead will burn the location of the fistula, and will bring about a miraculous healing.
When the fistula is healed, with what we have said of cautery and treatment, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nose-opening, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what comes to be in its own place
In the manner of cauterizing in lip fissures.
Many times there occur in the lip fissures that are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you have cured these fissures, when you have said in the explanation of the ailments, and the cure does not take hold, then you must burn slightly with a small knife, according to this form
And let its depth be according to the sharpness of the knife
Then place the burning quickly in the fissures, until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures
Then care for yourself with the poultice until you are healed.
Until then care for yourself with the poultice until you are healed.
When swelling occurs in the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus forms, and it breaks down: afterwards it subsides, pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then care for the fistula itself, and do not interfere with its healing, then it is necessary to cauterize with the needle according to the quantity that is taken in the fistula.</start_of_turn> Then introduce the burning substance into the fistula cavity, and hold your hand, until the burning iron reaches the depth of it, and its end: do this once, or twice at most.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself afterwards, as we have said concerning the care until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If therefore the swelling is removed, and healing takes place, it is good.</start_of_turn And if not, then it is necessary to remove the damaged tissue, and remove the corrupt bone according to what comes to light in the head.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXI.</start_of_turn
When the gingiva is softened by moisture, and the teeth are moved, and care is taken with physicians, and it is not necessary: then place the patient's head in your lap.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize the area, whose form will arise afterwards, in this way as to place the canula over the tooth: and introduce the burning iron quickly into it: and hold your hand lightly, until the patient feels the heat of the fire to have reached the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Raise your hand and then repeat the Cauterium as often as you wish.
Repeat the Cauterium as often as you wish and then let the patient drink some salt water. Keep it in for one hour and then remove it.
The tooth is now firm and the gums are softened, and the moisture of the corruption dries up
In toothache, cauterize cautiously and repeatedly.</start_of_turn>
When the toothache is caused by cold, or if there is cold or heat and the treatment does not help with the doctors: then Cauterium is used in two ways: either Cauterium with butter or Cauterium with fire.</start_of_turn
Cauterium with butter is like this: take soft butter and boil it in a crucible or pan.</start_of_turn Then take the cautery and apply it to the end of the tooth.</start_of_turn Then dip it in the butter that is boiling and put it on the painful tooth quickly and keep it there until it is cold: then repeat it often until the fire has reached the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Or if you wish, soak wool or cotton in cold butter and put it on the painful tooth: and put on the burning iron until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Cauterization with fire is like this: aim for the air bubble or the iron itself.</start_of_turn And be careful that there is something of size in its body, so that the fire does not reach the patient's bone.</start_of_turn>
Then take the Cauterium, whose form will appear: and place it over the tooth: and hold your hand until the Cauterium cools.
Do it quickly, for pain will move away, or on that same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary to press down upon the impression of the Cauterium, so that it may fill the hollow of the bone with fat, and hold it for one hour: then spit it out.
This is the form of the Cauterium
Use the Cauterium with whichever extremity you like, as much as is possible: and this is the form of the Cannula.
As for cauterizing in the Strophulis...
When the ulcers are full of phlegm, and by cold humors, and do not obey treatment with medicines, and you wish to expedite their digestion: then take the Cauterium in its concave form, whose shape is like this
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may escape from the Cauterium through the other extremity: place it alight over the abscess once, and twice if you do not digest it, until it reaches the depth of the abscess
If the abscess is small: then place the Cauterium according to the quantity of the abscess.
Then remove it after three days, and place over it a coat of ointment made with butter, until the burning caused by the fire is removed
Then care for it with unguents for the teeth, until the shape of the cannula is restored
As for cauterizing in the raised part of the voice, and constriction of the breath.
When the head of the lung becomes humidified over the windpipe, especially when it is accompanied by the coldness of the complexion, then it is necessary that the sick man be removed immediately with the physicians' solutions.
And then cauterize it in the navel at the root of the gullet in a depressed place: and burn, lest you should bring it close to the gullet with the Cautery, nor on the skin, except for something of that sort.</start_of_turn>
And then cauterize it with another Cautery at the junction of the neck at the end of its last rib: and let the Cautery be held closed according to the mode which preceded.</start_of_turn>
And then care for it with that which preceded, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
In the manner of cauterizing in the diseases of the Lung and the Cough.</start_of_turn
When the cough and the disease of the Lung are from cold humilities, and the sick man has neither fever nor phthisis, nor an old cough: then cauterize it with two Cauteries above the larynx in depressed places, in the angles, on the cartilage.</start_of_turn And another Cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples: and let the Cautery be held closed according to the form which preceded.</start_of_turn
And if you wish to make a cauterization by pricking with the Cautery, which is called the Punctum, whose form preceded in the pricking of the ear: and let there be holes from thirty holes up to almost as many.</start_of_turn
And then care for it with that which preceded, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And now let us consider the cauterium which has three branches: according to this form. When you make use of this cauterium with three branches, the cauterization will be complete with it, because it makes three cauterizations at once.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the adductor muscle is dislocated due to moisture, and does not return to its place in an hour after dislocation, until it has become accustomed to its return, then it should be relocated by a slight movement which, as we have testified, often happens in this way. Therefore, in such a case, it is necessary to reduce the dislocation immediately. Then the patient is placed on his back, or on the healthy side Then lift the skin which is inside the titillum towards the upper part with your left hand: and if the dislocation has gone inwards
Then take the cauterium which has two branches Whose form is like this
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and you will see the figure of the cauterization with four cauterizations
And when the cauterization is made with the cauterium which has three branches, because of this the figure of the cauterization will be of six cauterizations: and there are three branches according to the subtlety of the attempt
This is the form of the cauterium which has three branches
And when one adds on this way another one, so that there are eight cauterizations in total
Then place upon the cauterium pigs' feet crushed with salt. Then make the patient steady and tranquil, so that the limb does not move during the process, until it is comfortable
And if displacement has gone up, which is rare, then cauterize the upper part with a cautery nail, or with several punctures.
For the joint will become firm, and the moisture will be driven out: and the patient will be healed.
Regarding the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and much moisture are found in the stomach, do not extract it from its complex until it has been expelled from it. And multiply these treatments, and do not be remiss: then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back, extend his limbs, and place his hands on his chest Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the breastbone of the size of a single digit with a nail cautery, and two cauteries below from the two sides of the single cautery, until a triangular figure of the cauteries is seen And lengthen between each other so that they do not join, when pus is made
And the depth of the cautery is the size of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin
And let the figure of the cauteries be like this without addition: and if you wish to cauterize the large cautery in the middle of the stomach like this, let the cautery be as this single cautery is like a circle like this
And cauterize the stomach by puncturing it where it returns from this cautery: and it is that the signs on the stomach are like the quantity of this, as much as with the incisions: then cauterize with the cautery of the puncture. Then care for it with the care that preceded until it is healed.
How to cauterize the Epar frigidum.
When it happens that on the Epar there is pain from coldness and moisture, or from large swelling, until it escapes naturally from its natural configuration without superfluous discharge, and the patient is cured, as we have said, and does not suffer from it: then it is necessary that the patient be placed over the navel, and that three cauteries be made according to this figure and in this quantity over the lower Epar from the hypocondria, where the elbow of a man rests: and let there be space between every cauterium according to the width of a finger. And let the cauteries be according to the length of the body's rectum. And do not press your hand too much with the cautery.
And let the quantity of the cautery be that which is absorbed from the thickness of the skin, the middle quantity not being added: and let the patient stand on his feet
If he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has extended his limbs and raised his arms
This is the form of the cautery
And indeed it is possible to cauterize these cauteries with a knife when there is subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not go too far with the cautery, and that you do not burn the entire skin, because the body is burned there, and it reaches the intestines: for the skin there is thin, as you know well
How to cauterize the apostemata of the Epatis.
When the exiture occurs, and you wish to write, if that is the after-effect in the liver flesh, or in its covering: if it is in the liver flesh, it brings about mild pain without intensity: and if it is in the liver covering, with acute pain it is to be expected. Therefore I go, because the physicians have become fatigued with its care.
Therefore I go, because the physicians have become fatigued with its care. Then the figure of the after-effect is placed with the encasement: then you apply the cautery which absorbs the heat. This is its form. And cauterize thus with one cautery, until the whole skin is consumed, and until it reaches the fat, until the whole evacuation is complete: then care for the evacuation itself until it is healed
And it is not fitting that such cauteries should be used except by those who have studied the art of medicine for a long time: and for those whose hands have worked with these things many times: then indeed will you hear of such an operation.
But I would rather dismiss it, for with me it is better
Of cauterizing in the chest.
The ancients say that cautery with the roots of aristolochia should be used for a cold pleurisis in this way. And it is, that you take from the dried roots of aristolochia some long pieces, one of which is taken from that, and let it be as thick as the breadth of a finger Then immerse it in oil: and kindle it in the fire Then burn with one cautery where the continuation of the furcula meets the collar, and with two small cauteries under guidance slightly below the beard.
And also with two cauteries in that place which is between the fifth and sixth costal cartilage, declining slightly downwards towards the back: and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And three cauteries from the back: one where two spatulas are placed side by side, and two cauteries on the two lateral parts of the chest, the lower cautery being between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather that it should be clearly visible on the skin, smelling of it.
And some ancient people have said that there are some people who use a cautery like iron for a ray: they burn and then send it into that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches the spleen, and comes out whole: as we have said concerning the spleen of the liver
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear that either the patient will immediately die or that a fistula will occur in the place where there is no healing.
In this way the spleen should be cauterized at the head only.</start_of_turn>
When you treat the ailment of the spleen, when with this which we mentioned in the enumeration of ailments it does not bring about recovery, then the cautery must be used three times, all of which are right ways.</start_of_turn>
One of them is to make three cauteries or four in a line following the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, which precedes this figure.</start_of_turn
And let the quantity of every cauterium be as great as the length of a finger, or less.
And let the mode of the cauterium be as we said in the cauterization of the liver, equally
And do not press your hand with the cauterium: and let the patient lie supine over his back
And another manner of cauterization is: as when you have two rings of cauterium: as we said in the chapter on the dislocation of the humerus: and elevate the skin which is over the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient lies: and elevate your hand as much as the width of the body, so that the cauteria may fall according to the length of the body.
Then introduce two rings of ignited cauterium slowly, until when it has penetrated the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cauterium: there will remain four cauteria
And if you wish to cauterize with another cauterium which has three rings.
Then care for the cauterium after you have put it away to emit pus for many days: for this is more helpful than any other which has preceded it in the cure.
In the treatment of hydrosis
The cauterium does not fall in hydrosis, except when it is applied properly.
When you are treating hydrosis with the methods of treatment which we mentioned in the previous section, and the cure does not take hold, then you must cauterize four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the spleen, and two behind the ribs, and one in the direct vicinity of the chest, and one in the direct vicinity of the stomach: and let the quantity of depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin
Then discharge the opened cautery, that it may emit pus over a long time.
Do not remove the dressing from the burn after the cautery has been applied: for two intentions must be joined together for healing to occur. And it will quickly heal with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery which is to be used for cautery of the belly is like nails: as it has been said before. And that which is to be used for cautery of the back is like olives as it has been said before
Concerning the cautery of the feet and legs.
When swelling occurs in the Hydropleg (a swelling of the limbs), and they are filled with citrine urine: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the knot which is between the cubicular and lunar bones. And raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand again: and do not move it at all
The urine is citrine, and the cautery must be used in this shape.
Then make two cauteries on each leg at every ankle, and make the cautery with the tip of the knife: and make the cautery along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other above it halfway up the leg: and on every heel make two cauteries: and discharge the opened cautery without any dressing for a long time: so that some water may remain from it: then care for it as before
Concerning the cautery in the solution of the belly
Chapter 5.
When the belly is cured of the cold and moisture, until the retention and digestion of the urine, which are in the stomach and intestines: and that is cured with the methods of treatment, and not by nature: and the physician should endure the suffering of the patient who can tolerate the excessive virtue, then cauterize it with a great cautery above the stomach, as it was previously cauterized with the cautery of the circle, and with four cauteries around the navel, and with a cautery of the umbilical cord, and a cautery above the bladder above the large intestines, or with two cauteries.
And if the physician moistens the excessive virtue, and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it with a cautery above the loin, and a cautery above all the intestines: and perhaps add two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one.
For such a cure is useful whose application does not err
Method of cauterization for hemorrhoids.
Chapter 6
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the rectum, either one or several, which are corrupted by thick, cold, or moist humors, and are cured by this, which we have mentioned in the treatise, and not by treatment: then cauterize with three cauteries above the lower part of the spine under the ribcage in a triangular shape, and a cautery under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is hardened, and that his food does not digest, and that his face is pale from the urine, then cauterize him with a great cautery above the stomach, as we have said before: and a cautery above the spleen and another above the liver, with a cautery of the umbilical cord: and leave the cautery open for some time: then care for him until he is healed
How to cauterize the after-pulse following an incision.
When you cut through the after-pulse, then ignite the cautery that absorbs heat from the rays. Then introduce the burning cautery into the cut after-pulse: and keep your last hand away until the cautery has reached the orifice of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice
If there are many after-pulses, then cauterize each one according to what has been said before Then care for the wound, with what is poured out of the vessel, until it has healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, this is the best way to stop the bleeding.
On how to cauterize a fistula in the groin.
When you cauterize a fistula in the groin, you must be very careful not to burn the surrounding skin.
When the patient does not obey the section and the work that we have narrated in its place, and turns away from it, it is possible that it will heal with the cautery
When this happens with a fistula, and it becomes dry, pus flows from it, and the wound becomes moist. Therefore it is necessary to explore it with a fine needle Then know the depth of its cavity with the needle
Then ignite the cautery, which is similar to rays Then introduce the burning cautery into the fistula and the amount in which the thread entered the fistula
Repeat the cautery over the wound until all the corrupted bodies are consumed, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity required.
Beware of excessive bleeding, if there is any: or of great veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder or the intestines, take care to protect these parts from them all
Do not make the incision except when the fistula is in fatty tissue: and remember that it does not penetrate.
Then care for the place until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the place is sealed, and material is removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then you know that it is completely healed.</start_of_turn>
And if material is not removed from it, then you know that it penetrates, or that there is a broken bone beneath the surface, or as if this had happened in this place: from which remembrance will come to its own place.</start_of_turn>
In this way the cautery is performed on the kidneys.</start_of_turn>
When it happens in the kidneys that there is pain from cold or from great swelling, and it is diminished by this because of the infirmity of the patient, then it is necessary to cauterize over the outer membrane of the kidneys, with cautery over the whole kidney along with the renal vein, remembering the latter.</start_of_turn
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the same place.</start_of_turn Because three lines will come out.</start_of_turn Therefore there will be four lines remaining.</start_of_turn
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When weakness occurs in the bladder due to inflammation from gravel and moisture, until it retains no urine, then cauterize the lower part of the bladder above the bladder, where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right side of the bladder and also from the left side of it: and let the length of that cauterization be as much as the thumb. And cauterize with a lower dorsi cautery or two, if necessary: and let it be as before the cauteries were applied.
On the method of cauterizing the matrix.
When cold and moisture exist in the matrix, and it is hindered by this from conception, and corrupts its menstrual blood, and delays its discharge, and there is pain at its place, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we mentioned concerning the cauterization of the bladder, and cauterize over the lower abdomen, or with two cauteries: and let the cauterization be as before
On the method of cauterizing the hernia in dislocation
When moisture of the mucous membrane flows down to the heel of the hernia, and becomes the cause of its displacement from its place: and the sign of this is that the thigh is prolonged over the other thigh, when they are compared to each other: and the place of dislocation is found in that space.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient over the heel of the hernia with a cautery of a similar size in a circle: after which it must be sutured around the circumference of the heel, as if it were being rolled up: and that the heel itself should fall into the middle of the circle
If this cautery is not present, then cauterize with three cauteries, with a large olive cautery: and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of thickness of the whole skin.
Then care for it until it is healed.
In the manner of cauterizing for sciatica.</start_of_turn>
When it happens that there is pain in the heel of the ankle, and the cause of it is cold and moisture: and the patient is cured with this, as we said in the preceding chapter, and the cure does not take place, and the pain persists: then it is necessary to remove the cause of the pain from the gross humors with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and the like.</start_of_turn Then cauterize it.</start_of_turn
And the mode of cauterization in these is according to two ways: either with cautery with burnings, or with cautery with fire.</start_of_turn
Cautery with fire is according to many ways.</start_of_turn
One of them is that you cauterize over the heel of the ankle with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape.</start_of_turn And make the depth good, or bad.</start_of_turn And let the space which is between every cautery be of the quantity of the breadth of a finger: and let the cautery be an olive cautery.</start_of_turn
When however the cautery is in the middle over the heel of the ankle.</start_of_turn Why are there four carinae?
If one cauterizes with a circle whose form precedes the dislocation of the anchae in the cauterization, one: in order that the circle contain the whole anchae.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin
This is the way to cauterize in Sciatica, when the pain is adherent to the anchae itself, and does not extend up to the knee and thigh
If, however, it extends up to the knee and thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries above the knee, above the place where the ailment is there, where the pain is, and your cauterium above the heel four fingers to the outer side: and let the cauterium be in the shape of a knife
And let the depth of the cauterization be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the patient says that the pain extends up to near the toes, then cauterize there where the pain is with a point cautery, or with three, or four, or as many as are necessary for that
If he says that the pain is under the knee and above the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife cautery
And burn in all your cauterizations, that you do not reach the nerve or great artery, and draw over that above the patient the bad document of the disease, or a contraction.
And I indeed saw one and another, who having cauterized above the heel, and having finished the cauterization, the thigh was swollen, until the tumor followed the foot, and was burst through, and corrupted the whole foot: then there occurred resolution of the belly, and death after that
If pain exists in two parts simultaneously, cauterize both according to this method.
Wise men have said concerning cauterization of the anus, that this is the method. Make like a mark from the thumb to the wrist, and let it be at the orifice according to the thickness of the kernel of the thumb, or less: and there let be a third of itself inside.</start_of_turn>
And let the space which is between every mark be as much as the quantity of the thumb-knot: and let the marks be opened from two parts: and let the height of them be like a knot, or two knots: and make a handle of iron well-fitted to the marks.</start_of_turn>
Then ignite it in the fire, until it turns red, and throw sparks: then put it over the diseased part of the anus resting on the sound side.</start_of_turn Cauterize thus three rounds of cauterization in oil at once.</start_of_turn
Then remove it three days later.</start_of_turn> Then apply butter: and remove the wound opened days later.</start_of_turn> Then care for it with ointment, until it heals.</start_of_turn
Albucasis says, concerning this sort of cauterization, that we are little in use of it, because of its fearful appearance: and because of this, few people expect it.</start_of_turn
But truly, from the good cauterizations it has, he who suffers from it finds its place.</start_of_turn
But indeed, when used with physicians who are experienced in cauterization, as you make two holes having a handle in which the belly-button descends from the air, or by iron, of the length of the wall: of which in height there are two knots, or almost like these.</start_of_turn
And there be space between each two quantities of the length of a finger, and there be an opening below and above: and that which contain themselves to the inside, according to this shape.
Then lay upon the heel the thumb, the sickly one resting upon the sound side And compress your hand over the heel very much. Then pour between two circles of warm water, which be heated with little fire, and keep it for the quantity of an hour of time: and the sickly one will bear the biting of its own teeth, and it will endure the touch, for it finds the biting like fire until the biting cease
Then lift up your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from all around with sweet water: and then let it go for three days.
And put upon it butter, until the black of the wound be removed: and let it go away for a few days, and it will come out with pus. This is the end of the treatment.
Then care for it with unguents, until it be healed
If the pain should extend up to the knee, or the thigh: make for it a posture in which there is water contained, as you did in the ankle.
This is the way of warm water: and I have written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. Take alkali, and unburnt lime of both together in an equal part: there be two of each, and put them into a new vessel, of which the lower part be perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that is to be put in: and put under the bottom of the vessel another vessel filled with water: and pour over the alkali and the lime from sweet water, which submerges both through a finger: and then compress your hand well with your hand: and let go of the vessel, until the acute water descend from the lower part of the treated vessel.
Then add the whole water, and throw the upper heel over the lower heel: and the ankle until it recovers.
The water itself is often strong and acute in nature, which is administered in many medical procedures, and in the cauterization of the remaining limbs. Because it performs the work of fire itself.
And among the physicians, those who cauterize widely, such as surgeons, and masons, and carpologists, and chalk with soap, know how to mix both together.
And Galen himself reports that an ancient physician once cured a pain in the knee and a sciatica: and he praised his skill greatly And he said that no other cure was necessary, and that he himself was delivered from the bath, already healed, because he himself perhaps got into the hot bath and came out healed
It is, as the old physician said: and if it is not found green, take it dry, soak: and rub it often with some fat, and put it on the ankle, where the pain is, or the knee, or the hip: and bind it, and leave it for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels the pain diminishing Then immerse the limb in the bath.
When the limb becomes soft, immerse it in the cushion For the pain departs, and the limb is healed
And know that no other cauterization should be used along with these physicians, except after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides himself says that the dung of goats, when cauterized with a sciatica, brings relief: and it does cauterize in this manner Let a lancet be taken, and oil of olive be drunk, and be placed upon the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and the heel, and is nearer to the heel.
Then take dry camel's dung and burn it, until it turns to charcoal.
Then place it upon the lancet and remove it, until it is extinguished. Do it again. Do not cease doing this until sensation returns by means of the touch until the pain has ceased
And this method of cauterization is called cauterization of the Vaccinum.
On the cauterization of the dorsal pain.</start_of_turn>
When there is pain in the back from many causes, or from a wound, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar things, from the infusion of cold and moist material: and the cauterization does not suffice, except for this single kind, which is done from the infusion of cold and moist material.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the sick person with foul pills, and things like these, to make three lines on the Back where there is pain, according to the width of the palm of the hand, after having signed with the cautery in every line five burns, or more according to the quantity which comes from the patient's tolerance or the weakness of the patient: and make the cauterization with the cautery-needle.</start_of_turn
And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with the middle cautery, according to this form.</start_of_turn
On how to cauterize in the groin of Gibbositatis.
The groin of Gibbositatis suffers much from small children.
The sign of its inception in children is: there is an increase in stricture when they cough, and movement: and you will find it in the last vertebra of the spine and its nodes, which will begin to protrude over the rest of the vertebrae
When you have done this, and you wish to make this, then cauterize it with a circle in the shape of this figure
And take hold of the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebra with cautery, make two lines or three: and let the points be close to each other on one side
Then take care of the place, until it is healed as we have said
And be careful, do not apply the cautery to the groin, which is in a spasm of nerves.
How to cauterize in Podagra, and in joined pains
When the pains of the joints are from cold humilities, which flow to any limb of the body, then when these pains arise in the feet, it is customary among doctors to call it Podagra
When it has been cured by cold causes of Podagra with methods of treatment, and the pains are not removed, then cautery will remove them
And it is necessary to cauterize after evacuation around the joint of the feet with many cautery instruments: and let the cautery be of Olive oil
If it is not clear what part of the body is being described, then make a mark with a cautery on the point which is most prominent. If pain goes up to the knee, or if there are several wounds, and it frequently happens like this, then burn over the whole knee three times with the cautery, or four times from every side, as Claudius does with this same cautery.</start_of_turn>
If it is necessary to do this several times, then burn over it.</start_of_turn> Do not immerse your hand in the cautery, but keep the thickness of the skin at a distance.</start_of_turn
If pain goes up to the knee and the back: then do what we said about the cautery in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
If the pain is only in the hands, then mark around the nails like two lines that meet.</start_of_turn
If there remains pain in the fingers, then mark the knots of the fingers and the palm of the hand.</start_of_turn
If pain ascends after a day to the cubits or the arms, then burn both from every side.</start_of_turn
Do not neglect treatment from a good regime or from the advice of physicians.</start_of_turn> For if there is a good regimen and the phlegm is evacuated, it will be healed with the help of God by this cautery.</start_of_turn
(The text continues with instructions on how to use the cautery for treating ruptures.)</start_of_turn>
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine or the bladder descends to the testicle, then it is necessary for the physician to order the patient to abstain from eating on that day. And in order to prevent the evacuation of faeces from the belly.
Then let him sit between your hands over his back: and order him to hold his breath until it goes out, or until the bladder or the intestine appears.
Then reduce it with your fingers, and sign over the rupture upon the pubic bone, with the sign of which the extremity is similar to the middle of the circle of the body.
Then burn it with a cautery, which is of this shape, until it becomes white, and then remove the scabs. Then reduce the intestine or the bladder to its natural position. Then put your hand on the place, so that the intestine does not go out: and I opened between the crura of the patient, and put under it some powder, and another over his crura and another over his belly which holds his hands
Then put the cautery on that sign, with your hand standing straight up. And hold it until you reach the bone: or do it again with more oil, if you have not achieved success with it until the bone
And be prudent in observing the discharge of the intestine during the process of cautery, that you do not burn it, and that it comes out over the patient or the wound, or maliciousness large.
And know that when you do not achieve success with the cautery of the bone, your operation is in vain.
The cauterium for infants must be subtle, according to their measure.
Then care with the other unguents until healed.
And let the sickly person rest upon his back for forty days, until the wound is healed
It is necessary that you provide nourishment during the period of treatment, which will soften his belly: so that the intestine does not become constipated at the end and does not evacuate
Then when he wishes to rise after forty days, then make the ligament loose that was made firm, and keep it firm for another forty days.
And let him abstain from work, and restore his food and drink, and his bodily functions
For when you follow this regimen, the healing will be perfect.
And I say that the treatment of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When however ruptures happen in the rest of the belly, and are beginning to appear, and you do not wish to add them, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let this be such as to cause it to bleed like a third of its size Then care for it as we have said: and do not add to it
And some people say: cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this form
After it has been signed with a scar, and a line is drawn which is along the width at the upper side of the rupture, and a line which is lower. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery claw
But the cauterium first is easier and better.
In cases of pain caused by either an opening or a blow, the cauterium should be applied first.
Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn>
When in some limb there is pain either from a wound or from a blow, and the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment by physicians: then it is necessary to cauterize with the Puncti cauterium.</start_of_turn>
And the cauterium of every limb should be performed according to the size of the limb, and its degree of pain, and its weakness, and its virtue, and the position of the torsion and the pain itself.</start_of_turn
If therefore the limb is healed by the first cauterization, it is well.</start_of_turn If not: then repeat the cauterization over it again.</start_of_turn
For the custom of these pains is that they change from one limb to another.</start_of_turn Therefore one must follow them with the cauterization until the limb is healed.</start_of_turn
Of the manner of cauterizing in Lepra.</start_of_turn
Leprosy however requires the greatest degree of cauterization.</start_of_turn And especially the species of leprosy which is caused by the putrefaction of phlegmas and melancholy: in such a case the cauterization must be considered carefully.</start_of_turn
If therefore the leprosy is obstinate and does not yield to treatment as we have said above, and does not subside: and times over the limb becomes so corrupted that it encompasses the entire complexion of the body: then cauterize it five times over the head: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two over the two horns, and one behind the nape of the neck.</start_of_turn
And lastly, thou shalt hold thy hand with the cautery close, until it shall leave an imprint in the bone, and the fragments shall be broken off from it: that thereby the emission of thick vapors from it may be alleviated, and thou shalt cauterize with the cautery also over the spleen itself, as it hath been said before.
If, however, the leprosy is scattered over the patient, and appears manifestly: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cautery instruments, which we have mentioned at the head, and with the cautery over the tip of the nose, and with two cautery instruments over the two upper jaw-bones, and with two over the two lower jaw-bones, and with six over the vertebrae of the neck, and one large one over the bones of the buttocks and one above the loins: and two over the ankles: namely, one over every ankle, and two over the knees: one over every knee, and two over the biceps, and two over the triceps of the chest. And cauterize the whole of every joint, from the joints of the fingers and toes, and the heel of the feet. And cauterize over the whole calcaneum of the feet.
And cauterize also from the nerves which are over the back of the heel, that thou mayest not burn them.
And when thou dost cauterize with the cautery over the hip-bone, and over the ribs, and over the spleen.
Know that the more thou dost add cautery, the more is the pain, and the more dangerous it is
Know that a patient doth not find pain in the cautery, as they do in health: because the body is already stunned by the disease
It is necessary that there should be large and small cauteries according to the parts and the joints: as it hath been said of the species of instruments.
Then care for the cauterium with herbs and honey, and for the rest of the treatment, until healed.
Regarding the cautery in the wound
When some part of the limb is swollen and the healing is done with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it does not heal, then cauterize the swollen part with cautery, according to the size of the limb or its hardness
And let your cautery not penetrate too deeply into the skin of the limb. Then care for the cauterium with herbs and honey, and for the rest of the treatment, until healed.
And when it is cauterized at some swelling of the hand or foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and the swelling will be moved away
But it does not prevent that it should be known about the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move the body
Concerning the cautery of Albaras
When the Albaras is old and does not yield to any medical treatment: then cauterize above the deep cautery itself, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes
Then care for it with herbs and honey, with lentils with rose oil, with arnica leaves, with columb's blood, and with hyrundine blood: from each of these things take one part: mix them all together, and smear them over the dressing, and adhere to the place, until healed
On how to cauterize in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning, and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a cautery circle around its circumference, as it returns to its original shape.
Wise men, however, say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle
I do not see that. For I fear that it will ulcerate: and I have seen that happen many times before
It is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we said: or with several cauteries.
On how to cauterize in Adubelati.
When someone has Adubelati, and it is late in maturity, or because of excess fat making it swell, or because of old age, when it is decrepit due to little blood, or because of time, and you wish to speed up the maturity of the Adubelati: then cauterize around its circumference with many small cauteries, piercing through it Then let go of the wound For it will itself speed up its maturity
If, however, you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then make the cautery into a needle, which has this shape.
And place it in the middle of the Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be from that which follows the infirmus, so as to alleviate the flow of pus
Then care for it until it heals
On how to cauterize in a corroding sore
Chapter 48.
If a limb is corrupted, it is not without cause, and it corrupts itself: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If fire is applied to a part which can tolerate it, then the fire consumes many ulcers, small and great, according to what is suitable for the place where the corruption is located
Then burn it from all sides until the whole corruption is eradicated, and let nothing remain of it inside or outside
Then keep it away for three days, and put upon the burnt place sulfur in ointment, until all the phlegmas are eradicated and the whole corruption is gone.
Then care for it with nourishing ointments of flesh.
If there is no new corruption after three days, when the flesh is naturally renewed, then this is good.
And if not: then burn again the part which remains of the corrupted places
The corruption is treated sometimes with acute medicine. It sometimes arises from the place of the burn.
However, burn with fire is quicker in destroying: and I have already said that the burn with medicine is in dispersion: take therefore fire there when it is needed for that purpose.
About the burning of boils and carbuncles.
Chapter 50.
This disease often occurs in the lower parts of the legs: it is a great and spreading disease which annoys the leg
And the burn is done in two ways: with fire, and with hot water
As much as with fire, when cauterizing with an iron, let it be like a pennaceous wing of a bird: which is made of iron according to the quantity which it contains from all sides: and let it be slight at the edges.
Then lay the burning iron upon the limb. Then move the hand with the cautery around the limb until the cautery reaches the depth of the limb: and leave it for three days, until pus begins to emit Then cover it with wool and salt, and leave the dressing on it overnight. The inflammation will disappear from its roots.
Then care for the place where the wound has been made, until it has healed
If they are not concaved, and multiply appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then apply in it a little cautery with warm water: and it is that you take a needle of air, or iron, or a feather: and lay it on the limb, or on the ulcer.</start_of_turn> Then pour a little quantity of warm water into the needle: keep your hand still, and move the needle back and forth with your hand, so as to imprint the mark of the needle at the root of the limb, and find the warm water to reach the root of the limb: and expect the patient to be relaxed after an hour of the warm water treatment.</start_of_turn>
Then remove it, for the limb is healed with its roots.</start_of_turn>
So do with one after the other, until you have completed all that is in the body from the cautery.</start_of_turn>
Then care for them afterwards when they have been eradicated, as when that which generates flesh from moisture remains.
Once the [disease] has been eradicated, care must be taken of the remnants, for what remains after the moisture has been consumed generates flesh.
When fever occurs from cold in the nerve, or from the fourth [stage] of fever, or from anything else: then it is necessary to cauterise the four corners and the five spaces between the vertebrae, and between every vertebra cauterise, and in the chest cauterise, and on the stomach cauterise
The tremor will cease when olive oil is cauterised, and health will return to its normal state against the cold.
The method of cauterising for Albathir.
Chapter LVII
When pus is expelled from the body of Albathir, that is, from corrupt large matter
Therefore, in the first place, when it appears, it is necessary to cauterise over every head of the pus with a fine cautery with a twig of myrrh whose extremity is ignited with fire Or with a cautery like that of aristolochia longae root Or with a lentil-shaped cautery
And when they have been cauterised, at the beginning of the expulsion, in this manner: and they do not grow: and the superabundance is broken, making the matter thin, and it heals from the inside out
However, it is necessary to do this after the evacuation with a bloodletting.
The method of cauterising in the flow of blood from an artery to a wound.
Many times blood flows forth from an artery that has been incised near the elbow, which happens externally, or at the incision of the apostemate, or by cautery of the limb, and the like: and this makes it difficult to close it off.
When this happens to anyone, then act promptly with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and place your finger over it: and tighten it much, until blood is stopped below your finger, and nothing escapes from there.</start_of_turn>
Then put in the fire a small olive-oil cautery, and many in number: and blow over them, until they are ignited cool.</start_of_turn
Then take from these things one, or two, or three, according to the elbow and the place where the artery has been ruptured, and place the cautery over the very wound: and immediately remove your finger: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.</start_of_turn
And if it escapes when you remove your finger from the orifice of the artery, and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire.</start_of_turn>
Do not cease to do this until the blood is stopped.</start_of_turn
Beware, lest you burn the nerve that is there, and do not hurry over any other harmful matter.</start_of_turn>
And know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to close it off: especially when the artery is large, except with four fingers.</start_of_turn Or with the cautery, as we have said.</start_of_turn Whether during extraction or when it has not been extracted. When it is extracted, its extremities recoil and blood is separated. Or it is bound with a strong ligature. Or a remedy is placed over it, which has the property of separating blood, and it is bound with a constrictive bandage of proper size.
Whoever performs an incision with a ligature and a bandage, or with a burn or similar methods, does not cause him much pain, except occasionally
If, however, this should happen to anyone who has no physician present, neither medicine: then he should take hold of the tip of the index finger and place it over the orifice of the wound, as we have said, and constrict it tightly, until the blood is driven out from above the wound, and above the artery And the finger should not be moved, but should be held there with cold water or ice always, until the blood is congealed, and has become tough, and is separated.</start_of_turn>
And meanwhile consider whether it is necessary to cauterize, or to apply some medicine.</start_of_turn>
On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and similar things.</start_of_turn
We have said in the first chapter that every ailment in which it is convenient to use either cauterium or burning medicine, and the causes and occasions of these, and the instruments for these.</start_of_turn
And I will treat of these chapters from the vertex to the foot.</start_of_turn
I proceed in this chapter as before: to alleviate the seeker's inquiry.
Before I proceed further, it is necessary to inform you that what is contained in this chapter concerning cauterization is based on an error that appeared in the first chapter.
Therefore, it is necessary to exercise caution in this procedure, for in this chapter there is a great risk of bleeding during operations such as opening a vein, or making an incision over a swelling, or opening an abscess, or performing an excision, or extracting an arrow, or making an incision in a stone, and similar procedures. All of these are associated with tremors, fear, and bleeding that occurs in many of them
I warn you, do not be discouraged by this, for sometimes things happen to people in this art as they do in the art of healing the sick. For there is no greater madness than that which is provoked by pain: for it is light in this matter, as in the case of other maladies. And when pain is excessive, it signifies death.
Therefore, when a physician gives you his remedy and says to you that it will bring you health, you must know that his words are deceptive and his medicine is harmful
It is not right to consent to what comes from him who comes to you from outside, whose way of life is like this Therefore, you must be cautious and prudent rather than being greedy and reckless Do not presume anything about it until you have learned something certain from science that confirms that this will be successful
Use for the treatment of all sick people, prognostication and indication of what is useful for health
In this name is for you an aid above acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, son, your intellect, and not take from you direction and inspiration: for it is in his hand
And I indeed order this chapter to be distinguished by chapters, according as it follows the chapter of Cautery, from the hip to the feet: so that you may be relieved of the thing which you desire most from this, and of what you need.
Concerning the care of water which accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
You know that this infirmity happens often to children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without lubrication.
And sometimes it happens also from an occult cause which is not known
And I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than children: and I have seen it in all whom I have seen from among the masses: because of this it is useful for me to send away the operation in this case.
And I have seen among the children whose head was filled with water, and the head grew bigger every day, until it could not sit on itself because of the size of its head: and the moisture increased until it died
And this moisture, or it accumulates between the skin and the bone: or it accumulates under the bone on the soft parts
And the operation in this case, if there is moisture between the skin and the bone, and the swelling is small, then it is necessary to make a single split in the middle of the head: and the length of the split should be like two knots, until the moisture is cured
This is the form of a sponge.
If there is too much moisture and the swelling is greater, then make two incisions according to this form.
If the moisture is under the bone and its sign is that the fluid escapes from all sides of the head: and the water is withdrawn when you press your hand into the inside, and it does not remain hidden: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner
After the incision, remove all the moisture Then close the incisions with silk and wool threads.</start_of_turn> Then bandage it up with wine and oil until the fifth day.</start_of_turn>
Then loosen the ligament and care for the wound with tension and dressing.</start_of_turn>
And do not tighten the head too much.</start_of_turn And feed the patient with little food and little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.</start_of_turn
And another method of incision is to consider the size of the swelling and the collection of water.</start_of_turn
For sometimes it is in the occiput more, or in the chin, or in the right, or in the left.</start_of_turn
Proceed therefore with the incision where you see the swelling and the collection of water: and cut it according to what you are able to do.</start_of_turn>
And be careful not to cut an artery, and cause the flow of blood, and that the patient should die from that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.</start_of_turn
Concerning the incisions of the arteries which are behind the ears.
Concerning the incisions of the arteries which are behind the ears.
When any swelling occurs in the head, either to the eyes or the chest, and the condition persists, and no remedy has been of avail: then the last remedy in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
One must be skilled when performing such an incision, so as to prevent the patient from fainting Then [the surgeon] should rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible. Then the patient should grip his neck firmly with his hand or any other available cloth Then consider where the pulse is to be found And the places where both of them are to be found are those which are behind the ears depressed: and they are rarely hidden, except in some people
And mark with a burn each of them: and cut each of them with a lancet as sharp as a knife, incision running to the bone: and do this across the width of the head.
And if necessary, introduce a sponge under the artery, and cut upwards with the incision.</start_of_turn>
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers.</start_of_turn>
For when the artery is cut, blood flows out with the pulsation, which leaps inside frequently.</start_of_turn
If however the artery does not appear to the eye, then it must be measured by the breadth of three fingers.</start_of_turn And mark with a burn, and find until the bone.</start_of_turn
And that which must be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less will be emitted from it. The amount of that which must be emitted from the blood is according to the quantity which appears to you from the wound of the patient and the filling of its artery
Consider the wound. Then if anything remains on the bone from the scraping of something, then cut that, so that no thick clot may happen: then bind the wound with strips of linen cloth
Then care for the wound with unguents, until it is healed.
Concerning the extraction of arteries which are in their courses
(The text continues with the next chapter heading.)
When it happens to a man an old hemorrhage, or an acute catarrh because of acrid humilities and heat in the wounds of the times, or an old soda, vinegar, and things like these: and it is medicated with the methods of the healing of medicine, and does not give relief from it: then we are experienced in these ailments of the arteries of the times, or their cauterization, as we have narrated.
And the method of the operation in the extraction of these is that the physician grasps the hair of the patient which are in the times, and brings it to the apparent artery in the time. It itself is seen by you from his pulse, and rarely is it hidden except in a few people, or the heat of cold.
If it is hidden from you, then bind the patient's head with anything of his cloth: then rub the place with rough cloth Or apply the place with warm water, until there appears to you a clear sign. Then take hold of the sponge, which is before your form. Then cleanse the skin with the sponge, until you reach the artery. Then pull out the thread from the wound, and draw it upwards, until you have drawn out the thread from the skin, and make the wound empty of any cloths that are under it from all sides
If the artery is small: then bind up the wound with the end of a thread. Then cut away from that part as much as the length of its extremities, and contract, and let no blood flow forth For if it is not cut away, and if it is not bound, the blood does not ascend fully
Then wash out the blood with six ounces of vinegar, until .III
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to bind up the wound in two places with a strong thread of silk: or with horsehair, so that it does not burst before the wound has consolidated, and that the blood flow may be restored
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures Do this in an hour, or after an hour
And if necessary, cauterize the wound with a cautery until it reaches the bone, with a knife cautery: until its extremities have healed, and it has stabilized in the place of the work
It is better to do the work, if the patient does not have a fever, or has a flushed complexion. For cautery is from vapor, which dries up humors Therefore it is better to apply a remedy
And it is necessary after the extraction of arteries that the cavity be closed up as before: and they are to be placed upon the middle of the wound.
And after closure they are to be cared for with dry medicines which cause the flesh to grow, and with dressings, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
And if during the operation blood flows from the artery, then it is proper to bind it off with cautery, or to close the hole with silk: and grasp your hand until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn> And if nothing of these things is present, then place upon the place of the digit your hand, until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn> And bind the place with cold water, until the pain subsides, and tie according as it should be.</start_of_turn
And from this it is evident that the easiest and most straightforward extraction of an artery is with a cautery which has two blades: and let the sharpness of the two blades be similar to an almond.</start_of_turn But truly they are much smaller in sharpness than two blades.</start_of_turn For if they are sharp, like two blades, they are proper for both heat and cold: and do not tear the flesh with speed.</start_of_turn When therefore in this is some degree of thickness, it is held in the hand of the fire and is bound off more quickly: with this therefore the work is better in every way, and easier, and more straightforward.</start_of_turn
This is the form of the burn.
And let the space which is between the two blades be the size of the digit, after you have marked two points with the cautery: and place both ignited together downwards, until they reach the bone, and pierce the artery in two places: so that the length which is between the extremities is elongated.</start_of_turn They do not solidify with this deep burn.
Chapter III
Take care of the acute tears that run from the eyes continuously.
When there are continuous tears running from the eyes, which are above the outer part of the head: and there is no need for any medical treatment with doctors, and the tears cause the face of the patient to become red, and he feels a walk in his face like that of ants: and his eyes are expanded, wet, as if they were corroded with the tears: and his eyelashes are reddened from the intensity of the tears: then the ancients resorted to treatment for these with an operation, and they called this treatment, with Ense.
It is that, especially for the patient, to shave off the hair on his face Then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and let one incision be at the distance of the nose from the middle of the forehead, and the second at the distance of the movement of the lacerations, and the third from the other side: and cauterize from the arteries which are in the two sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let the space of the incision be as much as the thickness of three connected fingers: and let a sponge be prepared, or dry cloth, with which to soak up the blood
Then introduce two acute extremities of a sponge, whose following is the shape From the incision on the temporal side to the second incision: and scrape with it the whole skin which is between the two incisions, with a scraper, which is over the bone. Then do it also from the middle incision to the second incision. Then extract this sponge, and insert into the first incision once more a different instrument, which is called the sharp knife, from one side blunt, not sharp from the other side.</start_of_turn> This is its form.</start_of_turn>
And place its edge sharp towards the flesh attached with skin, and its edge blunt towards the bone: and press it in until it reaches the middle incision: and cut through everything that descends from the head to the eyes: except that which appears on the skin.</start_of_turn
Then do it also from the middle incision to the second incision.</start_of_turn>
And when the bleeding has ceased an equal amount, express the place from coagulated blood clots.</start_of_turn>
Then place in every incision a layer of old cotton, and place over it soaked sponges in wine, and butter, or vinegar.</start_of_turn And see that no swelling arises.</start_of_turn
And on the third day heal the ligament, and give a plentiful infusion with warm water.</start_of_turn And care for this from the basic ointment, and for the rest that heals wounds: until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Chapter V.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the care of acute tears and catarrh of the eyes from the inside of the head.</start_of_turn
When someone has suffered from acute, severe, and sticky tears: and their eyes are swollen, parched, and pale: and their eyelashes are ulcerated, and hair falls out from the eyelashes, and there is severe pain in the depth of the head, with sighing: then take away from these causes whatever does not cause tears, and the catarrh is not from many.</start_of_turn
The best treatment in these matters is this. The best is to shave the patient's face promptly. Then make a single incision in the middle of the face, or on the other side along the width, and commence the incision from the left ear to the right ear: and let the incision reach the bone: and stretch out your hand from the wounds which move at mastication until the bone is revealed: and soak up all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the wound with a piece of cotton wool, or with strips of linen. Then bind up above with thread: and soak the thread with wine and oil, so that it does not cause a swelling
And when you have finished, and you see that the swelling is diminishing: then it is necessary to compress the bone until flesh begins to grow in it
Then care for yourself with meticulous attention to the regimen of nourishment that makes flesh grow: as if you were to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and prepare from this a plaster, and administer it to the wound
(The text provided does not include any content for Chapter VI, so I am unable to translate it.)
And concerning the care of the wound during the Golden Age.
Every thing that falls into the Golden Age is of four kinds: either a mineral substance, or one like stone, such as iron and gold; or it is of a plant origin, such as beans and peas; or it is a flowing substance, such as water, vinegar, and blood, and things that are like them; or it is some living creature.
When such a substance falls into the Golden Age, which is not from the earth and does not grow in the Golden Age, it exposes the Golden Age to the solid state: if you wash away the stone, then something distilled from oil or resin will remain in the Golden Age Then perform the extraction and make the area firm with pressure, and pour oil into the nostrils opposite the area of pressure, after you have placed around the ear a ball of wool or cloth and extended the ear upwards.
Many are grateful for this care.
If however they do not depart, then perform the extraction with sponges, that is, fine sponges: whose form is like this.
If therefore they depart with the sponge, that is good.
And if not, then perform the extraction with a blunt needle of small size.
If they do not depart by this, then make a hole in the air and introduce the extremity of the tube into the ear a great deal, and pour oil which is around the tube with wool which has been softened with oil, so that there is no air except for the tube: then extract with your hand with great traction.
Many are grateful for this which we have mentioned If they do not depart in this way: then take from barley or from wheat, that is, prepared gluten, with which one seizes the wings, a remedy: and put it on the edge of the radius after you have enveloped above the ankle positioned centrally: then introduce it into the ear with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture
If they do not depart with all that we have mentioned, then prepare to perforate, before the swelling becomes acute, or spasm.
And the method of perforation is like a phlebotomy in the first place in the neck: and extract from him from the blood according to the measure of his courage. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and support his ear upwards, and find the opening of the perforation parallel to the ridge of his ear in the hollow part of it: and make the perforation in the shape of a crescent, until you reach the bone: then remove it with the forceps which are possible from the instruments.
Then seal the wound from the current hour with speed, and care for it until it heals.
If anything falling from one grain has grown and become inflamed: then manage its extraction.</start_of_turn>
If it does not obey you with respect to its extraction, then take a soft sponge, fine and smooth, according to this shape.</start_of_turn
And manage with it the excision of that kind of grain which falls into the ear, and do not make it bleed, when you think that that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put it out with many sponges: then extract it with hooks, or with fine graspers, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction alleviates.</start_of_turn>
But in the water which enters the ear, it is necessary to keep the patient quiet with sneezing from the beginning: and immediately cover the ear with some cotton wool: and lie upon it the ear which is in the water.</start_of_turn If therefore it comes out through this, that is good.</start_of_turn>
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, thin and smooth, and heat them with fire together, and introduce the patient from one ear into the other: and pour some salt upon his foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear.</start_of_turn Do not cease doing this with the stone and the stone, until all the water has come out.</start_of_turn>
And when the water comes out like this, take it out with a scoop or with a single sponge, and introduce the extremity of it once into the ear: and burn the other extremity with fire, until most of it is consumed.</start_of_turn Then repeat the process with another sponge, and make it much wetter, until all the water has drained out: and extract it with a tube as previously directed in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that is within the body of the wound, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar, take care of it as I have said in the instructions
But if it is of large size, which appears to the sense: then manage its extraction with hands and instruments: and thus it is easier for all who hold the vessel
When you have cured it with the things which we have mentioned in the instructions on distillation and treatment, and if your cure does not suffice: then you must bring the wound into the open air. If anything appears there from the worms, then extract it with hands or with fine instruments
If nothing appears there, then take a tube, which has a narrow lower part and a wide upper part: and insert the lower part into the wound according to the capacity of the patient: then withdraw it with force. Make it much wetter, until all the worms have drained out.
If they do not obey you in leaving, then smear the circumference of the tube with grease, as I have said in the stone
If they do not leave when you have done what we have said: then perform distillations which the ancient experts have learned for the elimination of worms: and you will find it in the treatise on distillations
And let your effusion be such as you pour oil and medicines into the wound with this instrument, which has the shape mentioned above As for wounds made by silver or by air, below a strict bandaging, there is a small hole, a wide one above.
The force that is in the curvature of the tube is placed outside the air hole.</start_of_turn> If you wish, take a radius and encircle in its extremity a piece of cotton. Then pour oil, or balsam, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the tube: and let it rest there. Then introduce the radius with the cotton above, and press it down with your hand in a temperate manner, until oil is driven into the curvature of the ear, and the patient feels it inside: that which is poured into the ear is to be warmed with a little fire: and take care that nothing distills in the ear when it is cold: for medicines do not tolerate this.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 7.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of a burn.</start_of_turn>
When some children emerge from the mother's womb without perforating them.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it happens that some people suffer a burn in the ear from a wound, or from meat that is born there.</start_of_turn
And this burn sometimes happens in the depth of the earhole, as it does not follow custom: and sometimes it happens outside the earhole a little, and follows custom.</start_of_turn
That which happens in the depth of the ear, and which does not comprehend the aspect, is in many positions difficult to heal.</start_of_turn
And in that which follows custom, it is necessary to put the ear of the patient on the sole, and to press on it: then if you see the burn appearing, open the wound with a fine needle, whose form is this which follows, so that its extremity is in the part which has a small width, whose part is acute: and the rest of the needle is soft: so as not to hurt the ear.</start_of_turn
If there is an opening from the cartilage to the meat of the ear: then hold the ear with a fine hook, and cut it off with ease until the whole flesh is removed.
If the opening is in the depth of the ear: then take a fine needle, thread, and burnish it with fire: then remove it from the meat of the ear.
If you feel a sense of opening with this, which the infirm has with a weighty deafness, try to open it with ease: and beware, lest you damage the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear a patch according to the quantity of the breadth of the opening which you have cut with the Egyptian unguent: make this for a few days, until you are secure about the consolidation of the wound.
Or take a patch and soak it in rose water, and grind on it some powdered alum, and use this.
If you wish to dry up the ear: then it is necessary that you remove the patch, and let it dry with another patch, which you put on a wound made with rose water, until the swelling subsides: then care for it until it is healed
If blood flows: then immerse a sponge, or pack it in cold water, and put it on the ear: and use the rest of the treatment which expels the predicted flow of blood in the tract of distillation.
Regarding the care of the eyelids.
(The remaining text is not included in the provided context.)
These are the Althelis which happen in the eyelids, when they are wet and when they are dry.
It is necessary therefore to hold them with tweezers: or with a hook, and cut them away from their roots Then place above the wound a soft cushion.
If blood flows from the wound, then cauterize it with a fine lancet.</start_of_turn>
It is better to cauterize after the incision.</start_of_turn> Many times they return when something remains from their roots.</start_of_turn> And when they are cauterized with fire, they burn those roots and they do not return.</start_of_turn
Take care of the large palpebrae of the eye.</start_of_turn>
Chapter IX.</start_of_turn
Many things happen in the palpebrae of the eye which assimilate Crandinum in its firmness and its hardness, and because of this it is called Grandus: and it is the collection of thick moisture in the upper and lower palpebrae.</start_of_turn
The operation is therefore in the eye, as you see, if there is a Grandus proceeding from the palpebra, which appears from the palpebra and moves to all parts, and its result is easy.</start_of_turn
Find therefore above the wound across the width.</start_of_turn Then scrape away the wound from all around with ease, until it is clean.</start_of_turn Then suspend the wound with a suture, and cut it off.</start_of_turn
If, however, you do not prepare the cut for abscission, except when you penetrate the palpebra with a small incision, then it will be harmful to the patient in some way.</start_of_turn
If the wound is large: then join it together with a suture: and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
If it is small, it will not cause any harm from it. The wound will restore itself, and the pain will vanish.
If it is large, it is advisable to incline it towards the inner parts of the ear towards the surface; then palpate the area thoroughly, and suspend the large size with a loop: for otherwise you will be tempted to make an incision, and press it from all sides
If the area is prolonged by incision, that does not harm in any way
Then wash the eye after the incision of the large size with salt water: and care for the place with that which is incrusted, until the infirmity is healed.
About the care of the eyelids.
Chapter X
The speck which is produced in the upper eyelid is called Axirnath: and this most frequently happens to children.  It weighs down the eyes, and causes tears to gather in the mornings, and they are unable to see the sunlight because of this, for the tears run down their face and over their eyes.  They sleep with their eyes always wet under their eyebrows, which have been puffed up by the inflation: and the prominence of Axirnath appears in the eye, and when you touch the place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between your fingers.
And the method of treating it is to place the patient's head in your lap
Then take a piece of linen, and prepare in it a loop, and make from that loop a circle according to the quantity which contains Axirnath from all sides. Then place it over the eye, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle
Then find in the middle of that moisture a swelling that has happened beside the heel of the foot, and let there be no greater split than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it may be necessary to find the whole skin, until Axirnath proceeds from the split according to the form of a white crust in multiple arrangements
Extract therefore the blood with the bandage which you have infiltrated between your fingers outwards: and you will move your hand to the right and left, until it is scattered: and take care, lest you add to the split, that you do not reach the heel with the blood, and stain it.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you do not see Axirnath at the beginning of the split, you will add a little to the split with ease, until Axirnath proceeds.</start_of_turn> Then extract the blood as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Then immerse the bandages in vinegar and water, and put them over the place, and bind them with threads.</start_of_turn>
And from men there are some who pour salt upon it, and put it into the hollow of the split, so that it may liquefy what remains of that moisture.</start_of_turn
Then take care of it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If, however, there should happen in the place of the swelling a hard calcar, then take care of it with soft plasters until it is healed.</start_of_turn
As regards the methods of treating the eye, that is, when the eyelid is softened, from which it results in redness as it should not.</start_of_turn
Chapter 11.</start_of_turn>
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond the normal course among the natural hair, they cause damage to the eye. This brings about symptoms such as excessive tears, softening of the eyelids, and discharge, until such time as the eye is destroyed.
The eye is cleansed according to four methods. Or with the use of fire. Or with sharp medicine, as has been mentioned previously in the chapter on cautery Or by incision and stitching of the eye Or with needles, as I shall explain later.
It is necessary to place the patient's head in your lap Then take hold of the patient's left eyelid with your left hand
If you grasp it firmly, that is good And if you do not grasp it firmly: insert the needle at the base of the eyelashes, and pierce the needle with the thread that is above, and let the needle lie close to the eyelashes, that is, at the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and tie the knot.
And find within the inner part of the eyelid under the added hair a mark that comes from the greater lachrymal gland down to the lesser lachrymal gland.
Then draw out the thread and place under the eyelid a small piece of cotton wool or gauze: then close the eyelid with stitches that look like the figure of a myrtle leaf
Indeed it is necessary to observe that the figure should be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this varies among people
The eye is harmful if it requires more to be excised from the eyelid than is necessary for the amount that is softened by the eyelid.
When the swelling has spread over two lines which you have signed, and you begin from the greater tear gland towards the lesser, let there be one opening near the natural hair, as is the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape away the whole thing. Then bring together with two sutures the two lips, with a needle and a fine thread: and stop the bleeding, and make fast what has been excised from the two superciliums, with some astringents if you wish to do so: or if not, do not cure it
Then remove the suture and the thread for three days, or four: then care for it.
And if you wish, remove the swelling without sutures, and care for it as before, which dries up and contracts it For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and the adhesion: but the future will be better.
In this way of treating Ataxmir, the ancients taught.
It is true that there is anxiety over the infirm, but it is from a good operation, and not from fear
And another way is in Ataxmir also: and it is that the sign on the eyelid should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate hooks, or gathered together, according to this figure, then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this figure, with equality of the incision.
If, however, it is not possible to retain the hook and it does not suffice: then grasp the point where the thread is located and insert it into the middle of the figure. Insert another thread nearby the larger lacrimal gland and another nearby the smaller lacrimal gland. Gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then elevate your hand with equal elevation: and elevate the skin above that which is signed with the mark of the pulse, as we have narrated.</start_of_turn>
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with the suture: and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, swelling occurs at the incision or the wound: hold that swelling with the thumb and index finger, and with like instruments from the stationary suture threads.</start_of_turn
And when the eyelashes also swell, as they are twisted about their hair.</start_of_turn
It is therefore necessary to use what we have said concerning the incision: but the sutures on both sides are artificial.</start_of_turn> Concerning the care of wounds made with canines.</start_of_turn
That you must cover the eyelash, and split the wound which is inside, as I have narrated.</start_of_turn Then make two needles, or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelash, and the width of them is less than the width of the pupil: and you will have pierced at the extremities from both sides where you hold the thread.</start_of_turn
Then gather together both things with a slight pull over that which is superfluous from the edge of the eye, and bind two needles from both sides tightly, and let go of them every few days.</start_of_turn The skin, if tightly closed, will die, darken, and decay until it falls away of itself.
If delayed, then cut it through with forceps.</start_of_turn> Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
When it has consolidated, raise the eyelid: do not pierce the hair.</start_of_turn>
And this is the shape of two needles, which you make according to this figure and the quantity in length and breadth.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XII.</start_of_turn
Regarding the elevation of the plucked hair in the eye with a needle.</start_of_turn
The operation in this is that you take a fine needle and introduce it under the thread of fine silk, which is soft.</start_of_turn Then you gather the extremities of it and knot both ends with a fine knot: and let the length of the thread be one palm.</start_of_turn
Then make a second knot of fine thread under this one in a short space, and knot the extremities of it if you wish.</start_of_turn
Then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be close to the cheek so that the operation is declared: because the operation is slight, or even a moment.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the needle with the knot in the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you have pulled out the natural hair.</start_of_turn
Then pull out the hair until above the knot: and introduce into the knot the light of the hair: if there is one, or two, or three, not more.</start_of_turn
Then draw your hand with that [finger] which will cause the hair to emerge with the natural hair on the eyelashes.
Then draw the [finger] which will cause the eyelashes to emerge with the natural hair on the eyelashes. If, however, the eyelashes are drawn out and do not emerge with the latter: draw the eyelashes downwards, with the thread which you have made in them, until the eyelashes emerge from the upper orifice and are visible: then draw out both the eyelashes and the thread and close the eye. Close the eye for two or three days until the hair has adhered to its place and has grown over the wound.
If the hair is short, then either associate it with a long hair from the natural hair and elevate it with that: or leave it alone until it has grown out, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
When this occurs in the eye, it is called the Leporina
This eyelash is either natural or accidental
Accidental, therefore, is caused by the consolidation of a wound, or a section, or a burn, and the like of these
The way to operate in this case is to find the consolidation of this and to separate its lips, and to put between them a piece of silk, and to tie them together, until it is healed
It is not fitting, however, to use those things which dry and constrict: for if you do, the eyelash will be worse than before: rather use those things which soften, such as barley-straw: and mix with water, in which barley-meal is boiled, and oil: and smear with this the thread, and care with this
Your surgical skill is such, that you can deal with every ingenuity, so that it does not waver, following the fashion which was first established.
This operation, as we have mentioned, is not without some rectification of Alxatrati, so that it does not deviate from its natural form altogether
Concerning the care of the eye which is in the lower eyelid, and that is the wrinkle or contraction above towards the right and left.
Chapter 123.
This lower eye-lid swelling is called Alxatrati in truth. And it is natural, and is accidental.
It is caused by a wound, or tear, or burn, or similar things.
As for the operation in this, you take a needle which has a double thread, and pass the needle through the flesh from the left lacrimal gland to the right one, until the thread passes through both ends of the flesh
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut the flesh with a wide blade. If the figure of the eye-lid returns to its natural form, it is good
If not, grasp the edge, and place it in the split, and join it to the eyelid: and find two holes at the inner angle of the eye-lid, and let the two ends of the holes be from two angles, until they converge and make an angle: until when they converge the figure of them both is like that of the Greek laudation letter
Then remove that part of the flesh which is beyond the acute angle of the lower eyelid from the eye-lid which follows the eye-lid Then gather the separated parts: sow them with a thread of wool.
Then take care of them as we have said, of the physicians of soothing medicine, and of licenses, until they are healed.
And if the Alexatrati occurs from a wound and suture, or cautery: then it is necessary that you find the wound even under the eyelashes, even as before Then separate between two lips with a license, as we have said
And the sum of the sermon concerning the care of the Alexatrati, when it is above or below, is that you should take care of it in that operation, as it is prepared from the form of the Alexatrati.
Indeed, there are many varieties in the form: and a prudent artist prepares the ingenuity in whatever way is possible for him, until he brings the figure back to its natural form, or almost so, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in many arrangements
Chapter XV
Of the adhesion of the eyelash to the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
When this happens to many people, it is because the upper eyelash is consolidated with the white of the eye, and it hinders its natural operations.
You must therefore introduce the extremity of the radius under the eyelash, and lift it up: or stretch it out with a hook: then cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be with the sharpness of a knife, but rather blunt and round: so that it does not trouble the patient during the operation, and that it comes away from the wound with its own sharpness: and let the incision be like that which you would make to scratch that adhesion, until when the eyelash returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is completely healed
Pour water into the eye, with water driving out the former: or distil into it from a vessel made, from gum dissolved with water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with lint: and put upon the eye a bandage of wool with alum: and on the third day use the vessel, and with the solidarities, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
As to the incision of the nail and the prominence of the carnis lachrymarum.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XVI.</start_of_turn
You know that the nail is according to two modes.</start_of_turn Or it is fleshy: and is like tough sponge, subtle.</start_of_turn Or it is not fleshy, like frozen white moisture: which when it touches iron, or when you try to grasp it with a hook, it breaks off and does not remain in it.</start_of_turn
And both these kinds do not begin until from the greater lachrymal, until it has advanced gradually, until it covers the whole, and excludes light, and movement of the eye.</start_of_turn
And the method of working in its incision is: as you put your sickly head in your lap.</start_of_turn Then open its eyes, and raise its eyelid with your hand.</start_of_turn Then gather the nail with a hook a few times, and stretch it upwards.</start_of_turn Then take the needle, and introduce it through the hair of the horse, and silk, or thread: and make the thread strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce the nail with the needle, and ligate the nail with the thread, and stretch it upwards: and remove the hair surrounding the pupil, as if you are grooming the nail until it reaches the last of its hair.</start_of_turn
Then penetrate the remainder in the root of the lacrimal gland with a small spatula or fine scissors: and discharge the natural tissue of the lacrimal gland, so that it does not obstruct the flow of tears from its incision.
And when the nail is extended with only one claw: or with a thread, as we have said.</start_of_turn> Then it is to be scraped with a soft spatula of this form.</start_of_turn>
Beware, lest you touch the delicate corneal tunic, and cause a rupture, and perforate the pupil.</start_of_turn
Then, after the incision, pour upon the eye some powdered salt, or a concoction made from sponge-wort, and keep it until the next day.</start_of_turn Then take care of it as is necessary, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If the nail is neither sensitive nor has a nerve penetrating into its substance, and if it does not bleed in it, then it is to be treated with many remedies by the physicians, and will heal as I have mentioned previously.</start_of_turn>
If you wish to make an incision, then open the eye of the patient, and grasp the spatula with a fine, gentle touch, of acute power, according to this form.</start_of_turn And remove the nail from above with caution and dexterity.</start_of_turn If, however, it is liable to become detached and fractured, and leaves a mark in the substance of the nail, then distil from your hour in the eye from a sponge-wort concoction, or from saffron, or from salt: and anoint the eye until the next day.</start_of_turn
Then repeat the operation above until the whole of it is removed.</start_of_turn Unless contrary to this, if there be a swelling in the eye which is cold and hard: then let it go, and take care of the swelling until it is healed.
Then repeat the operation with reason until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
But as for the prominence of the caruncle of the lacrimal gland, if it causes great discomfort in the eye, it is to be suspended with a thread, and a piece of it is to be excised: and not to make the last incision, lest the flow of tears be obstructed.</start_of_turn>
Then leave the eye bathed in a red solution, or made from alum, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
As for the incision of the Alguardenic membrane, and the natural tissue in the eye.</start_of_turn
Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn
Sometimes in the eyes of men there is formed a red substance which covers the pupil, or approaches, or tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outwards: and it is like the seeds of roses.</start_of_turn
And the operation for this is also to put the diseased head in your hand.</start_of_turn Then open his eyes, and take hold of the whole tissue with hooks which are convenient for this: and tear it out with one force, or grasp it.</start_of_turn
Then make an incision in the first place, until the whole of it is finished with the knife.</start_of_turn And burn away from the eye, so that you do not damage it during the operation: and let your incision be such as that which you make when you cut nails, or with fine forceps, with which you grasp the clot, as we mentioned concerning the incision of the nail.</start_of_turn
When the incision is complete and the entire garden of the wound has been washed away, then pour upon the eye from a container of salt: or distill into it a powder of red ochre, and similar things from corrosive medicines: and place upon the eye a compress of wool with vinegar or alum to secure it from the heat of the afterpulse.
If anything remains of the wound, and the blood is hot, and the afterpulse is strong: then remove the eye and keep it with that which will calm the afterpulse.
Then repeat over it with the operation until it is healed.
And do the same with the meat added which happens in the eye of this kind.
It is true that one must be careful, lest the eye be injured by a natural or accidental cause while operating with the instruments: and do not insert your hand into any of these operations, until you are certain that the limb can tolerate the operation.
Of the collection of the eye-wax.
Chapter XVIII.
The waxes are like red veins which are stretched over the eye, and which prevent the moisture from doing its work: and they weaken the eye with their length.
It is necessary therefore, in the first place, to consider whether the eye in which there is wax is strong and not suffering from any other ailment except for the wax: then collect the wax from it
And it is necessary to be careful, lest you put your head in your lap
Then suspend the veins with one hook or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be fine double the size, according to this form, or two hooks be united in one body, according to this form.
Then collect with fine scissors those one or two which are under the eyebrow, and remove the blood hour after hour until those one or two have vanished from the eye, and they are resolved: and beware lest you damage the eye with the extremities of the scissors.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation lest you injure anything other than those one or two
When you have finished, then pour into the eye a little oil, or red: so that its sharpness may dissolve what remains from the wound.
If it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then plaster the eye with this, which will soothe the pain of the eye: and let it go for a few days. And keep it away from heat: then repeat over it according to the same method until it is healed.
This is the form of the scissors.
Of the reduction of the Arissa to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The doctors call the Arissa Fistula which is cured with cautery, or with acute medicine and burning, according as its narration requires.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in that: except that you find over the swelling near the origin of its formation, and you remove all the moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is detected
When the bone is thus detected, and you have cleansed it of corruption or blackness, then close it with an instrument whose form is like this
And it is called the Asper of the head.
It is made of iron without solder, and its head is rounded like an azure, which is pierced with the point of nails, or with the point of an awl, or with a fine puncture: and place it on the place of the corrupted bone
Then move it back between your fingers, and touch your hand lightly until you know that the wound is healed: and do it often.
Then apply the remedy with the aid of hemostatic agents.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is consolidated and appears in the flesh, and the flow of blood is stopped: and it remains for forty days, and does not bleed again, and does not swell, and no inflammation occurs in it: then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if not, then there is no wisdom in it, except to reduce the swelling to the size of a bean, according to this shape.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to remove the bone from the second degree with iron, or with acute medicine: and when it is detected, then grasp the bone according to this shape, whether the handle is of iron, triangular: and its wood is an extended pyramid until it reaches the extremity, like blood.</start_of_turn
Then place it above the bone itself: and be close to the tear: and stretch your hand away from the eye a little.</start_of_turn Then move your hand with the bone until it penetrates the bone, and feel that it is weakened: for thus you will know that the marrow is coming out through it, when you hold your hand over your nose.</start_of_turn
Therefore, then, restore the place with the aid of hemostatic agents, as I have told you.</start_of_turn>
When the flesh appears and the place is hardened: then the matter which was flowing outwards returns to the nose: thus it is easier for it to be on the unhealthy side.</start_of_turn
¶ On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.</start_of_turn
Chapter XX.
When the eye emits with its entirety, and does not subside in any part of its document, neither does its diminution: then it is necessary to resolve the diseased part: then perform phlebotomy: afterwards place moist compresses in the cavity without scarification, but with suction.
Then put upon the eye an ointment which is made from acacia, and aloe, and oil, and gum arabic Then bind the eye above upon a cushion with many feathers.
And the manner of the feathers is: that you take fine wool, many, and fold every feather from its four sides: make from these many: then place one upon another, according to the quantity which the eye needs: then bind upon these with a strong cloth
And repeat the compresses with suction without scarification.
Then remove the compresses, and keep the eye closed day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary to bind it much: then remove the ligament after day and night, as we said
If thus you again see the eye coming out of its sockets, it is good: and if not, then repeat the cushion, and the feathers, and the binding, and the compresses, until it is healed.
Of the incision of the tunica of the eye.
(The next chapter continues with instructions on the incision of the tunica of the eye.)
When disruption occurs in the tunica of the eye, then it emits and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and is swollen like a man because of this, and one must cut into this: then the operation in this is as follows: and it is that you introduce the needle into the radix of the eye from the lower part to the upper part
Then insert another needle through the part where the tear-duct is doubled, and make it penetrate: and withdraw the first needle following its own arrangement.
Then pierce the place where the tear-duct is doubled, and secure it with the surrounding skin of the gum: and tighten it much.</start_of_turn>
Then withdraw the needle, and place above the eye a lancet soaked in alum: and withdraw it when the thread has been withdrawn from the gum.</start_of_turn
Then care for the eye with it, which soothes it, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
And when the thread is drawn from all around with a circle of cloth, until the eye regains great prominence.</start_of_turn
Then pricked with a fine needle which reaches the depth of the eye, and let moisture flow, and the eye will descend, and immediately restore itself: then tighten it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
¶ On the treatment of the eye.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
This disease which is called Alcomnati, is not except for health which accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and is not itself.</start_of_turn
And the method of treatment for this is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly.</start_of_turn
Then grasp his head with your hands from two parts, and move it, until you feel the health rise towards the lower parts of your eyes.</start_of_turn Then it becomes fixed, and does not descend, and the light is restored: and the patient sees as well as he saw: and if it does not descend further, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
If the preparation of the descent of the bowels is not ready with that which we have mentioned, then make the patient sit between your hands. Then take a soft sponge and find it above the bony prominence of the knee joint alongside the continuation of the joint with the cornea in a circle, until the bowels have departed.</start_of_turn>
When they have gone out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have boiled barley and honey: then wash with the rest of the treatment until the eye is healed.</start_of_turn>
As for the care of the water that descends into the eye, or a cataract.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXIII.</start_of_turn>
We have said concerning the species of water in the eye, and which agrees with the declaration and explanation, then take that according to the health.</start_of_turn
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands square, facing away from the light, near the heel: and bind the healthy eye shut, and clench it tightly: then take your right hand, if the eye in which the water is, is the left eye: or take your left hand, if the eye is the right.</start_of_turn
Then take your right hand, if the eye is left: or your left hand, if the eye is right.</start_of_turn
Then put the tip of the sponge close to the crown over the breadth of the radius in the apparent white of the eye near the smaller lacrimal gland: then press the sponge with force: and you will turn with it the hand, until it pierces the membrane of the eye: and you will feel that the sponge has reached the bottom.</start_of_turn
The distance from the iris to the outer corner of the eye must be measured. You will see this in the pupil itself through the clarity of the corneal membrane.
Then place the instrument until it reaches the aqueous humor Press the lower eyelid downwards one after the other.
If the liquid thus descends, the diseased part will immediately move away from the opening of the eye, and the instrument will be in the eye itself
Wait a little while. If the liquid descends again, then withdraw the instrument without causing the instrument to come out of the eye.
When it has settled and does not ascend, then remove the instrument with ease: and withdraw your hand slowly.
Then dissolve on the liquid some salt of the clear gemmae kind: and wipe with it when the eye is dry. Then put over the whole eye a pad or lint soaked in warm oil, and alum or gypsum; and bind with it the healthy eye
We also put upon it a rough cloth with alum or gypsum.
If it does not enter the eye because of its hardness, because it is from a person whose eyes are hard like a stone: then you must take a sponge which is called Alberid, which has this shape.
Wet it thoroughly with the sponge and join it to the instrument, and do not take your hand away from the hole: and do not do anything else except guide the instrument gently to the bottom of the eye
Then introduce the almond, as we have said.
And in addition to this, the patient is prepared with a warm bed made in the center of the room, upon which he lies upon his back in a dark chamber: and he is to be guarded against all movements and coughing: and he is to be given food which soothes the nature of his condition. And he must not move his right or left hand at all.
And let the ligament be set according to its position until the third day.
Then loosen it in that dark chamber, and let him experience its sensation: and make him drink something Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
And it should not be forced at the time of healing, or immediately after incision: but rather it should be allowed to happen naturally. For thus water ascends more quickly through the open wound
If however a thick blood clot occurs: then it is necessary to drain the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with that which settles the clot, until it is settled: then let the patient drink something by mouth which regulates his vomiting during those few days, while he remains in that dark chamber.
Then let him gradually go out of the room and return to his home.
And know that in the hospital a student is not excused from his studies for a few days: then indeed he will learn about the operation
And indeed some of those from Alayrach have reported to us that in Alayrach an almond was perforated with a needle, from which water came out
But indeed we have not seen anyone in our land who has done this: nor have we read of it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that this is something new
These are forms of species from great things, as they remain over those who ignore them.
Be like the air itself: and let their extremities be like those of a triangle with an acute angle at their base.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn
On the care of the newborn flesh in the nose.</start_of_turn
When various meats are added to the nose when it is giving birth, there is something that is absorbed from many feet of scorpions: from this there is a cancerous tumor, a stone, and a fleshy color: from this there is what is soft, not fleshy colored.</start_of_turn
In this way, whatever is soft from these meats is not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to make the sick person sit between your hands opposite the solid object, and open the nose and expel the mucus from it: then draw out the pieces to the outside, and cut away whatever you see with a fine and acute knife from one side, until you know that the whole meat has been removed.</start_of_turn
If there remains something of that from whose excision is not possible: then cut away that with a fine instrument until nothing remains of it.</start_of_turn If, however, blood dominates it, or if a thick clot appears: then oppose to it what is necessary: or that from malignant clots, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the meats are removed.</start_of_turn
Then wash the nose with vinegar after the incision, and water, or liquid.</start_of_turn If the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it until the palate, then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, moisture does not penetrate, according to what is necessary, then you know that the flesh has arisen within the upper bones of the nose, to which it does not reach with the incision of the instrument.
Therefore it is necessary to insert a thread of linen which has some thickness, and to knot it in many knots: and to place between every knot as much quantity as a digit, or less. And the patient will vomit, so that he sends out one end of the thread through the nose with the breath, or as much as possible after he has made it similar to a burr. And he will exhale his breath until it reaches the very tip of the nose, and withdraw it over the guttur.
And many do the same as this young Attom in schools: and it is an easy thing for him who wishes it.
Then place two ends of the thread, one which proceeds outwards through the nose, and the other which remains in the nose itself Then hold the closure of the flesh with the knots which are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is again with the knots of the thread.
Then withdraw the thread: and place in the nose after washing out the blood with the bath which you drank with the unguent of Egypt: do this for three days, or more, until the unguent has eaten away everything that remained of the flesh
Then place at the end of the matter in the nose a lead cannula for a few days, until it is healed
If, however, you require treatment which demands it, use that also
For the packing of the head, when oil and other medicines are distilled in the nose, do this from silver, or from the air: and make it similar to the nut of the fennel, open like a conch shell: and its cavity like that of a worm.
And if one wishes to make a closed cannula, like a tube.
And if one wishes to make a closed cannula, like a tube.
Chapter XXV.
The teeth of the nose grow in the extremity of the nose of Thelul, and grow large and increase with the days, until the aspect of the face is changed.
And for this reason it is necessary, when the condition of the teeth of the nose appears, to remove all of them at the beginning Then put on the place, or cauterize, or apply a burning medicine in the place of it
If, however, the incision is delayed, until it has grown large, then consider whether it is of stone, hard, brown in color, and without sensation: for then do not touch it with iron, because it is cancerous
Many times indeed does a wound arise from a bad humor of the apostema, and this happens from the great heat which it has
And if the apostema is soft to the touch, not brown in color, and there is possibility of incision throughout its entirety, then evacuate the sick person and perform the incision without fear, without hesitation: and care for the place where the incision has been made until it has healed
Of the suture of the nose, lip, and ear.
Chapter XXV
You know that when a solution of continuity is made in some cartilaginous parts, it is little useful in this operation, except in some people
It is necessary therefore when anything happens to anyone from that [injury], that you consider whether there is a wound still connected with its blood: and then join the two edges of the wound with suture: then care for it until it is healed.
If the edges of the wound have been separated from each other and have become one, then it is necessary to remove every part from its outer surface until blood flows again. Then join the two edges of the wound with suture, and tighten them, and smear upon it the blood of a dragon, and balsam of mastic: and place above the powder a piece of plaster of Paris, and some other solid plaster: and leave it bound for two days, or three days. Then remove it, and change the dressing: and leave it until the stitches come out by themselves. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
The way of suturing is to join the continuity of the solution, or with a pad, as we have narrated in the suture of the belly: or join the solution with thread, as you have been told.
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn>
Of the extraction of the knots of the lips.
Many people have a swelling in the insides of their lips similar to rough seeds of herbs: and some of these are small, and some are large
Therefore it is necessary to cover the lip and find on every knot of it and suspend it with a needle, and cut away from all sides
Then fill the place after the incision with powdered charcoal, until the blood has clotted.
Then it is bound with vinegar, and the place is cared for with it, in which there is stypticity, until the wound is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn>
Until the new-formed flesh of the incision on the gum has healed.</start_of_turn>
Many are the veins that arise from the gum of the teeth, which the ancients call abuluss.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore to suspend them with a thread: or to grasp them with forceps, and cut them at their root, and let the blood flow, or the fluid.</start_of_turn
Then put upon the place the bruised tissue, or other drying powders that are styptic.</start_of_turn
And if the flesh returns after the treatment, namely because of many veins that have returned, then cut it again a second time, and burn it: for it does not return after being burned.</start_of_turn
On the reason of teeth with iron.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXIX.</start_of_turn
When they are aggregated on the surfaces of the teeth from the inner and outer parts, and between the gums, their coatings are rough, and sometimes they are blackened and become soft, and they decay, and become yellow, until the corruption reaches the gum, and abscesses form in the teeth thereby.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore to make the handle of your hand firm between your hands, and place its head in your mouth, and move the jaw and the tooth, in which you see the coatings, and that is like sand: until nothing remains of it, and do the same with blacking, and yellowing, and yellowing, and other things until it is completely gone.</start_of_turn
If, therefore, anything is to be removed from the beginning of the matter by reason, it is well; and if not, repeat the process over the matter by reason on another day, the second day, and the third day, until the study has reached the end of the matter which you wish.
Know that teeth need various rasps of different forms, many figures: according to the preparation of your operation: because the rasp which bites from the lower part is different from the one which bites between the teeth, according to other forms.
These forms of rasps are with you prepared, which you wish.
Chapter 30.
About the extraction of the tooth pain.
It is necessary to treat the tooth from its pain with all ingenuity, and then to eradicate it It is not in its power to remove it when it is sublimed: because it is a sublime substance: except when there is no excuse for removing it, then it is necessary to compel the patient to eradicate it, in order to strengthen him, and to confirm to you the painful tooth
Many indeed suffer from the patient's pain, and suppose that it is in the tooth itself and eradicates it: then the pain does not cease, until the painful tooth itself is eradicated
We indeed go from the operation of phlebotomy to this.
When it is confirmed to you that the painful tooth itself is present, then you must sacrifice around the tooth with sponges, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is separated from all sides: then move the tooth with your fingers, or with fine forceps at first slowly, until you have fractured it
Then place at that place in the forceps a good large size, and the patient's head between your knees: which you have held firmly, so that it does not move: then draw out the tooth according to its direction, so that you do not break it
If it does not go out, then take some of those instruments and introduce it inside from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did at the beginning.
If it is tightly closed, either pierced or rotted: then you must fill that hole with a cloth: and string it with a fine thread, so that it does not break in the time of your constriction over it with forceps.
And you must pay attention, when you perform the incision around the circumference of the limb from all sides much.
And keep your strength, so that you do not break it, and remain over it until the greater part of it has gone out of that evil which is causing you pain from the beginning.
And beware, do not do what the phlebotomists do in their frenzy, and audacity in their attempt to eradicate it, except as we have directed.
Many indeed make them worse upon men with great illnesses, of which some are more difficult to break, and leave all the roots of it, or take out some of them along with some teeth of the jaw: as we have often seen
Then it should be joined after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt
And if blood flows from the place (for many indeed blood flows from it) then take hold of something with your hand, and put it over that place: and if not, cauterize it if it does not suffice to close the wound.
The shapes of the fine forceps which you will use when you move the tooth in the beginning, should be long-handled, with short handles, large, so that they do not bend when pressure is applied to them with the hand: they should be like large nails, until when you string them with the tooth, they do not break themselves, neither do they bend: short handles, and they should be made of iron or of hammered copper, directed at the extremes: and in their extremes there should be teeth, some of which enter into some of them, and string them with a moderate tension, strong
And when extremities resemble the shape of an eagle's beak, which is called a ciconia, there are strong constrictions.
Chapter 1
Concerning the extirpation of teeth and the extraction of fractured mandibles.
When there remains in the vicinity of erasure a tooth which has fractured something, then one must place butter over the root for one or two days until the place has softened: then introduce into the cavity the ligature or forceps whose extremities resemble the shape of an eagle's beak, which is called a ciconia. The form of these forceps is as follows
Their extremities are made like a file or like a chisel
If, however, they do not obey you at the extraction with these forceps, then you must place a hook over the root and remove all the flesh, and introduce the small hook, whose form is as follows
Have short extremities, but large heads: and do not immerse them, lest they break
If the root comes out through that, that is good: and if not, one must try with other instruments whose form is the same
The form of the first triangle of the extremities, in which there is some thickness
The form of the thin triangle of the extremities
And with other instruments and materials which are appropriate for teeth.
And be careful with this instrument which assimilates a large stone, of this form, triangular extremities twisted, in which there is some thickness, so that it does not break: and do not immerse it
And know that the instruments for teeth are many: and like the rest of the instruments they do not all work in the same way. And a skilled artificer, knowing his art well, finds by himself the right instrument for each operation and its related ailments.
For since the ailments from which these latter instruments are useful are diverse, the ancients did not speak of a single instrument for all of them
If, however, the jawbone is fractured from the teeth or from any other bones of the jaw, or if it becomes putrid: then it is necessary to consider the location of the fracture in relation to the instruments and forceps which were mentioned in the extraction of roots, and to use them with skill, since their form is such.
If there is something of size which hangs between the teeth and the bone, so that it cannot be drawn out without tension, or if it is retained with the bone and does not slip away, until the tooth is extracted: and restore the place with the physicians who are present
If there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then remove it from the putrefaction and care for it, until it is healed.
Chapter two.
About the closure of teeth that protrude over others.
When teeth protrude abnormally from their natural course, a wound is caused thereby: and especially when this happens in women and girls, because of their soft gums
It is therefore necessary to consider this For if a tooth has grown after another tooth and is not aligned, or if it is possible to suture or file it: then extract it. And if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has this shape
It is like a small knife made of iron, with acute ends and a wide blade
And let your incision be such that which you make on many days, and by reason of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not move another from the teeth.
If, however, the exposed edge of the limature is prominent: then limate that with a file which has a form like this.
Let all be from the handle, and the thumb of your hand be smaller than the other fingers, like a file which is made for needles: with which you may gradually file the tooth in many days with ease, that it does not move, and falls out: then soften it, and finish it off with some rasps.
If there is a tooth from which a part is broken off, and which is causing the tongue to bleed: then it is necessary to file it also, until the sharpness of that fracture is removed, and it is evened out: and flattened, so that it does not bleed, nor corrupt the speech
Chapter 33.
Of the reposition of teeth with files.
When it happens that the front teeth are fractured and shaken by a blow, or in a case: and the patient is not able to bite properly because of that: then it is necessary to restore them with gold wire: for silver quickly tarnishes and becomes putrid after a few days: but gold never changes
And let the middle wire be in thickness and breadth according to the quantity which it takes between the teeth.
And the form of the reposition is that you take the wire, and introduce its double between two healthy teeth: then you shall weave with two extremities of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you have fixed it to the healthy tooth on the other side Then proceed with the texture until you reach the part from which you began: and keep your hand steady with skill and wisdom until it ceases to move forward: and make your constriction firm as you bind the thread at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip away.
Then cut off the surplus thread with scissors: and gather each [end] together, and bind them together with the thumb: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moved tooth, so that it does not harm the tongue: then let go of the tight thread when it remains
If it is dissolved or broken, string it with another thread, and keep it firm as before for the whole time.
This is the form of the tooth, and the figure of the rotation of two healthy teeth and two moved teeth, as with water
And when it is done, that one tooth or two after falling out remain in their places, and return as we have said, and remain: and this does not happen except by a skillful, prudent, and experienced artist
And when some of the bones or pieces of bone are adjusted: and it is made like the shape of a tooth, and is placed in the place from which the tooth is extracted and bound, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time
Chapter XXXIV.
When this ligament which happens under the tongue is cut, it is either natural, as it is born with man, or accidental, from an injury which has consolidated.
And the operation in this is, that you open the bone of the patient in his head in your hand, and elevate his tongue: then cut through that ligament nerve across the width, until the tongue is freed from its retention
If there be in that anything of hardness and swelling, and if that arise from the consolidation of a wound: then project into that area the hook, and find that by its breadth, until you cut through the ligament, and the swelling shall be resolved.
Take heed, that there be no deep wound, and cut through the artery there, and the blood flow shall be restored.
Then shall be laid upon the mark of the incision with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a bandage of linen, which shall hold the patient at night: that it may not consolidate on the second day.
If however there arise blood flow, then place upon the place a dry sponge. If however it boils over with blood, then cauterize the place with a mild cautery, which shall suffice for that: then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it be healed
Chapter 5.
When there happens under the tongue a swelling which assimilates a small ranula, which hinders the tongue from its natural operation: and perhaps it grows so much that it fills the mouth.
And the operation in that is, that you open the mouth of the patient before the sun: and consider the swelling
If therefore you see it of a dark or red color, hard, which does not yield to the patient's sense: then do not touch it, for it is cancer
And if it inclines towards white, in which there is moisture, then project into that area the hook, and cut into it with a fine needle, and free it from all sides If blood should spill during thy operation at the hour of its occurrence, then place upon it a dry sponge, until the blood is severed: thereafter return to thy operation, until thou hast extracted it with its complement.
And bandage it with vinegar and salt: and care for the rest of the treatment suitable for this, until it is healed.
Concerning the treatment of the two amygdals.
Chapter XVI.
When the gods of the guttur region become excited, that is, the glands which resemble almonds, which arise outside: and which are called the two amygdals: when you treat them as we mentioned in the previous discourse, and they do not heal, then consider them
If there is a hard abscess, of a brown colour, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron
And if it is red in colour, and its root is large: then do not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, rather let it go by itself, until it matures And then either you will perforate it, or it will rupture by itself
And if it is white in colour, round, and its root is thin: then you must cut it open
And the operation in this is as follows: if the abscess has calmed down completely or if any diminution has appeared: then do sit the patient with his face towards the sun: and place his head in your lap: and open the opening of the abscess with an instrument, and grasp the tongue with your hands, and draw it downwards with the instrument.
Use silver or air, which is subtle like a knife.
When the thing is thus with me, and the limb is shown to you, and its bone protrudes above the skin of its part: then grasp the hook, and fix it in the substance, and draw it out as much as possible, except that you draw out with it something from the skin.
Then cut the skin with the instrument which has this form which follows. It is like scissors: truly their extremities are bent back, so that the opening of each one is at a right angle to the other: where care must be taken lest it be burned or wet with blood.
If this instrument is not present, then cut with the spatula, which has this form. Be acute from one part, not acute from the other part.
And after you have cut through one substance, cut the other according to this same kind of incision.
Then after the incision let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If there should arise bleeding, he should gargle with water in which poppy heads are boiled: or leaves of myrtle, and things like these from sponges: until the bleeding is stopped. Then care for him until he is healed.
And when there are shown to be other bones in the gullet besides the two tonsils. Cut these in the same way as the two tonsils were cut.</start_of_turn>
And I myself have cured a woman from a bone that was born in her gullet, which pulled at the flesh, with little sense, because it was pressing on the gullet: and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage, and I forbade her eating and drinking water: and she died within one or two days.</start_of_turn>
The afterbirth will ascend as far as it emitted two branches, until it passes beyond the two nostrils.
The afterbirth will therefore be fixed in one hook Then draw it out, and from it is the greater part
Then cut it off where it comes out of the nostrils
Then do the same with the other nostril that was left behind
Then open its mouth and press its tongue: and afterwards fix the hook in the afterbirth: then cut off from it the part of it which does not go away with the blood; for the greatest part of the woman's gut has gone away, and she immediately begins to drink water, and then accepts food.
It does not cease to cut from that afterbirth many times: and the afterbirth follows in the place of that which we cut out, until it is prolonged and becomes like it.
I did it like that, and cauterized the afterbirth between the gut
It remained in addition: then I went away from that place, and I do not know what God did with it after me
On the incision of the afterbirth of a woman
Chapter 7.
When the mucus descends to the woman, and the afterbirth is prolonged and is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part large and round, then it is called a woman.
When it is cured with that which we said in the discourse, and the cure does not suffice: and you see that the afterbirth is soft and quiet from it: then it is necessary to cut it off
And whatever is rounded in it and has no length, and is either blood-stained, or of a tawny or black colour, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to make an incision of it. And in it there is fear over the diseased part.
It is necessary therefore when you are dealing with it according to the method which I have mentioned from its whiteness and its length, so that you make the diseased part rest upon the sole: and you clamp its tongue with an instrument, as I have mentioned previously concerning the nail: then fix the loop in one, and draw it downwards: and cut it through with one of the two instruments which I mentioned for the incision of two finger-nails.
And it is necessary that you do not cut through it except that which adds to its natural limit without addition
For if you cut through it more, you will cause damage to the bowels and the flesh.
Then after the incision use that which we mentioned concerning the incision of two finger-nails: and take care of it, until it is healed
If however the diseased part returns from the incision: then it is necessary that you use ingenuity in its cauterization without fear and haste.
And the method of cauterization in it is not except with acute water: and it is that you place the head of the diseased part in your palm. Then clamp its tongue with the instrument which we mentioned previously concerning the nail. Then take from the water which I mentioned previously concerning cauterization and mix it with burnt lime, and put it on it neither thick nor thin, and touch it with the concave side of this instrument
So that its extremities which are placed where the medicine is concaved, are like the concave side of the cochlea of a radius
Place the instrument with the medicine upon the abdomen itself: and let the patient lie upon his side, so that the moisture from his mouth may flow inwards from the medicine, and not descend downwards into his gut, and cause him pain.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.</start_of_turn> And from the first touch over the abdomen for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it has become softened, and rest the biting of the medicine.</start_of_turn>
And if you wish to take hold of the limb, and cover it with the medicine over the end of the radius, and inflate the limb with medicine, and pass the radius into the cannula from above, until the limb adheres to the abdomen.</start_of_turn
Do this many times, until you follow that you wish to perform cautery on the vein.</start_of_turn Then remove the medicine: for it itself will dry and fall away in three days, or four.</start_of_turn
And if you find that the medicine has not digested as you wished, repeat it: and after the cautery, remove the surrounding fat of the vein with the coto, and bathe with butter, and rub with it what is around it from the medicine: and cool with cold water.</start_of_turn
And care for the outside with embroidery, and for the inside with gargles, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Thus is this kind of treatment safer than incision and longer lasting in respect of fear.</start_of_turn>
And when the abdomen is healed even with the thing which is finer than cautery and incision: it is healed with fumigation, according to this method.</start_of_turn Take calamine, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sassafras, and chamomile, and bitter herbs: and mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be covered with a lid: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which the instrument is composed according to this method.</start_of_turn
Let air or water issue forth: and let the extremity be introduced into that which contains the pomegranate, until the vapor rises up to the upper lip of the cannula, until the upper lip is obscured much.
Then repeat over the much, until it boils over.
Take heed, lest thou perform this treatment at the outset of an apostematic attack. Better add some of the [substance] in the apostemate: and it is not necessary that thou do this except when the apostematic heat has subsided
If, however, this instrument be not at hand, then take a cannula and apply to its extremity some bark of acacia: that it be not burned: for the bark of acacia hinders the vapor from burning the bone: and this is an excellent cure with safety.
Concerning the extraction of thorns and bones from the jaw
Chapter XXXVIII.
There adhere much of bone in the gut, or fish-spine, or something else.
It is necessary therefore that thou extract what appears above that which falls down into the groove, after thou hast placed the tongue with the instrument near the jaw, and hast declared that it is in the gut
And that which is not apparent to thee and is hidden in the gut, it is necessary that thou make the patient vomit before any food is eaten in the stomach Perhaps also the thing that is attached will issue out by vomiting.
Or the patient may swallow down a piece of chaff, or the radix of liquorice, or a dry piece of bread: or take a dry sponge of marine sponge and bind it up in thread, then swallow it down. When it is necessary to reach the place where bones or spines are, and they are extracted, then it proceeds outwards.
If it does not go outwards as we have said: then use an instrument of lead in this fashion.
Let it be thicker than the Radius parumper, and at its extremity there shall be a curve which intrudes into its guttur with ease: and it shall have its head elevated upwards
And beware of its contact with the epiglottis, that it does not cause it to swell, and drive forward with it the bone, or the spine, or the doctor himself must intervene with his hand.
However the sick person intrudes it, that is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed thing: and he drives downwards, or pulls his hand upwards with the instrument, the whole thing according to the quantity which is prepared for it, until it departs
Of the extraction of the blood vessel
Chapter 39.
When the bleeding vessel is treated with what was said in the discourse on treatment by the doctors, and it does not cease, then consider in the guttur of the patient in front of the sole, or behind the tongue after you have moved the tongue with the instrument which I mentioned before.
If your hand should slip upon the bleeding vessel, grasp it with a small hook, or with fine fingers in the middle.
If this is not possible with these: then take a curved needle, and insert it into the guttur of the patient until close to the guttur: then insert the needle with the burning iron into the curvature of the needle. Do this often: and the patient abstain from all water throughout the day.
Then he shall take a full measure of cold water and open his mouth wide: and he shall gather his jaw with it, and he shall not swallow anything from it: and he shall drink the water an hour after the other with his hand. The blood-sucker will be overcome when he feels the water falling from his mouth.
If, however, he does not depart from this as we have said, then he must suffocate the patient with sponges or with a towel or other instrument as we have mentioned in the suffocations of the nose or ear
Do this many times, for the thing itself will fall down.
And the mode of operation in suffocating is that you take all the bones in which there are joints with fire: and the container is covered with a cover, in the middle of which is a hole: and the instrument is made to issue from that hole
Then he will throw away the suffocating, and put the patient's jaw in the extremity of the tube, and close his jaw, so that he does not escape the suffocating, until you know that the suffocating has passed to the blood-sucker For the blood-sucker immediately falls down.
If it does not fall down, then repeat the suffocating many times
And the patient will endure sitting, and will eat onions and garlic, and will not drink water
It is necessary therefore that he depart from this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucker is extracted from the gut when it falls upon the vomit.
It is like tweezers, like bones: except that it has that curve which enters the gut And its extremity is like the wing of an eagle called a ciconia, in which there is a roughness of the lime: when it grasps something, it does not release it at all.
And concerning the opening of abscesses, and their cutting, and their care in general.
Chapter XL.</start_of_turn>
Abcesses are of many kinds, with many variations, according to the nature of the recollection of each: and they are diverse in their perforation and their cutting into two modes.</start_of_turn>
One of these kinds of abscess is that which proceeds from moisture.</start_of_turn
The other kind is that which arises from the body itself.</start_of_turn
For an abscess arises in the head, it is another thing from an abscess which happens in the belly: and an abscess which arises in a fleshy part is another thing from an abscess which arises in joints: and each one of these has its own judgment concerning the operation.</start_of_turn
And concerning abscesses there are those which must not be perforated until after the completion of the healing in the flesh, and the completion of their complement: and there are those which must be perforated while they are raw, and do not heal according to their complement.</start_of_turn
For example, abscesses which are close to joints.</start_of_turn
For an abscess which arises near a joint and which lasts a long time may cause the ligament or nerve of that joint to become corrupted: which is the cause of the contraction of that limb.</start_of_turn
Or an abscess in a principal limb: for if you delay its perforation until it heals, the bone will decay or become fractured, or through that limb itself.</start_of_turn
If it is near the anus, perforate it immediately: and it is not fitting to perforate a stool that is not completely digested, except if it is near the anus, lest it putrefy deeply and extend inwards of the rectum, and make a fistula, or remain unhealed at its end.
It is necessary to know the time of perforation of the stool, which is mature according to completion: and it is beside sedation of pain, recession of fever, and decrease of redness, and pulse, and severity of the headache of the stool: and the rest of the signs.
It is necessary to make the perforation in a lower place of the stool, and more cautiously: and let the perforation be wide in length of the body, if the stools are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of tears, and strings, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all the places where there is no reflection
However, in those which reflect, be cautious with the perforation according to that limb.
When indeed the stool is in the place of carnis: then it is better to omit the perforation of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to completion.</start_of_turn>
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the fever is prolonged, and there is much pain and distress, and perhaps the lips of it will be prolonged, and its depth.
And some stools are perforated according to the breadth of the body by necessity: or according to that which the limb demands.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to administer in small stools a moderate perforation, and in large stools a wide perforation: or many sections alike in the magnitude of the stool.</start_of_turn>
And there are from the apostemata, in which it is necessary that the skin should be concaved: and it occurs when it has been made like a piece of cloth, and has been made at the end, when it is dead: as it happens with many things, as with a dubelet and a bubon.
And there are from those which are cut with a section having three angles. And there are also those from which it occurs like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As the apostema of the groin.
And there are also those in which an round section and a lunar section are administered: and similar things are from sections
This, however, which has no head, such as are the superficial lenia apostemata, requires that it be pierced through with a superficial perforation, or simply flattened out
And it is necessary, when the apostema is thick and has collected much blood, to pierce it through, so that it does not swell up and extract all the pus at once: rather extract from it a part of it immediately Then oil the apostema until the next day. Then extract some of the pus again
Do this many times according to the degree, until it is expelled: especially if the patient is weak in spirit, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepitus: for the spirit of the animal is resolved from the animal with the evacuation of the blood: and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive it
Therefore take great care with this chapter
And after you have pierced the apostema, which you must do, you must remove the wool: and consider If there is a small abscess of the apostematis, either perform a plane section or administer lead from an old container. If there is a large abscess and many holes of perforation exist, it is necessary then to introduce into every hole a quantity of lead until they reach the innermost parts.</start_of_turn>
If in the abscess you have excised a piece of skin, or have cauterized around it: then it is necessary to apply an old container of lead, or like when a piece of flesh is taken out, or to smear it with wool without moisture: and bind it until the third day.</start_of_turn>
Then remove it and care for it with the unguents until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If however blood flow occurs in your operation at the hour: then administer cold water and vinegar, after having swallowed it on a piece of bread: and place it over the place of blood flow several times.</start_of_turn>
If the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer regimen, care, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places of this book, and from experience.</start_of_turn>
If it is in winter and the place of the abscess is filled with many nerves: then it is necessary to instill coarse barley with wine and mustard seeds: and place them over the place.</start_of_turn
And if it is in summer and the place is fleshy: then it is necessary to place barley soaked in water, and mustard seeds, or them with wine and mustard, and all cold.</start_of_turn> Until then, as we have said, on the third day remove the abscess, wash it out, and administer in its care what is appropriate until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
This is indeed necessary from the knowledge of the cure for all after-effects.
According to the nature of each case, as I have said concerning every after-effect, how it is possible to cure it is set out in detail individually.
Chapter 41.
Concerning the excision of after-effects which occur in the head
Small after-effects occur in the head and are of the kind of knots which contain tunics, which are like little sacks: as if they were chickens' eggs
There are many kinds of them.
Some are solid: some contain moisture like slime: some contain moisture like blood clots and pus: and some are like stones
And in the excision of all, and in their extraction, there is no fear, as long as during their excision it does not damage the arteries.
And the operation in their excision is like that of these instruments, which are named after their shape which comes afterwards, until you know what it contains
For if it contains moisture, then dry it out by the superficial section: by this form.
Begin by making an incision from point b to point g. When the moisture has been evacuated, then remove the knot which contains it, and do not leave any residue behind
There are many of these which remain if anything is left behind
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian unguent, if there is any: or in water and salt: and press with a sponge, and leave it until tomorrow. The wound itself eats away what remains of the cyst.
Repeat the procedure above the wound with the second and third layers, and if you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If there is a fat node remaining: then dry it out in this way, making a section in the shape of a cross: and draw out the nerves between the two lobes of the section, and remove it from every side: and make an effort to extract the membrane which contains it.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you meet with resistance from an artery, then do as I shall tell you later.</start_of_turn
Proceed in the same way with a stone abscess, by section and treatment as before.</start_of_turn
The section of a stone abscess is easier: because there is little blood and moisture.</start_of_turn> And sometimes there are some head abscesses in certain people, in which there is no moisture at all.</start_of_turn
That is: because I dried out the abscess on the head of a maidservant, and I found the abscess like a solid and hard stone, rough and white, which could not be broken: and if I pierced it with anything, it would wound it.</start_of_turn
In other abscesses which happen on the head, except for those which happen in the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, the section should be superficial.</start_of_turn
Or make the perforation always from the lower part upwards, so as to help the discharge of the pus downwards.</start_of_turn
Then care for that which is fitting for them from the care.
Then care for that which is fitting for them from the care of the throat parts.
Chapter 42.</start_of_turn>
Many of these wounds happen in the throat, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes also in other parts of the body.</start_of_turn>
And above all those which happen in the throat, there are some which are one, and many: and they are all generated from one source: and every Strophula is inside its own tunic, like in the nodes and the wounds of the head, as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn
And the species of these wounds are many.</start_of_turn And from these there are fat ones: and there are those which hold moisture: and there are malignant ones, which do not obey treatment.</start_of_turn
In this way, when a good-dispositioned liquid is applied to the touch, whose mark is its proximity to the colour of the skin, and which moves to every part, and is not attached to the nerves of the throat, neither to the gullet, nor to the artery, nor is it deep: it must be cut from the surface downwards from the upper part to the lower part of the body from the line A to the line G, and the two edges of the skin should be spread out with a single finger, or with many fingers if necessary, as we said concerning the wounds of the head, and the contents should be extracted gradually.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to be cautious that no bone, or nerve, is injured.</start_of_turn
And let the sponge be neither too acute nor too blunt: so as not to add your hand to the incision, or to frighten the patient, and to cut more than is necessary.</start_of_turn
If however you cut a vein, or an artery, or are forbidden by the operation, then put in the wound a piece of lead, or some powders which exude blood, and tighten the wound, and let it go until the pain subsides after the operation, and the wound is softened: or it will begin to putrefy.
For blood is expelled by tension. Redi therefore to your operation until you have completed it.
Then inquire with your index finger if anything remains of the other stitches: if so, cut them easily, and remove them.
If there is in the root of the large stitch a great vein: then it is necessary that you do not cut that vein from its root: rather you must bind it with a doubled strong thread, and let it go until it falls down by itself without any dressing.
Then apply to the wound the fat of an old man which you have immersed in Egyptian unguent. Then take care of it.
If the whole suture comes out, then it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound: and hold them fast, after you have washed because otherwise some excess remains.
If however you wash because of the excess of the suture because of the size of the stitch, then it is necessary that you insert at the root of that to extract it: and administer the suture as we have said.
And what remains of the stitches must be moistened, perforate it with a superficial perforation: that its maturity may appear: and place the perforation below that which follows below the body, as we have said
Then administer after the perforation lint with unguent, and like that, so that it consumes that which remains from the corruption, until when you wash the wound will be healed: then take care of the wound with the generation of flesh, until it is healed
On the section of the epiglottis from the apostemate inwards of the guttur by chance.
On the section of the epiglottis from the apostemate inwards of the guttur by chance.
The ancients said that this section of the epiglottis is in the Epiglottis, and not in any land that I know of, who has made it: and this is the writing of their words.
However, in the cases where there is a swelling, it is necessary to section the epiglottis: when it does not take effect: for all the veins and the lungs are sick
And in those who have a hard swelling in the mouth, or in the guttur, or in two amygdales, when there is no inflammation in the canal, it is necessary to section the epiglottis in order to escape from the destruction which comes from the protrusion
It is necessary therefore, when we wish to do this, to section the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small section through the width, in that place where there is between two circles the quantity which is the section of the cartilage, not in the cartilage itself: and this place is convenient for the section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the blood vessels from it are long.
If the surgeon is timid, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the guttur with a finger. Then find the skin, until it reaches the canal: there will be blood vessels if there is anything there.
Then cut the cartilage which we have mentioned: and it is signified over the section of the canal by the phlegm which comes out of it, when it is broken, and the cutting of the vessel.
And withdraw the wound open for some time.
When the hour has passed in which the preparation is due, gather together the two lips of the wound and sew them together without cartilage.
Then apply medicines which cause the flesh to grow back, until such time as the wound is healed.
Thus spoke Albucasis. This is all that Albucasis has said concerning this matter; for when any of these hours have passed since the sickness began, the patient is already gone, and his breath is cut off: he cannot breathe through his mouth because of the wound, and he expires. Therefore they command that the wound be closed immediately, until the mischief of the disease has vanished, which is in three days, or nearly so; then indeed they order the wound to be sutured and the patient to be treated until he is healed.
And this, which I have seen myself, that a handmaid took a knife and put it into his gut, and it went into the windpipe.
I was called to care for him, and I found him already dead, just like a dead man
I saw that he had been cut by the wound, and blood had flowed out of the wound from a wound that was not properly closed. I am convinced that if it had not been for the wound itself, she would not have died, neither would she have been blind: the wind had escaped from the wound
I treated her, closed the wound, and cared for her until she was healed: and the handmaid did not suffer anything further, except that she was spitting in the water: and she recovered after three days to a better state of health
Henceforth, it is certain that there is no fear of the epiglottis being cut
On the section of the hernia gutturis.
On the section of the hernia gutturis.
This chapter is on the section of the hernia gutturis. It is a large hernia, according to the colour of the body, and is frequent in women.
It is classified into two types: either natural or accidental
The natural hernia is certain not to have been caused by an injury
The accidental hernia is of two kinds: one is like a swelling of fat. The other is like an abscess which arises from the swelling of an artery And in this there is danger, and it is not right to assume that it is only a hernia because of its size: and you must examine it carefully and investigate it with an introspective examination. If you find that it is like a swelling of fat and is not attached to any vessel: then you must dry it up like a swelling of fat and extract its contents, if it is within a sac: or if not, you must examine it thoroughly Then take care of the place where it was extracted until it is healed
The section of the super species of nodes
The section of the super species of nodes
There are many kinds of nodes, and I have mentioned all of them in their order: and it is necessary to know the difference between a node and an extrusion, especially when there is doubt
I say, therefore, that when an extrusion has become cold, and has lost its fever and its pain, until the ebullition of surplus has passed away and the putrefaction has ceased: then the fever and heat will subside
When the node is not hot, neither is the fever, neither the pain, and it contains within it a bladder of fat, which is its own sac, and is according to the colour of the body: and it is the beginning of their disease like chickpeas, and it makes like a bath, and is greater or less.
And there are two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colours of moisture are many, as I said in the explanation
It is necessary therefore, when you approach the treatment of the Node, that you experience it, and inquire about it at first with the instrument which is called the Intromissum, according to the form which will be shown in the following chapter
And the way of inquiry after the swelling, and of all Nodes, is that you take hold of this instrument and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the swelling: and you withdraw your fingers gradually until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin Then finally touch your hand according to the measure of the swelling
Then withdraw the Intromissum, and consider what comes out in its stain
If therefore it comes out running moisture, whatever the colour be: then dry it with a superficial section, according as I said in the other swellings
And if it does not come out moisture in the stain of the Intromissum, then you know that it is fatty: dry it therefore with a section having the shape of a cross, according to this shape: as I have taught you: and suspend it with threads, and rub the skin from every part with ease: and grasp the bladder if you can see it above that, so that you may extract it whole with the Node.
If, however, the bladder is ruptured during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, much of the time this occurs, then extract it broken, until nothing remains of it.
For if anything at all remains of it, either a little or a lot, it returns to the Node according to the most.
If it urges you, and something remains of it slightly: then make a wound at the end of your work, with some corrosive powders of needles: and bind the wound, and place above it what rests upon the soft swelling, and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If there is a large Node, then two of its lips must be opened, and care for it with that which is within it.</start_of_turn>
If, however, there is an opposing pulse either upward or downward: then stretch it out, and make an incision at the root of the hair, and release it tightly for two or three days, until the wound softens and the blood-boiling subsides: then return to the incision which remains of the Node.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 46.</start_of_turn>
About the instruments for cutting and perforating.</start_of_turn>
These are the forms of the Instruments which are introduced, and there are three kinds.</start_of_turn
There are three kinds: the great, the medium, and the small.</start_of_turn
Let them be of iron, square-ended, with the center of the square removed, so that they may hasten the entrance into the swelling.</start_of_turn
And these are the forms of the Experiences, and no, that is, perforating: and one of them is called a beris, which is, a perforator, and there are three kinds.</start_of_turn
From the great to the small, all things have their measure.
They are all connected, as when we investigate through bones, and exits, and fistulas, and abscesses from what is between them
And the rest are round, third, and flat, like a large needle which is guided under the skin, from citron, or from air, or iron, or silver.
The best of them are those which arise from citron.
And also from black lead, which join in that they may be experienced through fistulas, whose concavity reflects like reflections with their softness against these reflections.
There are three kinds of them. Because they are great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the diameter of the fistula and the stricture of it
Shapes of vessels, and there are many kinds of them
Because they are simple, that is to say that they have only one curve: and there are three kinds like liquids, great, medium, and small
And from the bones are blind: and there are three kinds of them
And from the bones are needles having two curves, and there are three kinds of them: and from the bones are needles having three curves, and there are three kinds of them: and all of these are necessary in their place
And these are the forms of scalpels, which cut and scrape nodes and abscesses: and there are three kinds of them, because they are great, medium, and small.
Their extremities which make the cut are acute, the other extremities are not acute: and they are not put together like that, except when there is an attempt to make an incision in the nerves alongside the fear of cutting the veins, or to prevent infection from the abscess.
These are Magdae, and are three in number.
The shape of the sponges which are driven between the fingers at the perforation of the apostematum: these are not perceived by the patient. There are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
The shape of the sponges which are driven between the fingers at the perforation of the apostematum: these are not perceived by the patient. There are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
Let them be of air or citron, round, of equal length, somewhat like liquids: and be thin.
And it is necessary that these kinds of sponges should be great and small: so that you can evacuate blood quickly when necessary, and then when it is not required by the physician
But do not use them for the evacuation of blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in carbuncles: such as for wounds of the leg, thigh, arm, breast, belly, groin, and similar to these which are of carbuncles, moist.
And sometimes other small things like sponges are used which are similar to the cortices of fists, according to their shape: with which blood is evacuated when it flows out of the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein or artery: and sometimes they are of the round shape according to this form
Chapter XLVII.
Concerning the care of the breasts of men which assimilate the milk of women.
When the breasts of some men swell at the time of sleep (that is, when they begin to become soiled in sleep) until they become like the breasts of women: and they remain swollen with pus
Whoever dislikes this thing should cause the breast to be cut with a lunar section, according to this form from the line A to the line G. Then scrape away the fat all around After that, let the patient be given a poultice from the medicament of incision. Then join together two lips of the wound with suture, and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the nipple declines downwards, and is softened by its size, as is the case with women: then it is necessary to find two seams on the two upper sides of the wound, similar in size to a half-moon. Each one must be continued with the other at the end of each, until the larger line contains the smaller one, following this shape from the line b. to the line g. Then after that, scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said concerning the suture and powder, which is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you do not wish to complete the incision because of the patient's anxiety or because of bleeding: then you must apply a poultice soaked in corrosive unguent under the wound, and leave it until it has eaten away that which remains of the fat.</start_of_turn Then care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
As for the perforation of the apostematis, which happens under the nipple.</start_of_turn
Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn
These apostemata which happen under the nipple are of the kind of hard Stropharia which contain vesicles, and from these are those which contain moisture.</start_of_turn
Which are from the moist things which contain moisture, must be cut with a lunar section, following this shape from the line b. to the line g. when all that is in the apostemata from the blood has been evacuated, then apply a poultice to the old wound and leave it until another day.</start_of_turn
Then the foot is raised up, and is cared for with an unguent suitable for it, until it is healed.
If the swelling were from a kind of knot of the Strophular kind, then it should be cut above itself, as we said in the section on the Strophulas that are equal
If, however, pus extends from it in this way, then apply cautery to it, according to what has been said previously
Chapter XLIX.
Concerning the section of the swelling that happens by the Artery and the Vein.
When the Artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is consolidated, then much swelling often happens from the swelling: and in the same way, swelling also happens in the Vein, as it happens in this swelling and inflation
And the signs by which it is known that the swelling and inflation are from the Artery and the Vein are these: for when the swelling is from the Artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body: and when you touch the swelling of the digits with your fingers, you feel as though there is a constriction
And that which is from the Vein is rounded in the appearance of the body
And the section of this swelling is dangerous, especially when it is under the scrotum, and the groin, and the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is great danger It is necessary therefore that its care be taken with iron, and that from the outside also it is in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that its care be taken
Concerning this, therefore, that which is from the outside is from the swelling of the orifice of the Artery, find in the cutting of the skin in length. Then open the part with hooks, afterwards the artery: and free the thing from the tunics, until it is detached.
Then introduce the hook under it and make the thing penetrate until the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temporal bones.
Then pierce the place which is between the two ligaments with the sponge, until the blood which is in it all comes out, and it is dissolved after the clot has gone away
Then carry out the treatment which brings on pus, until the ligaments are gone: afterwards care for it with suitable unguents until it is healed.
If there should be a clot because of the section of a vein, then it is necessary that you hold your hand which is possible from the clot with the skin. Then introduce the hook under the place where you held your hand, and make the thing penetrate: and be there a double thread, until you pull it out from the other side. Then bind with the clot the ligament with a strong thread: according to what I have told you about the ligation of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of the thread
If however you wish to draw out the thread, then introduce another hook with another thread under the whole clot at the incision of the needle: before that, and bind your thread in four places.
Then dry the clot in the middle of it, until when it comes out what is in it: then cut away the excess of the skin, and let go what is bound from it
Then put over it a little powder which you submerged in wine, and oil. Then carry out the treatment which is done with poultices and unguents, until it is healed
Of the swelling which arises from the twisting of nerves.
Of the swelling which arises from the twisting of nerves.
Like that which happens in the artery and vein, in the same way does it happen in the nerves: which happens by impact in the case of concussion, or by excessive work, or in like manner: and it happens most frequently in the armpits, or at the ankle, and in every place where there is a joint movement: and it is a serious swelling.
It is similar in colour to the rest of the body, and it is found in various positions without pain: and when it is squeezed with pressure, a faint sensation of numbness similar to that of drunkenness is felt in it
It is not a swelling which is accumulated in the depth of the body, but rather under the skin, and it is moved to every part, and does not go forward or backward or to the sides
Which is caused by the impact in the joints, does not require that it be sutured with iron Perhaps in it there will be a contraction.
However, in that which is caused by the impact in the head, or in the face, find the skin with blisters. If it is a small swelling, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from its root
And if it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and scrape it off: then remove it, and mix gum with the suture: and care for it until it heals
Of the section of the swelling which happens inside the body
Of the section of the swelling which happens inside the body.
These happen to many people in various parts of their bodies, and in the rest of their body, the little things which are called Fungalia, because they are similar to fungi
Whose root is slender, and their head is large, and their lips are closed. And they are of small seed: and they are of the kind which grow tall
I saw a man who had two little things in his belly which were greater than the rest like other seeds: there was no difference between them, the root was white, the seeds were large, and their lips were closed, and they were moist from the inside always.
I cut them open and found in the weight of one like X and eight ounces and in the other like six ounces. And the operation of their incision is as you consider, if the patient is moist, and the color of the little things is white, moist, slender root: then cut it with a broad spatula and there will be in your presence their caecum in the fire.
A great deal of blood will be discharged at the section of it: be careful therefore if it incites you, then cauterize it.
If you see the patient weak and timid from the incision with the iron, then take a leaden thread, made in the center, and string it with it like this: which is how we have said, and let it go in two days.
Then put in the stricture of lead. Do not cease to string the lead until it is completely split, and it falls away by itself without toil
If the little things are large of the root, then in their incision there is something fearful and painful: especially that which is in the belly
It is indeed possible to cut through the middle of it Then cauterize it, so that it does not return
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound.
Then take care of yourself until the wound is healed.
Chapter 52.
Until the wound is healed.
The swelling of the belly is caused by many diseases. It is caused by wounds of the intestines which are above the belly: or from the bursting of the intestines, as in other ruptures Or from blood which flows from a vein or from an artery, as has been said before Or from a compressed belly.
If however the wound is of the intestines, and the fluid escapes: then the colour of the swelling is like that of the body: it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various places. And if it is from bursting of the intestines, then the place of the wound is like that which we have mentioned, and the swelling is of various degrees When you touch it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound like that: and it swells very much at the entrance of the bath, and there is great suffering
If however it is due to humidity, it is soft: then it is not hidden when you touch it with your hand, neither does it tighten, nor does it cause pain
When it is due to blood, then it appears with these signs: the swelling is black like soot
When it is due to dead flesh: then the swelling is great, bulky, hard, and is like the quantity of one
If indeed it is on account of excessive moisture, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation in that case is that you must consider immediately, if the prominence of the navel is on account of blood of an Artery or Vein, or moisture: then it is necessary that you abstain from its treatment.</start_of_turn> For in that case there is fear and danger, just as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of apostemata on account of an artery and vein.</start_of_turn>
If the prominence of the navel is on account of an intestine or a tumor: then it is necessary that you order the patient to take a breath, as long as he keeps taking a breath, and to remain standing extended.</start_of_turn Then signs with encasement in the circumference of the whole navel.</start_of_turn> Then order him to rest between your hands on his back.</start_of_turn Then surround with a sponge of a broad width in the circumference of the navel over the place which you indicated with encasement.</start_of_turn Then extend the middle of the apostemata upwards, with a large hook.</start_of_turn Then bind it firmly in the circumference with thread, or with a strong silk cord: and let the knot of the binding be firm.</start_of_turn
Then open the middle of the extended apostemata above the ligament.</start_of_turn If therefore you find that it is grasped by the ligament: then pull out the encasement, and introduce a finger into it, and push the intestine inwards: and if you find a tumor, then grasp it with the hook, and cut off its excess.</start_of_turn
If, however, the artery or vein is opposed, surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and pass through two strong threads: and pass two needles through the circumference which you made around the appendix in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate.</start_of_turn>
Then string the appendix in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place, until the extended flesh softens: and it will fall away by itself: or cut it when it becomes thin and softens.</start_of_turn>
Then care for yourself with what is necessary from the unguents, until you are healed.</start_of_turn
And if the navel cord is protruding from the flesh near the belly, or from moisture: then it is necessary to flatten the appendix, as we have said.</start_of_turn And draw out the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself with what is necessary to solidify the place.</start_of_turn
(End of text)</start_of_turn>
(The text continues with instructions on how to care for a cancer patient.)</start_of_turn>
As we have said in the discourse on the species of cancer, and how it is to be treated by physicians: and caution should be taken with it when treated with iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and we have said cancer is generated in the matrix, and its treatment should be cautious.</start_of_turn
And the ancients have said that whenever cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible: such as cancer that is in the breast, or in the thigh, and those that are like them, from the members located to be removed entirely: especially when it is just beginning small.</start_of_turn
When it is old and great, it is not fitting to approach it.
It is not right to approach it when it is old and great.
A procedure in such a case, when it is situated as we have said, is to precede and evacuate the black bile somewhat. Then, if you find a phlebotomy with a clear swelling.
Prepare the patient beforehand for the operation, in which it is placed with the procedure.
Then project on the knots of the spleen that meet it. Then retract it from all sides with the skin, according to the prescription, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it off too quickly, but rather express the place, and evacuate the thick blood as much as possible with your hands, or with whatever instruments are available
If however it makes the flow of thick blood from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein, until the bleeding stops Then care for it with the remaining treatment, until it heals.
Of the care of hydrosis.
Chapter 14. We are narrating in this section the varieties of hydrosis, and how water is accumulated: and the signs of each species, and the treatment with physicians
And concerning that which is cured with iron, it is not except for one kind of ascites alone: and it is not approached with iron in the case of tympanitis: neither in the case of acute hypospasm: for that is deadly.
When you are treated and have not benefited from the medication, consider the cause of your ailment. If, after treatment, the ailment persists or worsens, consider the nature of the disease other than Hydropisis: for example, if there is a cough or diarrhea, or a solution of the intestines, or similar conditions; in such cases, do not administer iron medication, for fear of its harmful effects.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the patient is vigorous or advanced in age, other than with pure Hydropisis, there is no reason to fear the disease: in such a case, the mode of treatment is to elevate the patient and express from his belly by pressing on his abdomen with your hands the fluid which has collected there.</start_of_turn>
Then take a sponge of thorns, according to this fashion.</start_of_turn Two acute parts, long, with acute extremities like a Sponge of Thorns.</start_of_turn Indeed, there is some shortness of breath which gradually passes away, so that you do not pass it with the operation until you have reached the intestines, and do not cause any damage to the intestines themselves.</start_of_turn
Consider carefully.</start_of_turn> If the Hydropisis originates from the intestines, then you must lengthen the incision from the navel to a distance of three fingers below the navel.</start_of_turn
If, on the other hand, the Hydropisis is caused by liver disease: then your incision should be on the left side from the navel to a distance of three fingers.</start_of_turn
If the cause is the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side: and it is not necessary to make the incision on the side where you wish to place the patient, so as not to cause additional discomfort.</start_of_turn
Then perforate with the instrument the whole of the skin. Then introduce into the cavity the instrument, and raise your hand with Spatumili between the skin, and scrape, as if you are scraping yourself: and be as much as you scrape, as much as the nail, or somewhat less.
Then perforate the scrape, until Spatumili reaches the empty place: and that is the place of water. Then extract it, and introduce into the hole the instrument whose form this is. And it is like a tube: it is made of silver, or of air, or of gold, flexible, thin: which has in its lower part a small hole, and in its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: and its extremity is cut off, according to the fashion of the incision of a reed, like water: at the extremity of it is an armlet
For when the instrument reaches the water, then itself immediately descends above the instrument, therefore it evacuates from the water in an hour the quantity medium
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, in an hour perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of the spirit of his animal: or something happens to him which approaches to death.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what is signified to you by the dispositions of the patient from the virtue of his pulse, and from his condition
Then extract the instrument, and retain the water.
For, because it is retained immediately because of the skin which retains the hole which is above the scrape: of which I spoke, that you must perforate it according to the light of the mode.
Repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient can tolerate it: and extract the same quantity from water.
Repeat the procedure on the other side if the patient can tolerate it: and extract the same quantity from water without fear.
If the patient is in too much pain, and you discharge from water a great quantity: then care for him with burial in hot sand, and much sweating in bath and sun, and expect above the seat: and care for him with physicians of renown, until he is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver, after the water has been extracted, according to what I have said before.
As for the care of infants who are born with unperforated urinary tract locations, do this: ...
Chapter 55.
When a child comes out of the womb of its mother, and its head is turned to the side, and its opening is not perforated, or is narrowed, or is in the wrong place.
One must immediately perform an incision with a fine needle when such a child is born with an unperforated opening, in order to prevent its bursting with Spatumil.
Then put in the opening a small lead weight, and tie it off: and keep it for three days, or four
When it wishes to urinate, move it around, and mix it together Then reduce it
And if you do not put in lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to close
He whose opening is narrowed is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it becomes wide
If there is a hole in its unnatural place, it suffers. If there is a hole in a place where it should not be, it suffers. For in a place where it should not be, there is no generation, for the seed cannot reach the womb in a straight line: and this is a severe pain.
The way to treat this is to support the sick person above his back Then extend the neck of the patient with your left hand, and with your right hand cut the head of the worm from its place at the groin, with a sharp knife or pointed spatula: just as if you were cutting a nail, or as if you were pulling out a thorn, so that half of the worm comes out like the head of the worm: and so that the hole is in the middle as it should be
And take care that there be no blood flow during the operation. Many times this happens to us Counter this by applying pressure with that which tears blood, and care for the wound, until it is healed
Of the accidents which happen in the preparation of the testicles and the head of the worm, and the corruption, blackening, and adhesion.
Chapter LXVI.
Many times these things happen to the worm, and it is the elevation of the diseased tissue
And among these there are some which are malignant, and some which are not malignant
The malignant ones you must suspend with a fine thread and cut through them, until you have severed them entirely Then place above the wound the submerged heel in unguent Egyptian. Then care for the wound afterwards with fine unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is severe, having color like blood, then it is necessary to administer cauterium upon it after its incision and the surrounding area.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the wound is in the vicinity of a testicle, not circumcised, and is part of the testicle which is within the scrotum and part of the testicle which is outside: then it is necessary to elevate the testicle which is within first until it is consolidated, and then care for the outside: for if you care for both simultaneously, the scrotum will be ruptured.</start_of_turn
And sometimes also in testicles, black spots and corruption.</start_of_turn It is necessary therefore that you drain away all that is swollen and that you wish to corrupt, or that is already corrupted.</start_of_turn
Then smear above it afterwards with honey which has been consumed with pounded wheat and powdered thyme leaves.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If however blood flows there, then administer cauterium with lunar cauterium, in this fashion.</start_of_turn
For cauterium is useful in two positions simultaneously, namely for bleeding and for a wound which is corrupted.</start_of_turn
If the head of a worm is corroded and the whole is destroyed in an hour: then it is necessary to introduce lead shot into the flesh of the penis, so that it may mix with the pus above the wound.</start_of_turn
In adherence of the scrotum with the head of the testicle, and this adherence does not happen unless in the one in whom the testicle is sound, and does not require more than its circumsision: and when it happens through a wound or an abscess, it is necessary to remove the scrotum with closed sponges until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the testicle is freed from all parts.
When it is difficult to discern these things, then it is necessary to remove some of the skin from the head of the testicle and from the scrotum. For indeed, when the scrotum is subtle, it is perhaps perforated because of its slightness.
Then separate the scrotum and the head of the testicle with a fine linen cloth which has been made wet in cold water, so that they do not adhere again
And care for them with vinegar until they are solidified.
Chapter LXVII.
Concerning the care of infants, and the treatment of an error from an accident
Circumcision is not a complete solution like the rest of the wounds: indeed, when it is our operation, our will, and the nature of the child herself are in the matter, it is necessary that we sign in this operation for a better result, and to reduce the risk of recurrence.
I say therefore, that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have learned through experience.
That I have found in my study a greater part of the physicians, and phlebotomists, who use circumcision for the purification of the blood, by cutting with the knife and the scissors: and they use the cautery, and ligature with thread, and incision with the nail.
I too have tried all these methods, and I have not found any better than the use of forceps and ligature with thread.
For in excision with a needle, the skin flees much For the skin has two layers of cover: so sometimes the upper skin is cut through, and the lower layer is threatened: it is therefore necessary to make an incision to cut through the other, and to stop the pain of the future And when the excision is made by the cutting of the nails, as the barbers do, the incision of the extremity of the limb is not secured: for perhaps it penetrates the hole of it
But in excision with a nail, perhaps the iron will go through, and will corrupt your work: and the skin of a child is short in nature, and many are produced in this way, which does not suffice for excision: and I advise you of this.
But as for excision with forceps, and ligature with thread, I have found it to be a good experiment: for the forceps are proportional to the incision: so that the greater the height of the former, the greater is the height of the latter. Therefore, when you handle your hand, the two heights are proportional, and they are cut together in the course of one operation: and there is a similar compression of the figure, containing the skin of the limb from all sides, so that no error occurs at all
And the proper method of performing the operation is to make the incision, especially with children, if there is one who understands the matter, for you will not do it unless you ligate the thread in the limb itself: and dismiss him until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that you can, from that which he receives understanding. Then make him stand between your hands, prepared to a normal stance, and do not sit: and conceal the instruments in your sleeve or under your foot, so that no one shall see them at all, neither any instrument.
Then insert your hand into the wound, and blow into the skin, and draw it upwards until the head of the wound emerges Then drain away from it whatever has collected in that cavity
Then suture the marked place with two threads. Then suture the lower part with the nearby ligament next to it. Then take hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament firmly, and cut between the two ligaments. Then raise the skin upwards quickly, and pull out the head of the wound Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and put on powder: and over the powder put a bandage in which the swelling has occurred or is being boiled in rose-water, pounded with fresh rose oil: and leave it on until another day: and care for the rest of the cure until he is healed
The shape of the instrument for draining this is like this
There are two handles at the ends, and two blades: do not let the handle escape from the wound: and let the length of the two blades be equal to the length of two thumbs together
The mistake which often happens in draining is that perhaps the entire intrinsic skin has escaped, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore one must stretch out your hand from your hour with your finger before the closing of the place: and cut according to equality
If you are unable to hold the limb with your thumb, then extract it with the index finger and cut it off.
If it remains swollen for three days, and the swelling persists beneath the nail, the nail has become loose: then remove it until the nail becomes firm again, and scrape it off easily, and cut it off as before: and beware of the nail from the head of the fingerbone. It will not harm it.
Treat it as we have said concerning the consolidation of bones from fragments: and even if it breaks through the skin above the measure, and goes up towards the upper parts, it will not harm it.</start_of_turn>
Treat it as we have said until it heals.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 58.</start_of_turn
On the extraction of a retained bone in a wound.</start_of_turn>
The retention of urine in the bladder may be caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh which has grown, or by other things of that kind which we have mentioned in the section on treatment for inflammation.</start_of_turn
If the urine is not cured, and the retention is known to be caused by a stone which is in the neck of the bladder: then it must be supported over the knee.</start_of_turn Then put their feet on their buttocks, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of their back, and bind the painful part as tightly as possible for them.</start_of_turn It is thought that thus the stone in the neck of the bladder will be forced backwards: thereby the urine will be expelled.</start_of_turn
If the ailment persists despite our previous treatment, and if the condition is grave, it is necessary to perform an extraction using an instrument called a siringa. It is fashioned from silver, is slight, flexible, and bell-shaped like the quill of a bird in the thickness of a radius. It is long like half of a palm. There is a fine cannula at its head.
The manner of extracting the [disease] through the siringa is as follows: take a doubled thread and bind it at its extremity with lanolin or cotton, a secure ligature. Insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the siringa. Incise with scissors if anything protrudes from the lanolin, but truly insert the thread into the cannula with care, like an arrow.</start_of_turn>
Then soak the siringa with oil, butter, and alum. Place the patient on a seat and support the limb, and grasp the vein with your hand, and instill oil with the fingers, and olive oil and warm water.</start_of_turn>
Then insert the siringa into the vein with ease, until it reaches the root of the vein.</start_of_turn>
Then double the upper part from the navel.</start_of_turn
Then push the siringa into the vein until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient know when the vein has been successfully pierced: do not do this without cause, except when the vein is twisted.</start_of_turn>
Then gradually pull out the thread with the lanolin.</start_of_turn The vein will follow the lanolin.</start_of_turn>
Then withdraw the siringa and cause the vein to flow through the urine. Repeat the process of inserting and withdrawing the siringa until the vein is empty and the patient experiences relief.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the quality of clisterization with Clepshydra.
Concerning the quality of clisterization with Clepshydra.
When an ulcer occurs in the bladder, or the blood therein is frozen, or congealed into pus, and the urine is distilled into water and medicines: then it is done with an instrument called Clepshydra, and this is its form.
It is blunt, that is, closed And there are three holes in it, two from one side and one from the other side, like urine
The boiling place, in which that which drives it is located, should be according to the quantity that it is desired to drive without addition, until when it is drawn with it something is attracted from the humilities: and when it is driven, when it is expelled far off: according to that which does the Clepshydra, which ejects pitch, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When thus it is desired to eject humilities into the bladder, insert the extremity of the Clepshydra into the moisture, and draw it with that which drives it upwards, the moisture is thereby drawn into the concavity of the Clepshydra
Then insert its extremity into the urine, as we have said in the syringe. Then drive the moisture with that which drives it and immediately the moisture goes to the bladder, as the sick person feels
The form of the gentle clister which is made for the bladder
It is made from silver, or gold: whose head is higher like a small bowl, and under that there is a space between which the ligament passes
Then take the bladder of a goat, and put in it the moisture with which one wants to clisterize the bladder. Then bind the two sinuses together with a strong ligature using a double thread: and heat it with moderate heat above the flame.
Then insert the extremity of the bladder into the wound, afterwards string your hand over the vessel with tight moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the vessel
If, however, the vessel is not present, then grasp a fragment of gut and form a circle from it, and perforate it from all its roundness. Then insert the strong thread firmly through those holes, as they are wont to twist around each other. Then gather the circle, as is done with a sausage: after you have placed in it what you wish of moisture, and oil, and water.
Then bind it in the instrument: and make with it as you made with the vessel from expressing with your hand, until the moisture has reached the vessel.
Chapter LX.
¶ On the Extraction of a Stone.
We have already spoken in the discourse concerning the species of Stone, and its treatment by physicians: and we have spoken of the difference between the Stone generated in solids and the vessel, and the signs of the whole: and we have spoken of the Stone in which the operation is performed with the hand and section: and this is the Stone generated in the vessel itself: and that which forms in the wound: and I shall speak of this with manifest explanation and abbreviation.
I say, therefore, that the Stone generated in the vessel most often occurs in children
And from its signs it is known that the urine comes out of the vessel like water in its substance: and there appears in it white sand, and the patient rubs his wound, and works with it, and is often fainting Then it arises, and goes out with it the anus among many things.
It is easy to heal the children from this, until fourteen years have passed from that time. It is difficult in old age. But in youth it is middle, in which is between these two things: and its cure is easier because of its greater hardness: and if it is small, its cure is more economical
When we come to the treatment, it is necessary in the first place to loosen the sick person with a cathartic, which will evacuate all the stool that is in their intestines: for this is often withheld at the inquiry of the stone
Then the sick person is taken with their feet and is beaten, and moved downwards: so that the stone will go down to the bottom of the bladder, or will go out of its high place several times.
Then let them sit down between your hands prepared, and your hands under their buttocks, so that the bladder will be completely tilted downwards
Then ask them, and touch them externally.
If you feel the stone in the space, then act immediately with a section above it
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must withdraw the index finger with the left hand if the patient is a child: or the middle finger if he is an adult: and introduce it into their rectum, and inquire about the stone, until it is under your finger: and gently push it up to the neck of the bladder
Then press above it with your finger, and push it outwards against the place where the section is to be made: and command the minister to grasp the bladder with his hand, and command another minister to extend the testicles of his right hand upwards: and another hand to move the skin which is under the testicles in the part at the place of the section
Then insert the sponge into the wound, which is of this shape. Then insert the sponge into the wound, which is of this shape. Find in it what is between the uterus and the testicles, and not in the middle, on the left side of the navel: and let the incision be above the highest stone, and your finger be in the rectum: and make a transverse incision, so that the external incision is wide and the internal incision is narrow, according to the quantity that it is possible for the stone to escape from it.
Perhaps the finger which is in the rectum will press the stone at the incision and it will come out without difficulty
And you know that the stone has angles and margins, because of which its exit is difficult
And from it is soft, like a gland, and round: and its exit is easy
To it therefore which has angles and margins, add in the incision.
If it does not come out thus, then you must understand above the highest: or that you bind above it with a handle which has an extremity like the Moon, which binds above the stone, and does not yield to it: or that you insert under it an instrument which is flexible at its extremity
If however you are unable above all, then enlarge the opening nearby If anything bloodstained comes to you, cut it off with a saw.
If there is more than one stone, then drive in the first one towards the os vesiculae Then cut above it Then drive in the small things afterwards: and do the same if there are more than two
If it is a large one, then you do not know how to cut above it with a large incision Whenever a sick person is afflicted with two evils, either he must die, or he undergoes an excessive retention of urine: because neither of these two things finds rest in its place.
In truth, one must administer the evacuation of the urine until it departs: or it is necessary to effect a fracture of its [bladder] with forceps, until it is extruded frustrated.
When you have completed your operation, then apply a sponge of wool, aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it tightly, and put upon it a soaked bandage of oil and wine, or rose oil and cold water: so that the swelling will subside.
Then rest the patient upon his side, and do not loosen the ligamentum until the third day. When you have loosened it, bathe the place with water and much oil.
Then care for it with unguents of diaphinium and balsam until it is healed
If, however, in the wound there is a soft swelling added, and corrosion, and similar things: thus also if blood is congealed in the bladder and is prohibited from passing urine: this is recognized by the emission of blood with the urine. Introduce your finger into the wound and extract the clot of blood. For if it remains, it promotes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply everything that suits the cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the course of treatment at all times to bind up the two thighs, and to compress, because of the medicines which are placed upon the place.
If the stone is small and lies in the urine tract and projects therein, and hinders the discharge of urine: then treat it with that which I have mentioned before until you reach the section. You are exempt from section in this treatment, for I have proved it to be useful.</start_of_turn>
And it is that you take a hook of iron, which has this form, triangular at the extremities, acute, fixed in wood.</start_of_turn>
Then take thread, and bind it with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.</start_of_turn
Then insert the perforating hook into the bladder with ease, until it reaches the stone: and withdraw the hook gradually from the stone: and make a hole in it from the other side.</start_of_turn
The urine will immediately cease.</start_of_turn>
Then press your hand over that which remains of the stone from the outside of the bladder.</start_of_turn It will break itself, and go out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you do not prepare this treatment for him, because of something that hinders it: then bind thread under the stone, and thread above the stone.</start_of_turn Then dry over the stone in the urine between two ligatures.</start_of_turn Then extract it.</start_of_turn> Then loosen the ligature, and staunch the bleeding that occurs in the wound.</start_of_turn
And it is not necessary to ligate the thread under the stone, except that it does not return to the bladder: and to ligate the other thread above, except when you loosen the thread after the stone has gone, that the skin should return to its place, and that the wound should be closed: and for this reason it is necessary for you to ligate the upper thread, so that you elevate the skin to the top, so that the skin returns to its original position, and that the wound is closed.</start_of_turn
On the extraction of the stone from women.
On the extraction of the stone from women.
Stones are rarely formed in women
If, however, it should happen to any of them that a stone occurs, then the care is difficult, and is prohibited by various methods.
One of them is: perhaps the woman is pregnant.
And the second is, because you will not find a woman who will confess to the doctor that she has a stone when she is chaste, or has a husband.
The third is, because you will not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand
And the fourth is the distance of the stone from the place: because it requires deep incision, and there is fear in that
If necessity compels you to do that, then you must take a female doctor who is well-versed: and few are found
If you wish to do this beforehand, then seek out a wise doctor, discreet, and present to her a skilled woman in the art of midwifery, or a woman who has learned a part of the art: do this so that she will make known to you everything which she has learned about the stone from her inquiries
Firstly, that she may see if the woman is pregnant: then she must insert her finger into her belly and feel for the stone
If she finds it, she should grasp it under her finger, and then command the obstetrician to insert her finger into the lower belly, and inquire about the stone, after she has placed her left hand over the uterus, and has pressed down firmly
If, therefore, a stone is found, it is necessary that he gradually move it from the orifice of the bladder towards the lower parts with the sum of his skill, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then he should secrete over it towards the middle of the belly towards the root of the thigh from whichever side he wishes to prepare it, and he will feel the stone in that part: and his finger shall not be moved from the stone, coiling under it: and let there be a small incision in the beginning And then he will introduce the radium through that incision.
And then he will introduce the radium through that incision. If, therefore, he feels the stone, then he will add to the incision the quantity that the stone comes out through that part.
And know that there are many kinds of stones Of these there are some small and some large, some soft and some rough, some long and some round having a branch
You know therefore the kind of each of these, as it is signified by this above that to which it refers
If, therefore, it swells with blood, then add in the place of the wound some powdered alum, and keep it for an hour, until the blood is gone.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out: and make ready with me the instruments which I mentioned in the extraction of the stone from the bladder, so that you may aid me in this operation.
If there is a flow of blood and you know that the bleeding comes from the artery that was cut: then put powder on the place and bind it with threads of thread: and do not stop it: and let the stone go, and do not pull it out. Perhaps the woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When blood flow has subsided after a day, and the place has become putrid, return to the operation until the bone has healed completely.
Chapter XII
Concerning the incision for an aquous hernia.
The swelling of the aquous hernia is not due to pus, but to the accumulation of moisture within the white membrane which contains the testicles: and this is called a hernia
And sometimes it is in the proper sac of the testicles, which nature has prepared for it in part: until it is burst: which is another testicles, and the skin of the testicles between the white membrane which we have mentioned: and this does not happen except rarely
And the generation of this swelling is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: and therefore it leaks out onto these things And sometimes it happens from a blow to the testicles
And this moisture has many colours Or sometimes it is yellow-orange, or red-bloody, or greenish, or black, or white-watery, and this is the best of all
And the signs by which you know that there is an accumulation of water, are these For if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the swelling is rounded to the length like the shape of a testicle: and the testicles do not appear, because the moisture contains them from all sides
And if it is in the proper sac of the testicles, then the swelling is rounded with a part of the testicle, and because of this the man knows that there is another testicle
And if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white fat, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore one wishes to discern the color of moisture, then to experience the color of moisture in the afterimage with the introverted square, whose form precedes it. According to that therefore which proceeds from the introverted square, judge concerning that which is between itself.
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to give the sick person the opportunity to urinate, and to let the blood out if it is possible for him, and to fill his body with liquid.
Then he rests on his back over a high low thing, and puts under him many cushions.
Then sit on his left hand side, and command the minister, so that he sit on his right hand side, who extends his arm towards one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the part near the navel.
Then grasp the broad spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, until almost to the navel: and make the incision according to the straight line of an equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white fat encompassing: and scrape it off and observe, or cut it out directly, as you please: and your scraping should be such as that which you make when you scrape with your thumb: and scrape cautiously according to the amount that you are able to.
Then perforate the full white fat with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the fat upwards, and do not touch the skin of the testicles encompassing: and cut the fat as you please, either entirely, or in fragments, especially the large one under the nail. If you do not scrutinize carefully, safety is not achieved in its incision, for water returns.
If, however, anything external to its cavity occurs during your operation: then when you have completed the incision, reduce it immediately. Then join together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it like the rest of the wounds until it heals
If you find anything corrupted from the black bile, then it is necessary that you bind up the parts that are its support, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicles with their support, and extract the contents: afterwards care for it as we have said
If indeed water has gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two roots: dry therefore the other part equally
And if they are equal, as for the operation to be one, then do so: then drain the blood. And introduce into the incisions a soaked lanet in oil, or in rose oil: and place outside the lanet another lanet which you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand between two testicles, and look into the belly: and place over them doubled layers of cloth, and these are nails: and bind them up above with a ligament which has six fingers according to this form.
And cover with two sponges, and wash, and apply the carmine-colored plaster, according to this likeness: and let the extremities which are sent forth from the hip, or the moist lanet: and gather with the tightening in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity shall take over from the hip up to the shoulder, and the second shall take over from the part of the loin: and the two extremities above the two thighs, and the two extremities above the two knees, and the tightening shall gather all together in the lumbar region of the arms
When the artificial treatment has been made with the cautery at the place of section with the iron: then you shall take up the cautery in a subtle manner and cut through the skin of the testicles. And it is ignited, as we have said: until when the white fat containing water is discerned. Then you shall take up the cautery in the like manner.
When the artificial treatment has been made with the cautery at the place of section with the iron: then you shall take up the cautery cautiously and cut through the skin of the testicles. And it is ignited, as we have said: until the white fat containing water is discerned. Then you shall take up the cautery in like manner.
Then you shall perforate with it [the cautery] until that moisture has gone out entirely.
Then stretch out the fat with hooks, and peel it off with the cautery which is ignited in a subtle way, and cut through it as much as possible, until you have excised all of it
And burn from behind, so that it does not touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer, and longer from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with section
If, however, you make an opposite movement at the time of the section, or at the time of the after-burning of the cautery, or the flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you cure the thing which makes the opposite movement at the same time as the treatment which is suitable for it, according as has been said before
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect such a great operation because of his horror: then you shall perform perforation as I have said above: and it is like this
When you are certain that it is like that which we have said concerning the signification of the ramex being aqueous: then you must cause the patient to sit upon a raised seat
Then perforate the abscess in the lower part of its belly with a wide spatula: and make the perforation according to the length of the body, and leave the opening wide open until all the pus has drained out.
Then place a pad over the place, and ligate it, and let it drain out until the rest of the pus has drained: then care for it until the wound has healed
But if there is opposition to the drainage of the pus in the hour when you perforate it: and this is not except for the white pus which makes opposition at the opening of the wound, and prevents the escape of the pus: then it is necessary to introduce a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which the hydropic fluid is extracted, which has a form before: or to add in the operation of the wound a little of the like.
And you know, that the water returns, and collects after six months, or thereabouts. When it collects, then it should be closed according to the same manner, and pass through the painful days of its life.
Chapter LXIII.</start_of_turn>
On the care of the flesh-muscle.
You know, that in the section above this Ramus, there is from the fear of carrying forward to mischief in many arrangements.</start_of_turn> Therefore its dismissal from that is seen.</start_of_turn
And I remember the operation on that, and the kind of abscess.</start_of_turn
I say, that many abscesses happen in the bodies, from which testicles are composed: and this is from the pus of many things, namely.</start_of_turn
Or from acute or acrid superfluousness, which flows down to the testicles.</start_of_turn Or by percussion.
The color of the swelling is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain: and it is a serious swelling.
And perhaps it is a swelling of the stones, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it
And when it is from the rupture of arteries, and the swelling of the veins: thus is its memory remembered: or from the swelling of the veins themselves
Which therefore is from the swelling of the arteries, is recognized by the disposition of the swelling, when you press it with your fingers.</start_of_turn> And it is not necessary that you touch it directly.</start_of_turn>
That which is from the swelling of the veins, does not depart from that because of the pressure with your fingers.</start_of_turn>
And it is possible that above this kind of swelling there will be an incision, and above the rest of the flesh: and it is like the cutting of the testicles.</start_of_turn Then extend the hand above, and extract it with white wool: and liberate the swelling from the veins, and ligate the veins: and cut the swelling when you have freed it from all parts of the hand.</start_of_turn
If therefore the hand is consolidated with those natural parts of the body, then it is necessary to pull the hand, and cut it.</start_of_turn
And if there is an adhesion between some of the hairs, or in that which is between the veins: then it is necessary to free the whole adhesion, and cut it with a round incision.</start_of_turn
But if there is a natural part of the flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut all of it, and extract the hand, as we said.</start_of_turn
When the operation is completed, take a wine-soaked sponge and wring it out into the wound, and afterwards care for it along with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 122.
Regarding the care of branches, which is with oil.
Uitis is a swelling which fills the quadra, like a bot, with the softening of the testicles: and it makes difficult the walking of a cripple and his exercise, and his walking about.
And in the treatment of this disease is fear, because of that which precedes its remembrance
It is true that we must say that the operation for this is done as the first ones did it
I say therefore that you must make the cripple sit upon a raised seat And then drive the testicles towards the lower parts. And then hold the testicles with your fingers, with the nails towards the veins: and hold them with another helper, and extend them with an extension of the palm of the hand
And then make an incision with a sharp knife across in the middle of the veins, until the veins are detected
And then remove it from all parts, as we said to you in the extraction of the arteries in their seasons
And then fix it in wax in which there is a double thread, and bind it in the first place where it occurs with the veins: and bind it again in the last of them. And then dry them in the middle of a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is gathered from the humours of corrupt faeces.
Then care for one wound with the care of the rest of the wounds, in which you wish to generate health, so that the masses that nourish one testicle fall down. Then care for one wound with the care of the rest of the wounds, in which you wish to generate health, so that the masses that nourish one testicle fall down. There is no evil in this.
If, however, the veins of all the masses go together, then it is necessary to remove the testicles along with the masses: so that they do not receive nourishment through incision, and that they may rot or decay, and not be of any use.
Chapter 15
Of the care of the intestinal branches.
The event of this branch is from a section which happens in the large intestine above the belly in the groin part from the wonders of the belly
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle? And this rupture is either from the siphoning or from the extension of it
And these two kinds of rupture happen from many causes: either from a blow, or a jump, or a shout, or elevation of a heavy thing, and the like.
And the sign that it is from the extension of the siphoning. Is that which happens gradually in a long time, and does not happen immediately: and it is equal to the depth of the apostema: because the siphoning compresses the intestine
And the sign of that is when it is from the section of the siphoning, because it makes the pain that is from the beginning to appear immediately: and it is a different apostema, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is because of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it to the outside of the siphoning
When the gut comes out with the intestines: it is called a ramex of the intestines, and the intestines. And when it is with swelling.
When stool runs into the intestine and is retained there: it is with it a cause of sickness. For it makes the abdomen swell and especially when it is discharged.
And in the treatment of this disease of the intestines with iron there is fear: so one must be cautious of the cause of it.
The method of treatment is to remove the major parts of the illness from the patient, so that the intestine may return to its natural place within the cavity of the abdomen if it obeys the return. Then it is placed over the collar of its column between your hands: and lift its edges.
Then stretch the skin which follows the skin upwards, and dry the whole surface of the testicles. Then fix in two hooks of section the intestines, according to what is necessary to open the section with the intestines: and the section should be made according to the quantity, as much as is possible, so that it may come out of it something.
Then peel the fatty substance and what is under the skin of the testicles, until the white fat is detected, hard from all parts: then insert your finger into the index of that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white fat and the fat under the skin, and between the fat of the following part and that which is alongside it at the back of the testicle
Then move with the right hand the hand towards the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white fat upwards, with the left hand: and lift the intestines with the fat towards the part of the section: and command the minister to extend the intestines upwards: and you will solve the adhesion which is at the back of the complete solution.
And inquire about your fingers, that nothing is there from the intestines thrust into the flesh or hardened. If, however, you find anything there: then push it down to the lower abdomen.
Then grasp the needle, which has a thick thread made of ten threads: and insert it through the back of the flesh, that is, under the testicles which follow the incision: and cut off the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads left. Then make a loop with some of the thread over some other part with a shape like a cross: and tie it with a slip knot, as we have said, because it is under the testicles a ligature which should not hold anything which nourishes them from sending anything to them: so that it does not happen that the wound becomes cold again And make another knot outside the first knot, which is longer than the two fingers less two. And after these two knots draw out the rest of the flesh from the flesh under the testicles as much as the quantity of the finger: and cut off the rest entirely following the roundness, and remove from it all the fat
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles which has been cut, from which blood runs, and heal: as we have said before
Then apply soaked wool in oil, and put on a bandage: and administer the knot which we have mentioned. And when the white gut which we mentioned has been cauterized after the incision, fearing the flow of blood. Very often this happens. And draw out the knot, until it comes down by itself.
If, however, the case lingers, then it is embroidered with warm water: and place above that which we have mentioned until it falls.
And then care for the wound with the rest of the treatment for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66.
Of a wound that is oozing.
In this wound no one should be allowed to remain above its treatment with iron
And first they say that it is like that which we have told in the wound which is like that of Vite. That is, as a belt after a section above that with ease below: then dry in the middle, and care afterwards with that which opens it up until it falls off: and care for the wound, as we have mentioned, until it heals
Chapter 67
Of the disruption that is in the groin
When it happens that there is a rupture in the groin, as we have mentioned, and the place is prominent, and does not descend to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it descends, it is little, and returns in every hour: but if it is prolonged with that time, a tear is added in the groin, until the intestines descend into the groin
And this happens from the extension of the groin, which is in the groin as we have mentioned That is, because the groin is extended: then it becomes softened, and the place is prominent, and it descends.
And its care is with cautery, as it has been mentioned before
And when it is cured with iron, according to this manner: and the patient lies on his back between your hands Then dry the place of the rupture above the apostem and eminens, section through the breadth, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then tighten the ligature and what is under the skin until the white substance is detected, which is under the skin following the latter.
Then take the needle and place it over the eminens from the substance, and press it down into the depth of the belly
Then take two points of the eminences from the edge of the substance and join them with a suture: then draw out the edge of the substance.
And do not cut through the substance entirely, neither tighten anything, nor do anything else, as I told you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then care for the wound. When you have finished cutting the thread, close the wound and restore the skin, until it has healed together
Do not draw the skin too tightly, and do not add to the thickness of the rupture
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to the substance.
Chapter LXVIII.
Regarding the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Many people soften the skin of the testicles because in some of them the meats which are between them are softened, and the sight is spoiled thereby.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is treating him to make him urinate on his back, and to cut away the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then join together two lips with a suture: and if you wish, take away the excess of softened skin with three or four sutures, and tighten the suture
Then penetrate between the sutures.
Then care for the remaining wounds until they are healed, and the sutures fall out.
Chapter LXIX.</start_of_turn>
¶ Of Castration.
You know that castration is prohibited in our law: and because of this I am forbidden to recall it in this book: and it is not necessary to recall it, except for two cases.</start_of_turn
Of which one is that it is in the science of medicine when it is asked about: and to know its treatment when it happens.</start_of_turn
And the other is that we often do not approve of castration for some animals, because of the groans we suffer on account of it, such as oxen, asses, and goats, and similar animals.</start_of_turn
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways.</start_of_turn Or by cutting.</start_of_turn Or by incision, and section.</start_of_turn>
In the former of these, the operation is painful: for we make the animal sit in warm water, until the testicles soften, and become limp, and hang down: and then cut through them with your hand, until they are dissolved and do not appear to the touch.</start_of_turn
In castration by incision and section, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly, and grasp the skin of the testicles with your left hand.</start_of_turn
Then tie up the suspension, and dry over every wound a single stitch, until when two holes have come out: then cut through them after you have scraped away everything outside the delicate sac, which is over the testicles.</start_of_turn
And thus is the best method of castration by attrition: for attrition often leaves something from the testicles, which the beast desires for coition.
Then care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 70.</start_of_turn
There are two methods of care for hermaphrodites.</start_of_turn>
A hermaphrodite is one of two kinds, from the urine.</start_of_turn One of them appears because it follows the space, or in the belly between the testicles, like a female dog, in which are hairs, and sometimes urine comes from the belly between the testicles.</start_of_turn
In women, however, there is one kind, which is like a female dog over the belly just like small testicles of a man, projecting outwards: one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.</start_of_turn
And the care of the three kinds, of the two from the urine and the one from the woman, is that you must cut away the meats added, until the impression of them is gone.</start_of_turn Then care for the rest of the wounds.</start_of_turn
As for the second kind, which is that from which urine comes out, which is in the belly of the testicles, there is no operation, nor any care for it.</start_of_turn
Chapter 71.</start_of_turn
Of the incision of the hair, and the meat which projects outwards in the bodies of women.</start_of_turn
The hair perhaps adds to the natural thing, until it is fed and becomes ugly: and sometimes it becomes big in some women so that it expands like in the urine, and continues until coition.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you should take hold of the superabundance of the Tentiginis mane, either alone or with one finger, and cut: and do not delay in the incision, especially at the root: lest there should occur a flow of blood.
Then care for the wound itself until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
However, the flesh which is born in the belly orifice, until it has filled itself up: and perhaps it comes out to the outside according to the shape of a tail: and for this reason it is called a tail-like wound.</start_of_turn> It is necessary therefore that we should cut in the same way as we cut the Tentiginis, and care for it, until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
As for the care of the Alratica, which is the unpierced woman's wound.</start_of_turn
Chapter 72.</start_of_turn>
The Alratica is, as it is the unpierced woman's wound, or as it is a small hole.</start_of_turn It is either natural or accidental.</start_of_turn
Accidental is from a wound which preceded it: and it is either from a piece of meat which has become added, or from fine sand, or from fat: and it may be either in the belly, or in the flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it hinders coition and conception, and delivery, and perhaps hinders menstruation.</start_of_turn
And the knowledge of it is by the aspect of the obstetrician, if the visible swelling is close at hand.</start_of_turn
If however it is not apparent, then inquire about it with your fingers, or with an instrument.</start_of_turn
If, however, the swelling is from a soft discharge close to the bone, then it is necessary to drain it, and break it.
And it is necessary to place two fingers over the lips [of the wound].
Then place your two fingers of both hands together, and a woman should be placed above his back with her knees spread wide. Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the soft discharge is broken and the swelling is opened.
Then take a piece of wool and soak it in oil, and put it on the place: and the woman should keep it moist every day, so that it does not harden in another place.
If, however, the discharge is thick and large: then it is necessary to cut it out with a sponge-like bandage similar to the bark of myrtus
If, however, the swelling is from natural tissue, then suspend the discharge with hooks, and cut it out: and there should be with you physicians who stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, and the blood of a dragon, and thus gathered with alum or something like that.
Then give a wide lead from lead, so that the wound does not harden too quickly, keep it for a few days: and give an ointment of dry linen, and then care for the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
And when there is birth in the matrix of other tissues: it is necessary to do this in this way: while not there is a cancerous tumor in the matrix, do not do anything contrary to iron in any way
Chapter 73.
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red in women's ulcers.
Hemorrhoids are open ulcers of the veins, until blood flows excessively from them.
When they are thus diminished, hemorrhoids become small: and I have already spoken of the signs of these, and of the things which aid their treatment and those which do not
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the belly-button and are not visible to the eye: in such cases there is no cure with iron
Those which are in the belly-button above which sense has fallen are those which are cured
It is necessary therefore to put the woman in a cold house. Then extend the little things with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut away their roots.
Then powder over the wounds with powder from one of the incisions without causing pain: as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and similar things.
Then put her feet against the wall for an hour. Then put her in cold water afterwards
If the bleeding persists: then make her sit in a decoction of rue, and nutmeg seeds, and barley, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back
If blood is thus separated with it, that is good: and if not, make the swelling adhere to the back, and swellings, without cutting
Then take wool, and soak it in pitch juice, or in rue juice, or in pomegranate juice, that is, aloe, port wine, and make it adhere to the wound
When the limb is quiet, then care for the place with unguents until it is healed.
When the limb is quiet, then care for the place with unguents until it is healed.
It is necessary therefore that you cut away whatever appears from it, as I have said before, and care for it, until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Concerning the perforation which occurs in the matrix.
Many kinds of swellings occur in the matrix, such as cancer, and a stone abscess, and ulcer, and foreign bodies, and carbuncles, and herpes, and tumours, and fistulas, and haemorrhoids, and thread-like swellings, and cold abscesses
And I will say concerning all these ailments and their species, their signs and their cures in general: it is necessary to say in this treatise the cold abscess which occurs in the matrix, when it is caused by other swellings which unite health, and to write how its opening is made with an iron
It is necessary therefore to consider it When the pain of the swelling in its beginning is acute with percussion, and inflammation, and fever: and you see it turning red: if it falls beyond the sensation of it, then do not attempt to perforate it: care for it with that which will promote its healing, until the acute pain of the accident has ceased
When it is necessary to sit a woman over two chairs, and she recline, or she is put upon her back, and her feet are put at the lower part of her belly: and her hips are spread out, and she puts her arms under her hips, and ties both ligaments conveniently to this
Then let the obstetrix sit at the right side, and manage the instrument which opens the maternal orifice.
And it is necessary when you are about to administer this instrument, that the figs be placed as far as the Radio of the deep matrix of the woman: that there may not be that which enters from the instrument more than from the depth of the matrix, and harms the lower part.
If, however, the instrument be thicker than the depth, then you must place sponges upon the covering of the deep matrix: in order to prevent the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the matrix: and you must place a bandage, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and must hold the instrument, and must turn the minister of the bandage, until the depth of the matrix is opened
When therefore the Exitura appears, and the hand is grasped, and is soft and yielding: then it is necessary to cut it off at its head with a broad knife
When therefore the healthy parts have been evacuated, then it is necessary to place in the wound a soaked piece of lint dipped in saffron: or in olive oil, in which there is some astringency: and place the lint, and withdraw the section from the depth of the matrix.
And place externally upon the matrix, and upon the belly wool soaked in water, in which there are small bubbles.
Then care for two days with an unguent that is suitable for this, until it is healed
And when the matrix and the wound are washed, it is to be cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the radix of lily, or long-stalked iris, is boiled: then return to the unguent.
If a vein has been concealed within the matrix, then it is necessary to exclude its treatment with iron, and indeed to treat it with that which we mentioned in the discussion.
Chapter Lxx.</start_of_turn>
How obstetrics should handle unborn creatures, according to their unnatural position of emergence.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to know at first the natural position of birth of a creature.</start_of_turn>
Therefore, when a woman is pressed downwards by the attendants and wishes to smell the air, and she feels that something is pressing upon her from below which is different from the birth process, and if she is hastening the birth, then you know that this is a natural birth, and the head comes out first, and afterwards the tail: or the tail is suspended or hanging from the navel.</start_of_turn
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press the belly of the woman, so that the fetus comes down more quickly.</start_of_turn
For when it descends upon the head, it also descends with the tail, and they move out together with ease.</start_of_turn
Whoever does not follow this part is unnatural and harmful.</start_of_turn
For indeed, when the fetus comes out through its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one foot alone: or the head comes out alone, or the belly comes out: and perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar things happen which are not natural.</start_of_turn
Therefore, it is necessary for the Obstetrician to be prudent and cautious in all these matters, and to fear mistakes and negligence: and I will show you all the figures and their meanings, and I will explain them to you so that you will be able to understand them.</start_of_turn>
When the fetus emerges from the head by its natural egress, and it mounts upon the woman, and its delivery becomes difficult, and the aid of its virtue is hindered: then let the woman sit down, or let the women hold her: and let steam rise from the bath of vinegar and decocted fenugreek with oily substances.
Then let the obstetrician introduce his fingers between the toes of the parous woman, and find the second finger, and cut it off with his nail, until he has run off what is in her from moisture: and press the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be stimulated with a sponge of fenugreek with oil of sesame seed
Then command her to strain: and make her wipe with a towel, and hold her hand and nose for an hour together The fetus will immediately issue forth.
If two hands of the fetus come out at first, it is necessary to reduce them gradually. If it does not obey in delivery, then let the woman sit down, and elevate her feet above the level: then strike the seat upon the ground: and the woman shall be held, lest she should fall by the concussion.
If, however, the hands do not issue forth, and the fetus dies: then cut off the hands, and draw out the remainder of the fetus: and bind up the hand with cloth, and draw it out with equality: for it will issue forth itself
The exit of the embryo from its feet. When the fetus comes out from its feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards: then slowly turn the fetus: afterwards equalize it.
Then he shall take one foot of his and extend it gradually.
When they have gone as far as the hips, then command him to bend his knee, and let him rest: he will go out of himself, if God wills it.
If he does not go out of himself as we have said, then reduce his foot gradually, until you have set it according to its natural form. For he will go out of himself when he wishes to go out.
If it is hindered that he should go out of himself as we have said: then take from the thick slime of the armpits, and smear it with oil, and gum dissolved: and pierce all this with a good needle: then draw out with the thumb of a woman, and downwards into his belly Then make him sit in warm water, until his pulse subsides.
When his lower parts are warmed by the water, then make for him a plaster of myrrh: and leave it on him When an hour has passed since you put on the plaster, then make him sit on a chair. Then make him cough: and bind his jaw and nose: and press down the lower part of his belly with ease For the urine will come out immediately.
The urine comes out over the knee and hand When he has gone out in this manner, then insert your hand inside gradually. Then the woman lies down on his neck, and leans his feet downwards: and she herself lies down on a bed, and joins her hands together Then first above the belly of it gradually. Then extract what is under its feet from the heel, until it is prepared in the lower part. If it does not come out, then grasp its feet and move them with force.</start_of_turn> Then first above the hip gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts.</start_of_turn Then introduce your hands, and equalize the fetus gradually: and command the woman, that she may compress, until the fetus comes out.</start_of_turn
The fetus comes out laterally hanging from the hands.</start_of_turn> Beware in the reduction of its hand.</start_of_turn If however you are unable to reduce it, then elevate the woman, and make her walk.</start_of_turn
If she is unable to walk, then make her lie upon a stretcher: and strike her thighs with a blow of force.</start_of_turn
Then administer the liniment which you prepared from mucilages.</start_of_turn
If she bears a part, then make her sit upon a seat.</start_of_turn Then study in the reduction of the hand, and equalize the fetus according to its natural figure: and command the woman to press, and tell her to compress herself, until she comes out.</start_of_turn
The fetus comes out upon its collar, with expanded hands, and its face is towards the mother's back.</start_of_turn It is necessary that the Obstetrician grasp the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn it back, and equalize it with ease.</start_of_turn
When the edges are equal, then place over its belly what we have mentioned from fat and mucus.
Then command him to move slowly. When you have done this, then make him sit on his seat, and command him to lean to his right side. Then command him to compress: and make him snort with pain
The fetus is prepared to come out on the right side When it has descended to the birth opening in this way with the second [finger], then split the second with your nail until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If it is suspended on the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it does not remain and does not die
Then drive the fetus inwards until you place it according to what is required: and command the woman to compress herself a little: for he himself will go out through the easy exit.
The exit of twins, or many fetuses. You know that twins are often born together: and sometimes three, and four are born together. However, this is an unusual thing, and rarely happens
Five or more is a thing beyond nature, and does not often happen: and it contains those which, although multiplied, are one: and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing between each of them that which is connected to each of them
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus through the natural opening, easily: and they come out through the difficult opening, as we have mentioned
If any of them are difficult at the part, and they reach that which we have mentioned from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have said: and let the obstetrix be gentle, and let her do what she does with ease and tardiness, and she shall succeed in every figure as she is accustomed to with that which is prepared for her from the leading mind for safety.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and aborts.
When one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and I have seen that a woman has aborted seven, and another fifteen, all of whom were formed.
Which is done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore all this is necessary that it should be in the science of Midwifery Perhaps also it will reach like that: oppose it with that which is necessary.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with that which I said in the discourse from medicine, and it does not go out, and you must do so by operation with the hand, then you must consider it.
If a woman is healthy and of good virtue, and is not with any of the things from which she is afraid that she will lose her life: then it must be that she rests over her bed, over her back, and that her head is inclined downwards, and her legs are elevated: and the minister shall hold her fast by two parts, or she shall be bound to the bed, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus
Then moisten the os matricis with oily things with high mucus, and chaff of aloes, and linseed seed.
Then the Obstetrix shall wet his hand with these oils and mucilages: then he shall insert it into the matrix with ease. Then he seeks the place where the ribs rest upon the fetus, and the convenient location for it
Consider therefore at that time, if the fetus is ready to descend over its head: then fix the ribs to its eyes, or to its neck, or to its mouth, or to its palate, or under its beard, or under its ribs, or in nearby places to the ribs, and under the hyoid bone
If however the descent is over its feet, then in the chest, and the middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he grasp the hook with his right hand: and he shall place his thumb in that place which is between the left thumb and little finger: and he shall insert it with the hand with ease, and he shall fix the hook in some one of those places which we mentioned, until it reaches the desired thing.
Then he shall fix the other hook, or the third one, if necessary: so that there is an equal tension, and it does not lean towards one side.
Then the extension shall be equal, and it shall not be extended only in a straight line, but it shall be moved to all parts, so that it may relieve the exit: thus it is done with a tooth in extracting it
And it is necessary at that place where the extension is, to soften the extension. Which if it is retained from that side, then it is necessary that the Obstetrix grasp some fingers with oil, and insert them from the side, so that it will recoil with that which is retained
If therefore the part of the fetus comes out, then change the nails to another place which is higher: do this until the fetus comes out entirely
If the hand goes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its compression: then it is necessary that the hand be bound above the palm. Then draw out the hand until when it goes out entirely, it hangs by the edge either at the wrist or at the elbow: and thus it is necessary that you make in the other hand, and in two feet
If however the head of the fetus is great, or if it has received compression on its exit, or there is water in its head: then it is necessary that you introduce between the fingers a thorned sponge, and find with it the head, and extract the water: or break it with an instrument which is called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the following chapter.
Likewise do thus if the fetus is of great head-size: then it is necessary that you cut through the membrane: or extract it with force, as we have said. Then draw out the bones with forceps.
When the head comes out, and is compressed at the furculum: then it is found, until the humidity which is in the chest is drained out.
If however it does not become complicated, neither will it agree to go out: then cut off the head roughly, as much as is possible to you
If indeed the lower belly is swollen with fluid, or there is water in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until the humidity from it comes out
If indeed the fetus is above his feet: then its traction is easy, and its direction towards the maternal bones is smooth
If however it is compressed at the belly, or the chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with the bandage which you bound above your hand: and find the belly, or the chest, until it comes out by itself.
If, however, the remaining limbs are removed and the head remains: then the Obstetrix inserts his left hand into the head. If the mouth of the matrix is opened: then he inserts his hand deep into the matrix and grasps the head, and pulls it until it reaches the mouth of the matrix: then he inserts one or two fingers into it and pulls it out with them.</start_of_turn>
If the mouth of the matrix is closed, because of a thick clot that has happened to it: then it is not necessary to work above it, rather it is necessary to administer an effusion of soft things: and to apply plasters: and to sit in water which softens and moistens.</start_of_turn>
If the fetus is above its side: then it is possible to make it even: then the following is administered for the fetus itself.</start_of_turn>
If it is not possible to do this, then it is done hastily, and it is extracted.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything remaining inside at all.</start_of_turn
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said concerning the clots which happen in the matrix.</start_of_turn
If there is a flow of blood: then descend into the waters of styptics, and administer the remaining treatment.</start_of_turn
And I myself have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus: then she was impregnated over her with another, afterwards the other fetus also died.</start_of_turn This happened to her after a long time there was a clot in her navel, and it became swollen, until it opened: and pus began to flow from it.</start_of_turn
I have been called to his aid and have treated him for a long time: and the wound has not healed.
I have placed above it some strong adhesive plaster: and it has come out of its place at the bone's location. Then some days passed by, and the bone came loose again from another side I am doubtful that it will recover, since there is no bone in the middle
I think that the bone is dead from its roots
I asked about the wound, and I extracted many bones from her, a woman who is in better health than usual: and I have treated her for a long time, and she sends out a little pus from the place
I do not know for certain what is the cause of this, except that it is a knowledge and an art that a physician who is an artificer has with his hand in the treatment.
Chapter 77.
Of the forms of the necessary instruments for extracting bones from the fetus.
When two Vertigines are rotated, these two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone so that it opens
Here below is the form of the Strictor, with which books are equaled, to which are equal two strings at the extremities of two sticks. True, this vertigo must be smaller than the strictor: and it must be made either of ebony or of seasoned wood
And the width of each stick is like two fingers: and the margin of each of them is like one finger, and the length of each of them is palm and a middle: and in the middle of the two sticks are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are firmly fixed in both of them, whose length is half of the palm and a little less: and the width of each of them is like two fingers, or less
And these two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone, so that it opens when you rotate two Vertigines.
The like of that, but smaller and smoother.
They are made from the wood of the bone or from horn, according to the likeness of pincers There are indeed two additional things at its extremity here: as above: and their length from the heel to the tip is like a palm, and their width is like two fingers.
When you wish to open the matrix with this, then make a woman sit over a bench, with her feet hanging down, and open that which is between her thighs. And then introduce these two additional things together into the matrix: and you hold the lower extremity of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, like making with pincers, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the opening of the matrix, until the Obstetrician wishes to stop it.
The like of that, as the ancients said, is the form of the Impelling Force which drives out the fetus.
The shape of the Alma, which counteracts the large head: and it is assimilated to the pincers, which have teeth at the extremity, like these things.
And when it is bent, like the pincers according to this shape, like these things, which have teeth like saw teeth, with which it incides and counteracts
The shape of the neighbor having a single spine.
The form of the neighbour who has spines two.
The shape of the spatula which has two extremities to bind the head
The shape of two spatulas also of the hands
These instruments are used for this purpose, and the more numerous the species of these, and the more are prepared by the artificer, the faster is the operation and the greater for the men, on account of their quantity
It does not behove you to despise the things of the instruments which are prepared for you. It is not unreasonable that you should have them.
Head seventy-eighth.
About the extraction of the second one.
When the second one is retained at the delivery, then it is necessary to grasp the lower parts, so that it retains its breath. Then make the grasp with the thumb and the index finger: and stretch out your hand over its bone, and take hold of its breath. If it comes out by this means, that is good
If not: then grasp the head firmly, and pierce through the skull in the suture: and put in it herbs which are applied to the bone, such as calamus, rue, and mugwort, and chamomile, and hyssop, and saffron, and pitch: grasp all these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them in water, and put them over fire.
Then put a bundle of reeds over the hole in the skull of the jar, and the other extremity in the bone of the matrix: and keep it there until the steam reaches the cavity of the matrix.
Then make the incision, as we have said. Then indeed it will flow out easily.
But if it remains after this treatment, and does not flow out: then command the Obstetrician, that he plunge his hand into the belly of the patient, or sprinkle it with alum. Then insert the hand into the belly, and search with it for the Secundina When you find it, then seize it, and draw it out slowly
If it is an appendix which lies deep in the belly, then insert the hand as we have said, until you find the Secundina. Then draw it out slowly according to the rule, so that the belly does not tear at the time of traction: it is better to move it to the right and left sides: and then add in the quantity of traction Then indeed it will obey, and will be cured, and will go away from adhesion
If the belly is closed, as we have said: treat it with an incision, and with medication from an oil jar with herbs
If it does not flow out with all that we have said: then be careful that you do not tire yourself in the process of extraction.
It is indeed necessary that what flows out to the belly-opening should be bound to the woman's hip. Then close the incision with four herbs. It will itself decay the incision after a few days, and will be dissolved, and will flow out.
Indeed when it decays, it will emit a bad odor from the belly and the head, and will make that worse the illness. It is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered thereupon.
Some of the ancients are experts in fumigation with naphtha and dried figs.
The manner in which a woman is fumigated with respect to the retention of the second [menstrual] and the menses
Let it be like the smoke of an incense burner, or from a cone: and put the broad end over the fire: and let the fumigation be placed over the berries: hold it there until the fumigation is consumed: and do it again for the other side
Chapter 79.
About the treatment of an unpierced animal
Many boys are born with unpierced noses, and their animals also have unpierced noses, which I have treated with subtle sponges It is necessary that the midwife pierce that sponge with her finger: and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula: and beware of tears, lest they touch it
Then put upon it infused wool in wine and oil. Then care for it with nails until it heals
If, however, it is to be opened, then put in the cavity a lead cannula for many days, and remove it when the boy wishes to fart
And sometimes the piercing of an animal is done even from the swelling or from the pus It is necessary that the swelling be drained, and then care for it as we have said concerning treatment and lead
Chapter 80
About the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part
The fistulas which happen in the lower parts are Nodatio and Grossitudo, which happen close to any deformity: or in the space of one part. And there is one fistula, or more.
When the Nodatio is old, it opens, and there runs from it a white watery moisture, or subtle pus
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating Therefore they are recognized as penetrating by the thing which comes out with the discharge, and by the swelling, when the patient uses the bowels: and sometimes it comes out with worms.
And there are fistulas from these things when they are penetrating from the space until the bladder, and until the membrane of the intestines And they are penetrating from these things until the hip joint, and until the node of the buttocks
From this it is known that a penetrating fistula until the limb, even if it is not penetrating, is when you insert your finger indicating towards the limb: and you insert a subtle attempt into the fistula from the air, or from iron, when there is no distortion
When there is distortion in this, then insert into the fistula a subtle lead weight, or a hair from a horse's tail, until you feel the attempt, or a hair in your finger
If you do not feel the attempt, neither does anything come out of the discharge, neither swelling, nor worms as I have said: then you know that it is not penetrating: depart therefore for treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating until the bladder, or until the membrane of the urine: then the meaning of this is the escape of urine from it, and the prohibition of this from happening again so that the place is consolidated with the doctors.
If the wound extends up to the hip joint or the hip bone: then its sign is that the limb hangs limp until that point, if there is no curvature of the limb up to the bone. And there is pain around the part, and discharge of pus from it always. And it does not heal in it, neither is it consolidated with oil.
In all such penetrating wounds there is no cure; the cure for them is toil and perseverance, from the stupid doctors who cause them.</start_of_turn>
But in those which are neither penetrating nor old, healing is expected with rest: as I have said before, and as I have shown: that the patient should lie between your hands on his back, and raise his legs up to above his hips, and that his knees should be bent towards his belly.</start_of_turn> Then introduce lead or air, if there is curvature of the wound, until you know where the limb hangs limp.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the patient feels pain around the part, then you must insert your finger into the part.</start_of_turn>
If you feel in your finger an attempt to penetrate itself which you have recognized, besides that which you feel between your finger and the bone, or meat: then you know certainly that it is penetrating: it is not to be treated, for its cure is not as we have said.</start_of_turn>
They say that in some people the wound heals with scar, and from the medicine which is expected to be applied, that is, to apply gentle cautery according to the size of the wound, and to insert the flame into the wound until it hangs limp around the part.</start_of_turn And do this again two or three times, until you know that all the fatty tissues which are similar to the veins of birds have been consumed.</start_of_turn
Then care for that with buttered cloths until they depart those meats which are bound: then care for that with unguents which generate flesh and consolidate.
If it is thus healed, that is good.
If not, then it will not be healed by any other treatment.
If it comes out a little, and does not suffice up to the thumb which is in the groin, and is between that and the fleshy swelling of the flesh, or pus: then make an incision at that point which follows the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the incision, and you will dry with the thumb which is in the fistula, until the cutting reaches the extremity of the thumb, and the thumb is freed and falls off.</start_of_turn>
Then soften those meats which have been drained, which absorb the bristles of a quill bird, so that nothing remains of it.</start_of_turn
If however it is stained with blood, and dissolves between you and the operation which you have made to cut away those meats: then it is better to cauterize with fire, or with acute medicine.</start_of_turn
For indeed cauterization with fire unites good habits, adds adulation to those meats which have been bound, and cuts off blood, and dries moisture.</start_of_turn
Then care for that with buttered cloths, or bruised leaves, until that place emits pus, and those meats which have been bound in the pus depart in it.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with solid unguents which consolidate, generate flesh firmly: and these are medicines which have stypticity and drying properties.</start_of_turn
For when they are restored, then it is healed: and do not do it again.</start_of_turn
If, however, the fistula persists until it reaches the depth of the rectum, and is prolonged by the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the rectum and inquire what you feel.
If you feel resistance there, and between you and the rectum is something like a piece of gravel, or flesh, and it is close to the perforation: then there is no operation in that case, except according to the degree of trust and hope.
For in such a case one must administer three things: either to cauterize the fistula itself, as we have said: or to dissect the wall, until you reach its concavity, so that you may afterwards be able to insert instruments and cure it from the next time And do not proceed with much dissection, lest you lacerate the wall containing the rectum, and cause excessive discharge of faeces without their consent. Then care for it as we have said.
Perhaps it will heal by itself: or you will lengthen that piece of gravel and cleanse it after you have dried it up to near the rectum, as we have said, or with your finger, or with some other pointed instrument. Then clean the torn flesh that is in the incision, until it is firm when you scratch it with your finger.
Then attempt to restore the whole wound with the incision, and the upper orifice where it is closed: and the fistula will remain open in the inner part of the rectum, and will be less harmful.
And when you suture the fistula in this way: and that is when you insert your finger into the fistula: and it is on the side of the rectum surrounding the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the rectum: then grasp the perforated extremity, which is like a nail, that is, prepared to pierce the skin, according to this form. And insert into the loop of the thread which is involved from five threads, and encircle it. Then insert the needle with the thread through the fistula, until its curve follows that of the fistula.
If it is penetrating through the inner margin of the anus near the base, then withdraw the thread from that hole: thus you will insert your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and tighten both of them, and let them go on one day, or two days: and the more the thread has penetrated the flesh, tighten it well, until those pieces of flesh which are between the two ends of the thread fall away: then care for the wound, until it has healed and is sound
If, however, the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way you prepare it, except that it should not be too deep Neither should you make it penetrate because of tears, lest you damage it.
Then do as we have said, until it has healed.
Make a sponge shaped like the fistula, whose curvature is acute downwards, and the other part is not acute, so that you do not damage that which is not necessary, like urine
Chapter 81.
Regarding the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs out from the incision of them: and care for the tears.
There are hemorrhoids of two kinds. Either they are inside the anus, similar to grapes or plums: or they are like little grains of wheat And they are of two kinds: small and large: and blood always runs from them, and there is one, and they are many They are outside the knee, and at its extremities.
They are outside the knee, and at its extremities.
The treatment of that which is inside the knee is, that the patient be made to flex the limb: and it should be expressed until the anus comes out, and the discharge appears. Therefore, bind it up with bandages: or hold it with your finger Then cut through at the roots of its hairs.
If they do not hold in the knee, because of the moisture of the humors and their softening: then bind the limb with rough cloth, or with felt from wool, and draw it out with your fingers Then cut through, and powder over the wound after cutting whatever powder is warm, so that it stays in its place like cautery Or cauterize it according to what was said in the chapter on cautery. Then care for the limb with the remaining treatment, until it heals
If the anus does not come out, then instill the patient with a little enema in which there is a slight biting, so that it is forced out with the feces, when the patient flexes the limb
If however the little ones are outside the anus, then the matter is easy: and it is as if you grasp the limb with your finger, or grasp it with the thumb, and cut through it Then care for the limb as we have said, until it heals
And whoever dislikes the cutting with the knife, must administer a suture of it according to this method. Grasp the slippery thread and introduce it into the hole. Extract the plug to the upper parts, and cause it to penetrate with the needle at its root from the opposite side: and pass through two ends of the thread, in the lower part of the needle, and make them lie parallel: and tighten the thread strongly. Then knot the thread and extract the needle.
Do this with all the plugs, and draw them out one at a time: do not leave them in, lest they cause excessive bleeding.
Then place upon each wound a soaked pad of infused fabric in rose-water, or vinegar, and place it upon the wound: and command the patient to rest. Then leave it until it has healed.
When the plugs have healed, care for the incisions with unguents, and leave the treatment until the wound has healed
(The text continues with instructions for wound care.) Many times these arise from excessive discharge of stool, and from the constriction of the natural passages.
When these have been lessened, and do not yield to medical treatment: then it is necessary to rub with Spatumil's sponge, or with your finger, until they become soft, and remove from the outer layer which hinders consolidation Then care for the wound, until it consolidates as it should
If, however, they do not consolidate: then repeat the wound-cleaning with more force than before, until they bleed profusely, and are then cleansed again with care, until they heal.
(The text continues with instructions for treating wounds caused by insects, such as fleas and mosquitoes.)
Chapter 82.
Know that the Almirmar is not except a round knot according to the colour of the body, like the head of a nail: and it is in the whole body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and the fingers: and it happens from a wound in the flesh causing pain while walking.
It is necessary therefore that it be cut off which is round about the nail, and be held fast with forceps, or with a hook, and be eradicated from its root
Then care for it: and if you wish you may cauterize it according to what has gone before in its chapter.
And from the heel there is a small elevation, rough, filtered, rounded above the surface of the body. And they often happen in the hands of children.
And its care is to extend the heel and cut it: or to bind it with a silken thread: or with hair, until it falls out. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said with fire, or with acute medicine: and thus the heel is eradicated both forwards and backwards, and not backwards only with the instrument which I have mentioned
There is also a small, filtered elevation, large, above the surface of the body, which extends inwards downwards: and when it is touched by cold, there is in it a sensation like that of the bite of an ant, and it is in the whole body: and most of it is in the hands
And its care is to take hold of a needle from the beak of a bird, or a strong nail: and put it on the Ant, until the circle of the needle is contained by its parts Then withdraw your hand with the needle, until you have severed what is around the Ant: and you put it deep into the flesh, and you pull out the Ant from its root.
And if so, do it with an air cannula or iron, according to this shape.
The tip of the cannula should be above the base of the thumb, so as to relieve tension on the thumb and its return
And if so, cauterize the area according to what is stated concerning the cauterization of the thumb in the chapter on cauterization
Chapter 83.
Concerning the forms of instruments which are used for boils in the carbuncles of the hand, and the solution of the belly, and the colic.
When a boil arises from silver, or gold, or from blown or hammered copper.
And when these instruments are small and large, according to those which are used for them
This is done in the treatment of young children with loose or painful ribs, as well as boils of them
A large boil
The upper part of the thumb, which is bound by the ligament, should be wide according to this fashion: and there should be a distinction so that the ligament is bound as with liquid, and the lower part which goes into the palm should be solid, that is, not open, soft, pliable, stretching towards thinness: and on one side there are two holes and on the other side one hole
The size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays, somewhat smaller, and the thumb in which the medicines are placed from the animal's belly: or from paper wool, which is according to the shape of the asphodel seed: whose root is the sole palm
And it is pierced through with many holes as it is turned around, and there is space which is between every large hole is the size of a digit. And then introduce into these holes a strong thread from a raw thread, which is from ten threads, or thereabouts, and bind it together like asphodel seeds. When it is thus placed in the body, it is sutured at the head of the wound between two marks of constriction which are strong And then ligate it with it.
This is the form of the circle which is here depicted, and of the holes.
The quality of the ligation with it is: that you implement both an abutment and a portion from medicine which is warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance: and be careful that it is neither too hot nor too cold, nor too cold.
And then the patient is laid down on his back, and he raises his legs upwards: and put under it a cushion, that is, skin which people lie upon, or a linen cloth.
And then anoint the extremity of the ligation with oil, or with alum, or with barley flour, or like these things. And then introduce it into the wound with ease. And then take hold of the thread with two hands simultaneously, and pull it out with force, until it has evacuated everything that is in the ligation into the intestines
And then draw out the ligation, and raise the patient's legs to the side of the body.
And if the medicine thinks that it should be drawn out, then hold it as much as you can And if he sleeps with it all night, it is very dangerous indeed
If, however, you have instilled it in the bowels of the solution of the belly, and it hastens its exit: then repeat the enema until it is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful swellings in the rectum, then let the enema be gentle and soft, without excessive force
And this is the form of the gentle enema over which there is tight skin.
Chapter 84.
I have already spoken in the discourse on the treatment of wounds that it agrees with the book, and I will speak here of the treatment of them with the hand and with the physician according to the supplement.
I say therefore, that wounds are varied according to the thing that causes the wound and according to the place where the wound falls
The things that cause wounds are many, as for example the fall of a stone: or the bite of a sword or knife: or the impact of a lance, or wood, or an arrow: and the like of these from many things
Wounds, however, which are caused by the place of the body are as follows: for example, a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the abdomen, or the limbs: and the like of these from the various parts of the body.
And I speak of the treatment of some wounds, in order to give the reason and rule concerning the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head: because the composition of the head will be remembered at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When it happens in the head a single [tooth] which is not fractured of bone: consider then, if it is from the action of a stone, or like it: and it has split the skin only: and it is a large tooth, and times super infirmum euentum apostematis calidi: then proceed, and perform a cephalic phlebotomy immediately: and do not delay it: and extract from it from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue: if there be no obstacle to the phlebotomy, especially if there be little blood issuing from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be from the side opposite the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be from the side opposite the wound. And let the patient be guarded from repletion, and wine, and coarse food
If anything hinders the reduction [of the swelling], then do not give food, and do not approach meat, nor drink.
And put over the tooth if it happens to it a soft swelling in saffron butter alone, or with wine in which there is stypticity
If you are secure from the soft swelling, then put over the tooth what is common with its blood, and do not move it, powder which I will tell you afterwards: and if it has moved, then put over it some unguent until it has healed
If the tooth is large, or if it is from a cut of the knife, and like these: and the lips of it do not adhere by stitches, then adhere them together with the suture, according as I will tell you in the wounds of the belly about the suture of them
If the tooth is detected from the bone, and hangs, and its retention is not necessary, except for a small suspension: then cut it off Then care for the tooth with the doctors, and restore in it solid flesh instead of skin, and command the patient, that he eat coarse food like heads, and barley cooked, until the swelling has gone down: and like these things.
If you find in the wound putrefaction that does not adhere to the bone: then cut through the whole putrefaction and throw it away; afterwards care for the wound.
If however in the wound there is an artery or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not severed by medicines: then inquire concerning the artery. If therefore you find it not severed, then dry it with Spatumil or ligate it.</start_of_turn> If indeed necessity compels you when it does not confer what we have said: then burn it, until the blood is severed.</start_of_turn>
If however the wound is small and simple: then the matter is easy and light: thus as to rub over it with this powder: because it strengthens it before it changes it with air.</start_of_turn
Method of applying the powdered incense.</start_of_turn> Recipe: take part one of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburnt chalk: mix them all together thoroughly, and sprinkle them: and apply it to the wound, and bind it securely, until it adheres well to it and clots with the blood.</start_of_turn
Then string up the wound with hairs, and let it go, and do not wash it until it has healed, so that it does not burst.</start_of_turn For it is not driven out by medicine until it has healed.</start_of_turn
And when it makes the sole plaster, when there is neither olive oil nor dragon's blood in it: it also makes the same operation in many great wounds, when it is convenient to put it on and bind them, and when the wounds are fresh with their own blood, which has not changed air.</start_of_turn
If the wound has been altered by a fourth part of an alteration, especially when it is in the summer season, then its position is not intended here: care for it as we have said, so that you place upon it some oily unguents of digestion: or you place upon it barley meal pultes made with water and honey, until pus is emitted. Then care for the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If indeed it happens that there is a fracture in a bone which is small, then extract that with Gesti: and I will tell you the treatment of fractures of the head in this which the future is.
Of wounds of the neck.
If indeed a wound happens in the neck, then there is no difference between it and a wound of the head when it is simple
If indeed the nerve of the neck is cut, or an artery: then if it is the nerve, it is not in vain, unless you direct the treatment of it with that which makes stypticism like cinnamon, rue, and ivy, and things of that kind. For they do not know the nerves, and they oppose them
And do not place anything cold upon the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the soul of the limbs: and let that be treated by physicians gently, like chalk dust mixed with sweet water, or with rose water, and oil, when it is bathed even with sweet water: and the rest of the mineral stones, according to this method, and oily unguents
If indeed the wound is large, then administer a suture: or close its lips with little pillows. Then care for yourself until you are healed.
If the wound is deep, or if it occurs in a sinus in the lower part of it, where pus accumulates, then perforate it in a depressed place in that area.
If blood flows from the wound due to an injured artery: then separate it, or dry it up, and ligate it: or cauterize it if necessary.</start_of_turn>
If the cartilage of the epiglottis, or all of it, is fractured and the fragments are close together: then unite the edges of the skin with sutures above the edge of the epiglottis, and do not touch the epiglottis, but keep it even, and reduce it to its natural position.</start_of_turn> Then bind it loosely with a bandage, and discharge it in a few days.</start_of_turn Then care for yourself with unguents which have styptic and drying properties, until you are healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, a wound has made an imprint in a bone, then uncover it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all, or whatever can be removed: and what cannot be prepared, leave it, until the wound has healed, and the fracture has been separated and consolidated.</start_of_turn
If the wound was burnt, then powder over it the powder which I mentioned.</start_of_turn If, however, bone is seen in the wound, and there is an fistula: then care for it as is mentioned in its chapter.</start_of_turn
(The provided text does not include any information regarding a wound in the armpit, so I cannot translate this sentence.)</start_of_turn>
If there is percussion of the lance or the knife, and you know its depth, then consider it. If there is discharge from the wound, when the patient groans in pain, then you know that the wound is mortal
If it does not have depth and is accompanied by blood: do not immediately apply powder or ligate it, lest you trap the blood in its depth and it returns to the heart, causing the patient's death. But put in the wound a proper dressing and leave it for two days.
If indeed no dressing is present at the opening of the wound: put in the mouth of the wound a thick wool cushion, so that it absorbs what comes out of it from the humours. And make the patient sleep on the wound so that it may heal what collects in it.
If indeed three days or more have passed from the opening of the wound, and the patient does not suffer spasm, nor bad tremor of the heart, nor bad constriction in swallowing, and the rest of his symptoms are good: then you know that the wound is healed Care for it diligently and according to the laws, and with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing is excused, and it always opens again: then you know that a fistula has been made. Care for it from its head to its foot
And if the wound is from a cut or knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then care for it as if it had been sutured, if it is large: or with powder if it is small
If however it has made an imprint in the bone, and has burst from it: then inquire about the wound and properly remove the splinter if it is separated If they are not separated, then depart them, until the bone becomes rotten, and the wound is relieved by the extraction of the foreign body.
The remaining wounds of the accident in the other limbs is the judgment in their care, which is what we have already said.
Concerning the wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestine, and the extraction of the foreign body.
The rupture which occurs in the belly is great, medium, or small
From the great one, therefore, sometimes the intestine comes out, or a number of intestines
Therefore the evacuation of the foreign body is more difficult and painful and more difficult to suture
And the small rupture is also difficult because of another way. Therefore, it follows that the reduction of the foreign body is more difficult if you do not immediately perform the introduction into its place: because it is swollen, open, and thickened: which makes its entrance difficult
Therefore, it is better for the rupture to be medium: because with this one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with the two previous kinds
You know that the suture of the wound is done in four ways.
Two sutures are common in the suture of the belly, and in the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures communicate properly with the remaining wounds. However, there are also specific methods with the suture of the belly: and I will tell you about one and the other with exposure and declaration
I say, because when the wound is small, and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it: then this is because of one or two of these methods Whether by the density of the disruption or because of the inflation in the intestines caused by cold air.
If either of these things be the case, then it is necessary to apply heat, so as to soak the sponge or cloth in warm water alone Or boil in water barley, ginger, pepper, and caraway seeds along with the intestines until the inflation is resolved.
When it makes such a drink which has a styptic action: it is better than plain water for resolving the inflation.
When the inflation has been resolved, then moisten the intestines with the warm water in which it was boiled, or with vinegar For thus it will soothe its entrance with a small thing.
If however he vomits after this treatment, then look for a small opening in the disruption where the hemorrhoids were excised with the instrument
The first treatment is better when it is prepared beforehand, than when it is performed hastily: and it does not cause a cutting after necessity and the imperfection of the instrument.
Let one part be acute and the other not acute, and the extremity be neither soft like wool nor hard like obsidian, but rather somewhat soft like hair: and this is like urine.
When the bladder is increased and the intestine is brought in, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural shape in its own place, if possible: for this is better
When the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary to make the patient lie upon his back and place his knees above his head If it is in the upper part of the belly, then put the head of it upwards, and the feet downwards from it.
If there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your intention and your thought on this, so that the part which has the wound is above the other part
It is thus necessary, that you observe this with great care in large wounds and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, put it according to what is prepared for you
Then make it present between your hands, which hold the entire rupture together: and join its lips together. Then draw out from it something that follows the suture one thing after another: and this is the way of common suture of one thing.
And it is, that you take needles, or the number of needles according to the quantity of the wound Then draw out from the edge of the rupture the quantity of the little finger, that is, the physician: and fix the needle one beyond what you put into the flesh in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of fat which is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from another side, and when you have gathered together two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of fat: and there are four orders.
Then string with a double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from two parts together, until two lips of the wound are aggregated with a descent.
Then draw out the length of the finger also, and fix in the flesh another needle: afterwards tighten the flesh with the thread, just as you did with the first needle. Do not cease to make it until you have completed the constriction of the whole wound.
The needles should be of medium size between the thickness and fineness: for the fine needles are easily broken or slip through the flesh, and the thick needles are difficult to pass through the skin. Therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in fineness and thickness.
It is not permitted that the needle be placed at two adjacent ends of the skin close together: for it will break the flesh easily and open the wound before it has healed, and will also lengthen the wound even after it has been sutured, for it will prevent the wound from healing properly
Then prick the extremity of the needle, so that it does not harm the patient during his sleep: and place upon it a few wool cushions from all sides, which will hold the extremities of the needle: and let them go when you know that the wound has healed
And this is the kind of stitching which is most suitable for small wounds. For it is sufficient in stitching them to use one needle, or two, or a few.
The second kind of suture is common, as it joins together four extremities: two of the skin and two of the fat with the needle in the middle, with the thread equally thick and thin.
Then when you have pierced through with the needle with the four extremities, reduce the needle from the part from which you began and let the thread go from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture will be like the suture of cloth which joins cloth together, and place between every suture as much of the thickness of a small finger
This kind of suture is known to men
And when such a suture has been made, I will make a hole at the point where the wound has occurred in the belly, which has been caused by the knife, and there will be a disruption of the wound greater than the palm of one hand: and it will go out of the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there will be a disruption in the middle of the belly.
It will be reduced thus after it has remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours
It has been consolidated thus in a space which remained about fifteen days: and I have treated it, and it has healed: and it has left after that many years, being restored to its own condition.
And the physicians judged that it would not heal.
And indeed, it happened by a miracle that I did not treat it with unguents Because I was in a place where unguents were not to be found, and no one among the physicians had them. I put upon the wound a thick wool cushion twice a day, and I took care of its ablution with sweet water until it healed
There are two kinds of sutures which I shall speak of according to the narration of the sermon.
And it is like this, that you begin with a sharp suture: and you carry the point through from the outside to the inside of the part
When you have thus pierced the skin, and in the tough membrane you have pierced according to the length and breadth of the whole body: you will draw out the point of the needle in the side in which you put it in, and make the point penetrate from the inside outwards in the opposite side
When you have thus made the needle penetrate, then make it penetrate once more through this in the same point from the outside inwards: and draw out the point which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate from the inside outwards through the opposite side: and make the needle penetrate with the same penetration as you made when you made the needle penetrate the tough membrane
Then commence also from this side, and hold the organ itself with the extremity which is from the heel to the side, and extract the point from the skin as it penetrates.
Then reduce the skin to that side, and hold the extremity of the heel which is on the other side, with this extremity make a mark: and extract that point from the skin which is on its side, and make it even with this one, and the other: and make it even after the other, until its whole circumference is in accordance with this example.
And the end of this suture is that your sutures of the skin which are of the leather type which are made for the skin: so that your heel is even with one side of the extremity of the skin: and that you let go of the other side on the other side, until you have completed it.
The second kind of proper suture which Gale has mentioned.
This is the explanation which Gale has mentioned, that your sutures should be made according to the manner of some of the physicians, because they collect every part to the same extent by nature: and apply the extremity of the heel to its other extremity, and the extremity of the mark to its other extremity. And that is done according to what I have said.
It is necessary that the point pierce the heel close to the outer side, and that you make the point penetrate inwards only in this place: and let go of both extremities of the heel Then withdraw the point, and make the point penetrate from the outer side to the inwards through both extremities of the heel, that is to say on both sides
Then withdraw both of them, and make them penetrate both from the inside outwards through the two other extremities of the heel which are on the opposite side
And thus is the best manner of stitching that which requires no reminder.
This is indeed the saying of Galen as well
Some have said it. The suture is corrected within with two squares. That is, you insert into each of the two squares a single thread: and you begin with the needle which is towards you, and make it penetrate up to the opposite edge, following the suture which is between the skins equally
You know that when a disruption occurs in the middle of the belly: then the suture of that is more difficult than that of the rest of the belly.
The judgement of the true healing of a wound is the judgement of the rest of the wounds.
When you follow the wound with blood, before it changes itself with air: and you reduce the intestines, and put your hand over it: then you place over the wound a layer of powdered meat
When the air has already altered the wound: then you place over it some unguents which are your presence, until they make pus: and the thread will fall away, and it will be consolidated by the fat, and will heal. Then care for this in the same way as for the healing of the rest of the wounds, until it is healed.
But if there are no physicians present: then you place over it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, a soft cushion: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed
For you do not need other medicine in many situations, when the wounds are simple.
If, however, the time should happen when the vein communicates with the greater limbs in the lesion, then it is necessary to immerse the lancet in lukewarm water or in rose water: and place it around the circumference of the parts which are between the groin and the ankles, and under the scrota.
If it feels pain, or pricking, or decay in the intestines (for this often happens in this), then bathe it with a vinegar sponge, black and warm: especially if decay has spread in the intestines, and an opening has been made through to its cavity
And know that that which is from the great intestine is easier of healing: and that which is from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
The small intestine, however, which is called the Jejunum, does not recover from an ulcer which happens in it throughout: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the greatness of their numbers, and because of the subtleness of its body, and because of the proximity of its nature to the nerves
If, however, what proceeds from the ulcer is purulent, and you follow up on it, reduce it according to your reduction which you make of the intestines equally.
If, however, it has passed beyond that space, and has become black, or dark: then it is necessary to ligate it with a thread above the place which has been denatured by it, so that the blood flow does not occur. For in the ulcer there are veins and arteries.
Then cut through that which is beyond the ligament, and place two hanging threads from the lower part of the ulcer outside of it: so as to counteract its attraction, and extraction of itself in the case of the ulcer, and the emission of pus from the ulcer
Remember the wound that happened in the Intestino.
When disruption happens in the Intestino and is small: then it is possible, in some people, to restore it: for I have seen that which was wounded in the middle of the belly with a lance and was old, and a fistula was made, and it went out through that and there was egestio and swelling.
I put in treatment, until I am commanded to cease in the healing of it: neither shall I abstain from continuing it until it is healed and the place is solidified.
When I have seen that the place has been solidified, I fear that something bad may happen over the diseased part in the belly: and it did not happen to him from that bad thing. And it remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, hopeful, and went into the bath, and exercised in his diet.
And some experimenters say that when a wound happens in the Intestino and is small: then it must be bound in this way. And take the large-headed ants. Then join two lips of the wound, and put an ant on one of those which have an open bone over two lips of the wound When you put that over them, and bind its bone, cut off its head, join with it, and do not dissolve it
Then put another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing that until you have done as much as the size of the whole wound
Then reduce it, and bind the wound. The head remains connected to the intestines until the intestines are eaten and restored, and it does not cause any harm to the patient.
It is also possible to ligate the intestines with a fine thread: which has been taken from an animal's intestine and is attached to it after it has been introduced into the belly
And you must take hold of the end of this thread from the intestine, and remove a great deal of it. Then ligate the thread at its end with a fine suture Then introduce this thread into the belly, and join it to the intestines. And reduce it to a rupture
And this method of stitching with needles and intestines is not without risk, except with great confidence and hope.
You know that which is great, broad and especially when it is in a thin intestine: then there is no skill except cunning, and its healing is not at all
About care for wounds and fistulas.
You know that every wound, or fistula when it has become old and hardened, and has become a wound, and does not consolidate, and constantly emits pus, and does not burst: then it is called universally in every member a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula is according to truth a filter node, hard, white: which does not cause pain, which has the consistency of a feather of a bird: and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, feather
And sometimes it is wet, which emits pus Perhaps humidity breaks down in some hours. When humidity is much, it is little, large, and soft.
And I have said previously in the discourse concerning ulcers, that no wound which does not heal, neither is born in that flesh, is there except for one new cause.
There is one, either because there is little blood in the body: or because of the malice of the blood: or because the flesh between the lips and the teeth is hard, hindering the birth of flesh: or because there is much pus and slime: or because the wound itself is putrid, and the matter which issues from it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is unsuitable for the cure: or because corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence: or for the property of the region itself, as it happens in Caesarea Augusta, where digestion is difficult for ailments and healing is delayed in this because of its nature: or because there is one bone, or many bones.
And I have shown you all these causes and signs and their cures with the physicians in the discourse: and it befits you to write the cure for fistula and fistula, which is done by one operation with the hand
You know therefore that fistula happens in all members of the body. For there are fistulas which reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestines, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs: or to some of the vertebrae or to some of the compound joints: such as the hand and the foot. And there are those which arise from the proximity of the great limb to the principal limb.
And thus these fistulas which are according to this method arise from difficult and incurable ailments, and occupation with them is laborious and ignorant
If the depth of any fistula does not reach these places which I have mentioned: and you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to reach an understanding of it, then grasp a trial from air or iron, since the fistula runs according to its nature, and inquire about it with the fistula itself.
If, however, the fistula has a twist, then investigate it with a thin lead weight because the lead, with the softness of its body, alleviates around the twist
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to grasp it with a trial. Close your hand over the fistula from its openings to its openings.
For the moisture which closes your hand will go out through other openings and run out of the hand.
Then inquire diligently in what way it is possible for you: to know whether it is bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short: or whether the fistula is one which has many openings and lies over all that, with the sum of your strength: with your question to the patient, and the sensation of pain in compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and symptoms following.
When you have reached all these stages, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and know that if the fistula is close and apparent, or is far from the junction with the nerve, or artery, or vein, or any place which I have mentioned to you: then grasp the fistula as I have said before, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupted blood, which is born in its opening from meat, or pus, and similar things: and care for it until it is healed
If, however, the fistula is of great length and depth, and is according to the rule of rectitude: then it is necessary that you dissect as deeply as possible. Then you must remove from it all its corrupt parts
Then apply ligatures with sharp instruments: and introduce these until you have reached the depth of the fistula which you recognized with the iron: do this as many times as necessary, until the acute medicine has eaten away everything that remains in the depth of the fistula from corruption
Then restore the part with the bandages which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If, however, it does not heal by this, then cauterize it as we have narrated.
If, however, the cause of the fistula is bone, and you suspect this: then inquire about it, and dissect it as we have narrated: if it does not prevent you anything from the bone, or the nerve, or the principal limb, as we have said
If, however, in it you discover bone, and there is something of corruption and blackness: then burn it out, until the corruption of it is entirely removed Then care for it with that which nourishes it, until it is healed
Which if it does not heal, and emits pus like before: then you know that you have not reached the entire eradication of the corruption.
Discover further on this, and make an investigation of it, and dissect it with the greatest skill you can muster.
Then restore it. If, however, it heals, it is good: and if not, then you know that this corruption is in great depth of the body, which you have not been able to overcome No force is there in that thing in the body, except that which it itself sends out.
If the bone of the limb is corrupted, and you can reach it, draw it out with fine forceps which fit to it
If there are many bones, then you must make an incision of all of them, and do not send anything out with your hand.
If anything opposes you from making an incision, and there is no fear of error in the incision, then you must make an incision of the humors and the flesh there, and free the bones.
If indeed you are not prepared to extract the bone at this hour, then put over it something which will putrefy it: and send it away, until it is putrefied from the flesh and humors surrounding the bones.
And keep the wound closed so that it does not swell up. And let the incision be as small as you made it in your operation And put over it, if you wish, sulfur pounded with oil: or immerse it in Egyptian unguent or in some other unguent of your choice
For when the humors are putrefied and separated from the bones, the pain will cease, and their attraction will cease also
If indeed there is a great bone, such as the shin or the thigh, and the like of them, which is corrupted, it is a great part: then cut away that part finally, until the blackness and corruption are gone from it. Then close the wound.
If indeed that which is in it is corrupted, is a great part, and the corruption has already penetrated the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to amputate it, and cut through it entirely until the corruption has ceased: then care for it, until it is healed
And I shall tell you about the swelling which happens in the leg: in order that you may take it as an example and an aid in your operation.
A youth of about thirty years of age suffered pain in his leg, due to something that had moved within his body, that is, from the inside outwards, until it reached the leg, and there remained a large swelling: there was no external cause for it.
It has been prolonged for a long time with the error of the doctors, until the swelling was opened, and many materials came out with it And after that, his cure was completed, until the limb was bandaged, and many holes were made in it: from which all sorts of pus and moisture came out of the body
He was treated by many doctors for about two years, and there was no skill in their art of hand, until I came, and I washed the leg and the materials which came out of the holes were great: even all the flesh of the limb had been wasted, and its color was yellow
They introduced it into one of the holes, and the attempt reached the bone.
Then I examined all the holes: and I found that they all went deep into the leg from all parts of the limb
I proceeded accordingly, and I closed one of the holes, until I reached a part of the bone: and I found it corrupted: it was rotten, discolored, and putrefying, and had a hole in it, until it had penetrated as far as the marrow
I saw what had been detected by me, and prepared from the corrupted bone
And I concluded that there was no soundness in the bone except for that corruption, which I cut off and removed I have eradicated it.
Then I shall institute the restoration of the wound with the physicians consolidated in a wide space. It is not consolidated
Then I tried, and I found above the first detection: and I found a continuous corruption with the bone: and I saw that it had also appeared from that corruption
Then I attempted to restore it It is not restored
I found it again above that: and I did not cease to cut the bone piecemeal, and to try to restore it: and it is not restored, until I cut from the bone almost a palm's breadth, and I extracted that with the marrow itself
Then I restored it with the physicians, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and it was not necessary for this repetition in the operation of this, and the section of itself, except for the disposition of the infirmity of the patient, and his small tolerance, and my fear of death for him: because it was happening to him in every hour from the excessive evacuation of the bad humors
He is healed thus by complete healing: and it has become in the place of the hard bone, and a good disposition has been made in his body, and the strength has returned to him: and he has recovered his former state: and he has not suffered any discomfort in walking or sleeping ever since
If however the prominent bone in the body is fractured: then it is necessary to bind it up according to this method: and it is that you take a ligament, and bind the bone at the extremity of the prominent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament of a greater thickness than the first ligament. Then bind up the limb above the flesh which is upon the bone: and stretch out its extremity, so that you may draw the flesh downwards: and you will see the flesh above the place which you wish to cut, so that it does not damage the flesh.
Place a stick, or a board under the lower bone in the center: because when you make this, it does not hinder that the flesh is cut through which is spoiled
It is necessary that the suture be above the spoiled place rather than in the concavity of the broken bone: and that it should not appear in its vision to the patient, and should cause no pain to him concerning the suture of his wound
If the bone is spoiled and is not prominent, continue its part with its part: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in the part itself: then draw out the flesh from all parts of it whole Then place a stick below.
Then cut it from the first part where the corruption is, until the suture is completed from the other side: and let the suture be according to the length of the corruption, as we have said
If the corruption is in the joint, cut through the spoiled joint, and cut the bone where the other side continues.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in this place except for abrasion.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot: then the matter is difficult to deal with. It is necessary to inquire concerning the nature of the corruption. And scrape the wound, and cleanse it according to whatever method you are able, and with whatever skill you can: when it does not cause you to be in contradiction to the Vein, or the Nerve.
And you know that the incisors and the molars for cutting down these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their size, their flexibility, their magnitude, and their quantity. Therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for each kind of operation for that operation.
And you know that these operations are significant to you above the kind of instrument which you do not know when you have studied for a long time. And the knowledge of the ways of this art is a testimony to the ways of knowledge: for then you will find for yourself that which is suitable for it from the instruments for all diseases.
I am firm in the last of this chapter concerning the number of instruments which I place as examples of those which you will encounter, and the test which you will experience with others.
The form of the other molars
The shape of the cutting instruments The head of this instrument is like the head of a star-shaped key: and its points are like the points of a nail.
It does not fit unless it is rubbed against it with the head of the cutting instruments when it is broken, or when the bone is large and great
Greatness of the wound.
Small greatness of the wound.
Wound of slight concavity
Wound of great concavity
Wound of extreme concavity at the margins
Wound of very small greatness, slight tension
This is like a wound caused by a knife, and the edges are like a saw: it appears in many places because of the cause of the fractured bones.
The greatness of the wound is in accordance with the extent of the perforation caused by the bones
The edges are triangular, the extremities are acute
Like that from India And in the same way, it is necessary to consider all the wounds, cuts, and saw-like injuries
Regarding the incision of the extremities and the stitching of bones
The extremities putrefy, either by an external cause or an internal one.
When you have treated the cause of the putrefaction with medicines and it does not heal: and if the putrefaction has spread to the limb without causing any effect, you must then cut off the limb until the point at which the putrefaction stops. Thus the patient is saved from death or from the greater defect of the limb
And the sign of this is that the limb becomes pale, until it turns black: for fire burns it, or it becomes putrified after it has become black. Until such putrefaction has spread throughout the body
Properly therefore when the incision is made, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from a blow which has struck some of the veins: such as a scorpion's sting, and spiders, and worms, and things of that kind.
If there is corruption, or the blow has struck at the extremity of the finger, then incise the finger and not the space of the corruption, so that it reaches until the remaining hand
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then incise from the root of the bone, and not the space of the corruption, until it reaches the wrist bone
And if it comes to that, then incise the arm at the elbow in its joint.
But if the corruption has passed, and you see it around the elbow: then that is the mark of the disease. And as for treatment beyond this, it is the quantity of the remedy.
And do the same with the foot, when the corruption comes to the finger, then incise it at one of the joints: and if it reaches the heel bone, then incise the whole foot. If it comes to the knee, then incise the thigh at the knee joint
When the corruption has gone beyond the knee, then it is not in it, except for amputation, and leave the diseased limb to die.
And as for the mode of incising the limb, or leaving it, it is like this, that you string the ligaments below, which you wish to incides: and string the other ligament above the place. And stretch out one ligament downwards: and stretch out the other ligament upwards And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is separated Then it either advances or retreats.
Therefore, one must take from all parts of the wound the amount of linen that does not touch the healthy area: and when it has advanced, the wound becomes more inflamed and the swelling becomes greater.
If, however, blood flows inwards during the operation, then cauterize the place quickly: or put over it some powder that absorbs blood Then return to your medicine until it is complete.
Then bandage the wounded limb with the bandage that is suitable for it, and care for it until it heals
And I tell you what happened in my foot, that is what I tell you
That is, because it happened in my foot during a journey, with a burning sensation that assimilated with the fire: and the corruption first occurred in my finger, until the whole foot was affected
He therefore went away from it by himself after he had cut away the corruption from the limb because of the pain and the burning sensation: and he put it at the juncture and it healed
And when a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred in the thumb of his hand.
He came to me and I attempted to recover the swelling with the methods which I use on the other patients after I had treated his body: and the swelling did not disappear, but it began to advance to another finger. And the corruption spread to the hand
He called me to amputate his hand: and I did not do it, hoping that the swelling would subside: and I feared that if I made an incision in his hand he would die Because the force of the man was great over the case.
When he had given up hope of me, he returned to his land: and he came to me again because he had heard that I had been cured. And he threw himself upon my hand whole: and he was healed.
And do not heed this narration except as an aid concerning that which has fallen from the kind of this ailment: and as a signification which signifies, and according to how it is done.
Of the care of joints, and the quality of blistering with the physicians.
When swelling happens in some limb with pain, and the space of the swelling is prolonged, until it makes collection of the healing: then it is broken, or pierced, and what is in it is removed from the healing, and the place which was swelling is left as though it were a hollow space: and the skin which is over it is like a thin membrane which has been stretched: and it does not reach the end in its corruption, neither does it reach the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not called a Fistula, until its space is prolonged, until corruption is made in some part of the limb, then it is called a Fistula, or swelling
And its care is that you cut the whole skin as it is twisted: and especially when it is stretched thin, like a membrane: and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and this does not result from this corruption: and if there is thickening in the skin from the flesh, then cure it with blistering: and it is like considering the Sinus
Then if it is great, and the pus which comes out of it has a foul smell: then blister it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and resin, equal parts, mixed together: and boil them over a fire, until the medicine boils: and bring in the spissitude of honey
Then take from this what is necessary: dissolve it with water and honey, and instill it with vinegar: and tighten its orifice, and send the medicine into it for two hours.
Then extract it with pressure: do this for several days until the sinus is healed, and the stench is gone.
And when it is instilled with vinegar and water, when it is not in the presence of this medicine: take vinegar of wood ashes, or vinegar from the wood of ilic: and sprinkle it over the water Then rest it, and instill it with this, until you are confident that the sinus has been evacuated
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, neither vinegar or water, then instill it with water and honey, to which something of ground cinnamon has been added Or instill it with honey and wine mixed together, for honey has the property of healing and softening: and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in it
When you have done this several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has passed away: then instill it with something that makes new flesh grow in it.
And it is good to take from alum of Daphne: and dissolve it with rose water and wine: or instill it with some medicine, and anoint with others, of whose properties are written in the treatise on unguents.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow, in which the cannula of the syringe will not pass: then widen it with a small iron: or put in the cavity something softened in Egyptian unguent, or in aloes, until it is widened.
If the orifice is wide, join its lips together with suture and discharge the amount which enters the fistula without adding.
If pus flows from the orifice, elevate it to the upper parts: then dry it in the recess where it is, so that it flows downwards: for pus, when contained in depth, hinders the generation of flesh in it
If it is not possible to dry the fistula below, try to prepare the limb with a preparation which will allow the pus to flow out easily as it is prepared Try that nothing of the pus remains in it: and take solidifying medicines which are placed over the sign, suitable for this purpose. And spread them over a layer of linen. And let the linen be of such quantity as to cover the whole fistula. Then cut through in the middle of the orifice of the fistula with scissors, widening the orifice of the fistula somewhat. Then spread out fine sponges over the other linen, according to the size of the hole: and put it over the fistula in a long position away from the orifice of the fistula, so as to relieve the discharge of pus from it: and do not make the linen too large, except after a few days or so once
But he who is over the orifice of the fistula should move in every hour, so that what accumulates in it from the pus may go out: and you will know whether it is much or little, digested or indigested
And thus consider again the place of the fistula itself, whether the master of the house feels pain there, or whether there is pain there, or whether there is swelling there, or not
When the remedy has been applied in this way, and you see that the material which exudes from the orifice of the Sinus has ceased, then you know that the Sinus is adhered, or is close to adhesion: then you must solve it in the palm of your hand, or on the third day. And when you have solved it, then change the bandage and renew the unguentum.
But if it continues to exude from the Sinus for a long space of time with a fine discharge, then do not despair of adhesion, for its healing approaches, because there are men who are slow to generate flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrariwise to this.
But if it continues to exude from the Sinus for many days, pus which is indigested, then you know that the Sinus is not adhered
If, however, the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add to the medication, truly the physicians will make the medicine moist in its substance and dry in its nature: like unguentum dyafinicon, when added to it makes the excess moist.
And from the last thing which is to be done, that is to take unguentum dyafinicon and dissolve it with rosewater, and return over the old liquid equal in quantity to its substance.
Then mix it with this and use it thus.
It does the same thing as this, when it is not present there, honey, when you boil it until it thickens, until it is consumed, and you use it with this Or take myrrh, aloes, and olibanum: mix them all together, and grind that up over honey while it is over the fire. Then smear upon the bandage, and bind it over the Sinus: and smear with the honey which you have boiled until it is consumed: and grind over it the spices, and put upon the bandage, and bind it.
When such aristolochia, long roots of lilies of the heavens, lilies, herb seeds, and centaurea are administered together, When these simples are used together, either simple or combined, and there is bleeding, let there be pounded salt on the wound, and use it on the pulse.
If the condition of the sinus persists and does not heal with this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: either that it makes an imprint on the bones, or on the tough parts of the limb, or the ligaments: then treat it by fistula, as mentioned before.
Concerning the care of panaritium and nails that have become detached, and the incision of the digit added, and the section of it.
Panaritium is a swelling that occurs under the nail of the thumb or finger, or perhaps in the other digits.
When it persists, and is neglected, it becomes inflamed and pus is emitted, until the root of the nail is corroded: and perhaps the whole nail is broken, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone, and there is a foul odor: and the digit becomes swollen and its color becomes dark.
When you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve: then it is necessary to cut off the entire superabundance that remains from the nail with a knife Then burn the nail afterwards A cautery is useful for these things when the iron is cold.
If indeed the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the nails have become loose and penetrate the flesh: then you must place radium under the nail at an angle so that it will touch the flesh, and push it up: and cut the flesh easily, and put on what remains of the flesh from the physicians who have burned and corroded it until it is gone Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, corruption has already set in the bone, then it is necessary to cut away the bone and extract it: for it will not heal as long as the corrupt part remains in it.
If you see corrosion and corruption advancing in a finger, then cut through it at one joint, as has been mentioned previously concerning its reminder. Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, an attrition or percussion should happen to the nail, and there is pain in this, then it is necessary to bleed the diseased part at first. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula from above downwards to the edge.
And take care, lest the cutting should reach the flesh under the nail, for thereby you will cause the addition of pain to the diseased part, and that is the cause of the rotting of the flesh in that place
Then care for the place with that which sits upon the pain.
The finger which is born among the hands of men, perhaps is entirely fleshy: perhaps there is in some of them a bone, and perhaps in that is the nail: and some of them are born in the root of the joint, or that is the origin of them in some part of the finger He who is born in some part of the finger does not move: and he who is born near the joint of the finger, perhaps does move
He who is born of flesh is easily cut away That is, as you would cut away the nail with a wide spatula
The treatment of the condition whose origin is in the root of the junction is difficult. Avoid therefore incision of the same.
In that case where it originates in the finger at the end of the bones, then it is necessary to cut through the flesh in a circular fashion from the beginning of the bone down to the bone itself And then cut the bone with one saw that fits to it Then treat the wound until it heals
Consolidation however which happens to the finger at the joint, often happens either by natural cause of the man, that is, it is born with it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from burning of fire, and the like.
It is necessary therefore to separate that consolidation, until the finger returns to its natural shape Then put between the bones ligatures, or soaked sponges in boiled oil: so that they do not solidify too quickly, and separate the bones: or put between the bones a thin sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated according to what is necessary
And in the same way if consolidation happens to any finger with the palm, then dry up that consolidation, according to what is prepared and convenient for the figure of the limb.
¶ On the Incision of Wounds.
There are veins which are involved, large, full of melancholic superfluities which happen in various parts of the body: and most of the time their event is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who are engaged in travel and work, and those who carry burdens.
It is necessary therefore to manage the swelling of the body from black bile somewhat by evacuation.
Then the physician shall take the patient's pulse with ease.
Treatment of these with iron is in two ways. One of these is to cauterize and draw out black blood. The other is to raise the vein and draw out all of it.
The cutting of these is in this way. The patient should be bathed with warm water, and the thick blood should be resolved until it becomes like mud Then bind the limb of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with oil Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three wide sections
Then raise up, that is, draw out blood from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and from the top pour it out so that the patient receives the phlebotomy at the beginning Then dry the blood until there remains just as much as is needed for the treatment, and as the patient can tolerate the pain of the wound
Then bind the limb: and command him to abstain from food that generates black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are filled, and this will be good for the patient
The elevation of these is in this way If there are many hairs in the limb, shave them off Then immerse the limb in a bath: or cauterize the limb in the leg with warm water, until it turns red, and swell the veins: or perform an exercise of force, if there is no bath present, until the limb is warmed up
Then dry the skin in the direct vicinity of the area to be cut: either at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with scissors, and scrape the area thoroughly, until sensation is restored: and it is when sensation returns that you know that you have rubbed away the redness to the blackness When the blood has drained from the wound, you know that the wound has bled as much as it will.
Then introduce beneath it radium, until it rises and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a cautery needle, fine hair
Then dry the other area nearby for three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the area, until sensation returns. Then raise the area with the radium as you did before, and suspend it with another needle as you did before.
Then dry another area, or several areas, if you wish Then lift up, and make the final incision at the heel
Then remove the wound from the area which is above the wound
Do all this, until you have removed the wound from the upper section, or from all the higher sections, until when they are all gone: then make the incision.
But if you do not manage to remove it by lifting and pulling: then introduce a needle with a strong thread, and tie the wound, and pull it out: or introduce radium under it: and move your hand over the whole area, until it comes out Take care not to make any further incisions If it happens, it is difficult for thee to lift him up again, and it enters over the patient from this document.
When you have pulled out all of it: then put over the place of the wound a soaked bandage of wool in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for him, until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the vein is contracted, having a twist to which the parts are twisted, and is not as we have said according to the rule: then it is necessary to find over the vein on all parts the twist of the twist itself.</start_of_turn
Then suspend the vein with hooks, until you have lifted up all of it: and beware at your incision on the vein above that you do not cut the vein, or wound it: for it is difficult to lift up or extract it.</start_of_turn> Be prudent in this matter.</start_of_turn>
The form of the wound which heals the vein.</start_of_turn
The form of the closed wound.</start_of_turn
It has no curvature like other veins, neither is it acute at the extremities, as it does not wound the vein: and it is of great flexibility, gentle: for if it were slight, it would wound the vein by its flexibility: or if it were of great thickness, as we have said.</start_of_turn
On the extraction of the thigh vein.</start_of_turn
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, like Alizegi, and the land of Arabs, and in dry and warm lands, few in number, that is, in which no herb or tree grows.</start_of_turn
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the limbs.
And indeed its generation is from putrefaction which occurs under the skin, as for example worms and serpents within the body, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And a sign of the commencement of this event is swelling in the limb with heat Then the site becomes wet Then the vein begins to depart from that wet place, as if from the root of a plant, or an animal
When therefore it appears from that extremity, then it is necessary to cover over the lead with the thumb, which weighs a drachma, up to two drachmas and a node: and let the suspended lead go from the limb.
Every time therefore that anything comes out from that, cover it with lead and tie it If it is prolonged for a long time, then cut off a part of it, and cover the remainder And do not cut through the root before all of it has gone out For if you cut through it, it contracts, and enters the flesh: and it makes the swelling worse, and generates putrefaction in the place, and a bad ulcer
Therefore it is necessary to extract it gently, and gradually, until all of it has gone out of the body: and from this vein comes out in some people which is as long as five palms and ten fingers long And indeed it has come to me, because it has gone out of the body for twenty palms.
If, however, it happens that you are seized in the hour of your medication: then introduce radium into the cavity of its body, and perforate it through a long opening, with the body, until all that is in it from the material is evacuated: and administer putrefaction of the place with physicians for a few days. Then care for the aftercare of the wound.
And thus the vein often has many branches, especially when it appears in the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many outlets, and branches go out from every outlet.</start_of_turn>
Care for it accordingly, as we said before, and as is usual.</start_of_turn>
With regard to the section above the worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.</start_of_turn
This disease is called in this land among us bovine disease: because it frequently happens to cattle, and it is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.</start_of_turn
It goes through the whole body, ascending and descending: and is perceptible to the sense during its walking from limb to limb, until it ruptures wherever it ruptures in the skin at the place, and comes out.</start_of_turn
And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors.</start_of_turn Just as worms and serpents appear, that is to say, roundworms and tapeworms in the belly.</start_of_turn
And they are harmful.</start_of_turn Because when it itself goes into the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to the place: then perhaps it opens there, and comes out, and destroys the eye: and this happens frequently.</start_of_turn
When the will to care for him and extract him exists, it is not done except alongside his walking and the perception of his sense.
It is necessary therefore that strings be passed both above and below him with strong ligation Then dry over him and extract him.
If it is found deep in the flesh and you do not find it: then place over the place a cautery with fire until it dies
And more than that which is feared is the corruption of his eye, as we have said
If indeed you see him going toward the head near the eye, then string under it with a strong suture above the eyebrow. Then dry over him and extract him
It is necessary that the patient be treated with the purification of his body, with physicians resolving the harmful humors.
And beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
Regarding the incision above the navel of Nakir
This ailment is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body: then it changes from limb to limb.
I myself have seen it, as I have told you I was called to a woman who was sick in some corner of the house And I found her arm swollen and saw a swelling of the marrow in the bone of the arm
And after an hour had passed, I saw another swelling grow with a worm, like a worm, ascending to his shoulder more quickly than is possible: so that it was like silver going from place to place
The pain has receded from that place and is fixed in the arm.
Then remain one hour, and it runs through the rest of the body until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that it was returning throughout its whole body, as I saw.
I marvel at the swiftness of its change from limb to limb And indeed I did not believe that such an illness could be seen in this way until now But I have seen many who have found the pain change from limb to limb, and I have not seen it with my eyes in a woman.
I do not believe this, except that it is because of the moisture of the women of this district: hence hence appears the swelling to be moved about
It is necessary that it should not appear in delicate persons and humid bodies, hidden by their secret parts.
When you see it with your eyes that the pain has returned: then if it appears to you like this, then grasp above and below with more force: and dry above until the swelling has gone away: and cauterize the place.</start_of_turn>
If you do not see it with your eyes: then take care of it with the evacuation of the body and with the application of fomentatives with poultices of rue and sage, and similar things.</start_of_turn>
(The text continues with a description of treating another medical condition.)</start_of_turn>
Arrows are varied according to their kinds and according to the locations from which they fall from the body.
Their variety is indeed great: for some have large teeth, others have small, some are concave and others are convex And some have three angles. And those which have tongues And those which have stars
These are varied according to the members from which they fall, in two ways. Or else the members are from those which are concave in principle, such as the brain, the heart, the spleen, the lung, the kidneys, the intestines, the bladder, and similar parts When therefore it falls into any one of these members, and you see signs of death, which I shall tell you afterwards, then it is necessary to extract that arrow from the body, for death follows its trajectory in many positions. And when you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and care for the wound
From the signs of the brain, when it falls in that arrow, and pierces the bone, and comes out at the surface of the brain, it is: because from that arise soda that causes vomiting, swelling, vertigo, redness of the eyes, inflation, redness of the tongue, spasm, and mixture of the intellect, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils or ears. And perhaps the voice is lost, and the will is destroyed. And comes out from the wound a white moisture like pus And it comes out like the moisture of meat.
If, however, this sign appears, then abstain from treatment and draw out the arrow if it does not come out by itself.
The signs of an arrow lodged in the gut are: when it is close to the left breast: and it feels as though it is fixed in something hard, not in something soft. And perhaps the arrow is moved like the beating of a pulse: and it runs out with black blood from the wound And following this there is cold extremity, cold sweat, and fainting You know, therefore, that death approaches with doubt.
The sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung, is the escape of bloody foam from the wound: and the swelling which follows the chest, subsides and changes the colour of the patient. And the great and high spirit expires: and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the diaphragm, which is in the chest: then it is near the lower ribs: and it causes a great sigh with pain, with breathing difficulty, with gasping: and all the arms hang down
And if an arrow falls into the stomach: then perhaps it comes out of the wound with some undigested food
And if an arrow falls into the belly and is fixed in it: something of stool, or urine, or intestine which has been ruptured comes out of the wound There is no hope in the treatment of this, neither in the extraction of the arrow
If an arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out: and something goes out from it to the outside, and the pain is more severe over the patient: then you know that this is deadly
The remaining members, as the face, neck, belly, spatula, assistant, dorsal spines, fork, hip, thigh, and those similar to them, are treated according to various arrangements: when neither an arrow nor a nerve is found.
I also say concerning these arrows that you must understand by that your care.
That is, because I believe that the arrow is hidden by the swelling of the eye or the root of the nose. Therefore I extract it from the other side under the fatty substance of his ear: and he was healed, and no wound remained in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had it in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was hidden, and I did not find its tip until I had broken its bow: it was a large arrow of the Turks, with lead, in which there were no ears.
He was healed therefore, and no evil happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the belly of a Christian.
It was an Arabian arrow, and these are those which have ears And I found it between two ribs: and it was buried deep in his belly I was careful with it until I had extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another which had been buried in his bowels: and we thought that he would die from it.
After these things happened to him for thirty days, and there was no change in his condition concerning the arrow, we believed that he would recover: and we treated him, and extracted the arrow: and he was healed, and no evil happened to him
And immediately he who was struck by the arrow in his back, and the bone was consolidated above it. And after seven years, the arrow came out from the root of his thigh bone.
And immediately she who was struck by the arrow in her belly, and the bone was consolidated above it, and the arrow remained inside her: and no change appeared in her condition from her former habits, and the woman did not suffer from any aftereffects of her natural operations.
And immediately another man who was struck by an arrow on his face, and the bone was consolidated, and the arrow remained, without causing him much pain: and similar things happened to many others
And I extracted an arrow from the king's face, which had struck him in the middle of his nose, and which had inclined towards the right side below: and the arrow was completely hidden
I was called to his care after the arrow wound for three days. I found the arrow wound quite tight above the bone
I asked him [the patient] whether he felt any pain under the skin, and he himself confirmed that he felt pain and swelling from the right side around the wound I hoped that this was the mark of the arrow's exit wound.
I plastered the place with absorbent and adhesive plaster, trusting that the wound would heal, and that the sign of the arrow would disappear on the surface: and it did not happen in the place of the wound as if the arrow had followed its course.
I continued to pack the wound with plaster for many days: and it did not happen that the accident occurred, and the bone consolidated in the meantime: and he remained unable to extract the arrow until one day he felt the arrow within his nose He told me that.
He told me that. And he related to me that.
Moreover, in the opening of the wound by means of that acute medicine, until it became visible to us the extremity of the arrow: and we passed over that period of time about four months.
When the wound had healed, and we were able to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not emerge: then we did not desist from boring under the nail, and devised ways to manage above it like skilled people, until we put an end to it on a certain day with forceps which had been made crooked, as it happened in the end of the chapter, until we extracted the arrow from it. The wound was restored.
And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored We restored it, and the wound became firm and healed completely: and nothing remained of the illness.
And I tell you the kind of extraction of arrows which I have seen: so that you may know the rule and the signification of it concerning this matter which I have not mentioned
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended by the narration: neither does this book comprehend them, nor does the skillful craftsman compare them with little to much: and with regard to that which is present, there is little of it, while that which is absent is much; and he has found a new operation and an instrument among the descent of these things in this art when they arise
I say, therefore, that arrows do not emerge from the members in which they are fixed, except according to two methods. Or by attraction from the place from whence it came in. Or otherwise from the opposite side.
And that which goes out from whence it came in, or that is a bow proceeding in a fleshy place: and it is attracted and goes out.
If it does not obey the exit at the hour when it fell: then it is necessary that you omit it for some days, until the carrion that is around it is putrefied: and the attraction of it will be diminished, and its egress will cease
And in like manner if it is fixed in bone, and does not obey you at the exit, then omit it also for some days: and do it again every day with the attraction and motion until it comes out
If it does not obey you at the exit after days: then it is necessary that you perforate around the bow in the very bone from all sides with a fine thread, until the bow be increased Then draw it out, and draw out the thing itself.
If, however, the arrow is hidden in a body part and is concealed and hidden from sight: then inquire concerning it with a hook. If you suspect that it is there, then draw it out with some instrument that is suitable for its attraction.
If, however, you are unable to see beyond it because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow in its depth: and there is no bone, no nerve, or blood vessel there: then find above it until the wound is widened, and only then can the arrow be extracted.
If there are veins which are held by it, then loosen the flesh fixed in the wound from all sides, by all means which you can think of, and contort them, if it is not possible to remove the flesh from the fracture of the ears, and the twisting of the ears, until it escapes
And when you are administering the extraction of the arrow from whatever place it is in, then use the twisting of your hand with forceps to all parts, until you make the arrow escape: and with the last little force, so that the arrow does not break, and so that its extraction is easier for you
If you are unable to remove it at one time, then leave it for a few days, until the surrounding parts have become putrid Then repeat the process: for it will be useful to you that it does not cause the flow of blood. Then administer what we have said about the care in its chapter: and guard your virtue from the incision of the vein, or nerve, or cord.
And administer skill in every way that you can in order to extract the arrow: and do it with ease, and tranquility, or slowly, and firmly, as I have told you
And it is necessary that you do this while you are pulling out the arrow, so that the patient is like the image of the arrow as it is in the case of the arrow in itself. How great is the blessing. If this is not possible, then do what you can from the things that are possible to you.
An arrow which proceeds from the opposite side, or which proceeds from that to the exterior, either makes a swelling at the end of the arrow which is near the skin, and brings up pus: dry therefore over the pus, and cut according to the quantity which they take in that force-ps
Then draw out the arrow: for itself becomes easy to come out.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the circumference, until you press the arrow into the bone, and expand it: then draw it out
And if not: leave it for a few days: then try it again, until it comes out.
If the arrow-wood is in that, then push it out with that.
If the wood breaks, and you wish to administer a push: then introduce an instrument with a concave edge, so that the concavity of the instrument may enter into the head of the arrow: then push out the arrow with the instrument itself
If the arrow is concave, then push out the arrow with an instrument entering into itself The arrow will be relieved by that.
If the arrow is poisonous, then it is necessary to cut away the entire flesh in which the poison is: if this is possible Then take care of the arrow as it pleases you which will agree with this
If the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the gut, or on the side: and it is close to that which you touch with your finger, and it is possible to cut over the wound: then cut over the wound, and burn from the navel, or nerve, and draw out the arrow.
Then, if necessary, apply the poultice to the wound, and care for it until it heals.
This is the form of forceps with which arrows are extracted.
The extremities are like the beak of a bird, made of iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not recoil
There are many kinds of forceps, large, small, medium, according to the quantity of the arrow, the size of the wound, and the constriction of the wound
The shape of the bent handle
The shape of the blunt handle
This is the shape of the extremities like a radius, so that the entrance of the wound is protected into the bent arrow, and is driven in with it.
On the Phlebotomy of Veins
The veins which are usually bled in the body are thirty in number.
Of these, there are six in the head: two palpapable veins which are behind the ears, called the two Herbas: and two arteries which appear in two temporal regions: and two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead: and the vein which is at the end of the nose And two Guidegis which are in the neck And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth And two veins which are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich And two veins which are under the tongue
For the veins which are cut in the arms, there are five veins in every arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it comes from the side of the collar: and it names the great vein of the head And the other is the Femoral. And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of the branches of the Basilic and the Cephalic: and it names the great vein of the body And the Basilic, and it is placed on the domestic side: and it is also called the Titillicaris. And it names the great vein of the belly And the Brachial vein, and it is placed over the elbow: and it is that in which phlebotomy is performed, and that which appears above the thumb in a visible wound
And the Palateal: and it is the vein which is between the ankle and the wrist: and there are two branches to it.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins One of them is which is under the curvature of the thumb from the lateral side And the second is the Saphenous: and its place is beside the calcaneus from the domestic side And the Popliteal: and its place is beside the calcaneus from the lateral side
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to these.
After the Aures, from the two veins.
After the Aures, from the two veins which are post Aures, is the treatment for old cataracts, and migraine, and haemorrhoids, and head-ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as it is said to be. And it is that the head of the patient is to be reduced: and the scalp is to be abraded in the place of the two veins with rough cloth. And then let the patient grasp his neck with his hand, until two veins appear. And their places are post Aures in two depressed places of the head Seek therefore where your finger is easy, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there are the signs with the cautery
And then make the phlebotomy with a lancet, and that is called Incidens. And then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist has reached the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the skin towards the upper parts, and cut the vein with the incision which is incidental And the length of the incision is as much as the distance of two joined fingers, or thereabouts: and let there issue from the blood as much as you wish
And then bind up the patient with bandages, and let go of the vein, until it is healed.
And thus it is before in the beginning of the book, the incision of the veins, and their cautery
If, however, the veins which are in two positions during phlebotomy are injured, it is to the ancient migraine: and the proud sweat, and the persistent vomiting: and the running forth of sharp excoriated matters to the eyes.
The quality of the phlebotomy is easy according to what I have said to you. The patient should tighten his neck very much, until two veins appear to the sense of sight: and it is shown that their pulse is under your finger Then indeed the signs are with incisions.
Then raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and make the phlebotomy incision below, and raise the vein above. And make the incision like that which you made in the two other veins: and make the blood flow out according to the quantity which you need
Then loosen the patient's compression, and place your finger on the vein for an hour Then place above the limb and the nails, and tighten it above the constriction: and let it go, until it is healed
And now remember the incisions and their extraction at the beginning of the book
The after-effect of the phlebotomy of the front vein is after cephalic phlebotomy for ancient facial ailments: and for migraine, and redness: and ulcers.
The quality of this phlebotomy is, according to what I have said to you. The patient should tighten his neck with the thumb and index finger, until the vein appears to the sense of sight Then take the instrument which is called Fossorium.
Place the prominent point which is at the head of the Fossorium over the opening, and pierce through it with a hook or in some other way: and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you desire. Then close the perforation of the patient, and tie it off until it is healed.
And when it is opened with a wide lancet.</start_of_turn> It is not necessary that the lancet should be acute at the extremity, like the other lancets, but rather that it should be wide at the extremity.</start_of_turn> And the lancet should be passed according to the course of the veins: because the bone is close by: and perhaps in that it will break the lancet if it is slender.</start_of_turn>
The purpose of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal bones of the two eyes is for the eye from itching and redness: and for swelling in the eye, and for the ailments of the face.</start_of_turn
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that it tightens the neck of the patient with a loop.</start_of_turn Then the phlebotomy is easy: and you stand over his head.</start_of_turn
And do the phlebotomy according to the course of the vein to a small length, with a small lancet, wide at the edge, for in that place there is no bone.</start_of_turn If the lancet is slender at the extremity, perhaps it will break.</start_of_turn
Then let him run from the blood as much as is necessary. Then put on above the wound a bandage once, and bind it tight. Then loosen it
The veins of the nose are to be bled in case of acute fever, excessive sweating, facial pain, such as a headache, and redness which occurs in the face: especially when it is old.</start_of_turn>
And the quality of the bleeding of these veins is that it tightens the patient's neck.</start_of_turn Then take the left hand of the patient and make the incision slightly under the tip of the nose, long: and hold it in the middle of the nose itself, between that which distinguishes the nose from the second part.</start_of_turn For the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary, after having performed the bleeding, to take the last hand with the bleeding: and let the blood run from the blood as much as is necessary.</start_of_turn Then bind it tight once at night.</start_of_turn> The wound itself will soon restore itself.</start_of_turn>
These veins of the guide are to be bled in case of constriction of the breath, excessive weeping, leprosy, melancholic diseases, bad ulcers and wounds, and corrosive diseases, that is, herpes of the piles.</start_of_turn
The quality of the bleeding of these veins is that it tightens the patient under the chin with the ligature: and let the artist sit above the patient's head, and the patient sit down on a seat.</start_of_turn
Then the phlebotomy shall be performed to a length equal to that of the wide phlebotomy. Then draw from the blood an amount appropriate, or according to what is needed for the purpose Then do likewise with the other vein.
Then suture the ligament and bind the two veins with a middle knot: so that the patient is not harmed And keep it bound until morning. The wound will then heal naturally
Of the phlebotomy of veins according to Algeberich The veins of Algeberich are phlebotomized because they cause swelling in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, cracks in the lips, bad ulcers also in the nose and in the surrounding area
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these veins is that you must make the patient sit before you: and bind their neck with a collar. Then pull down their lip and look at two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left side: and the sign of both is by their blackness around them And this is true: because around them are small veins, black ones Incise therefore each of them at the place where they join.
If, however, you are doubtful and do not know which of them is which: then you must proceed to the incision of the greater of the two, and their manifestation will be evident to you
And do likewise with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and most of them run together with it: and incisions must be made of the two veins which are in the lower lip
From the phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein below the tongue after the phlebotomy of the vein above the tongue. From the phlebotomy of the vein below the tongue after the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun: and lift up his tongue, and look under the tongue from one side of the tongue to the other side of the tongue: and the colour of both is to be dark red.
The phlebotomy must be done on both sides: and take hold, lest you should put your last hand in phlebotomy.</start_of_turn> For under the tongue are arteries, and perhaps blood will flow out from those arteries.</start_of_turn>
For indeed three veins are phlebotomized in the elbow, and it is customary in all men to perform phlebotomy on them.</start_of_turn
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways.</start_of_turn Either by grasping with the thumb as with a phlebotome of Myrtle: or by olive oil to the point of thinness: or by cutting with a knife, which is Alnesil.</start_of_turn This is its form.</start_of_turn
And there are broad and narrow species according to the width of the veins and the tension of their form. The phlebotomy of the Myrtle is broad like water.</start_of_turn And it is suitable for opening wide veins that are contracted, full, engorged, visible, large, and those which contain thick blood.</start_of_turn
And this phlebotomus is of smaller width and has a finer extremity.
And it is suitable for the puncture of slender veins which contain thin yellow blood.
Basilicae, however, which is one of the three main veins for phlebotomy, is deemed an instrument. Because it draws blood from the swellings which are under the jaw and the throat, from the chest following the belly, and the groin: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist because it is above the risk of causing damage to an artery If, therefore, he is mistaken and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will damage the artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary not to puncture the phlebotomist with the phlebotome: rather let him be dry like Alnesil.
If it does not appear visibly, then one must seek it out elsewhere, or ask about it, or take one of its branches: or perform the phlebotomy in another place, such as the elbow pit For it is itself visible, and let the phlebotome be dry like that of Anesil, as we have said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy upon it itself, then you must beforehand grasp the arm tightly, so that you may know the place, until you recognize the place of the pulse Then mark upon the place with a scar, afterwards the arm, and dry the vein with a concave section of the phlebotome like that of Alnesil, as we have said And beware lest the puncture should slip from the place of the artery.
And when you go, with your strings of the ligature, the inflation in the place which you marked with the cautery, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery: you must therefore do so.
When you go [i.e., perform surgery], with your strings of the ligature, the inflation in the place which you marked with the cautery, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery: you must therefore do so. Therefore do so, and place your finger over the said long space, then withdraw your finger. If blood is therefore separated (for it is much more severed), then string the arm, and let it go: and let the patient beware of its movement: and be over its fear.
And do not move it for a few days, until it is healed.
If however blood is not severed, and it increases to you: and it does not appear to you in your moment of need, then cut the artery if you see it For its extremities recoil, and blood is severed.
Or take the edge of the flesh, and find the vein: take the middle one, and string it over the place of the narrowest constriction, with the ligature and the threads until another day.
Then if blood is severed, that is good. And if not: then care for it as for that from which the recollection of the bleeding powder flows: and the cutting of blood in that is not difficult in many positions, because of the smallness of the wound, and the possibility of ligating from the arm.
The vein of the Fuscus is suitable for phlebotomy, because it carries blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the branch of the Basilica and the branch of the Cephalic, as we have said.
It is fitting for the phlebotomist to be above the fear of phlebotomy, for under it lies a nerve. If, therefore, the phlebotomist adds in the puncture of the phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, it happens in this that he falls into a trance, and the healing of his case becomes difficult, and perhaps does not heal at all
And this nerve appears to be connected with the sense of touch. If, however, it is hidden in some people, and is slight, and is not seen: then it is necessary that you should perform phlebotomy with caution, sectioning with Alnesil, and take the nerve with your strength.
If there are two nerves between which there is a space, then find the space in its length.
Of the nerve of the head. Phlebotomies of the nerve of the head are useful, because they draw blood from the head, and confer to eye diseases.
And it is necessary in this vein alone, if you will, that you should perform phlebotomy with the olive oil needle, or with the myrtle needle: because it is safer for the veins of all, because there is no artery, nor nerve under it
But it is fitting to you to know concerning phlebotomy that you should take hold of the head only with the first puncture, and seek a softer place: and it does not harm if it is not found with the first blow, as it will return with subsequent phlebotomies.
Perhaps sometimes in some people the swelling subsides when it is not phlebotomized in the first blow, but it does not harm that swelling in anything.
Of the usefulness of phlebotomy, and the precautions to be observed in its practice. The quality of Phlebotomy and its associated accidents are such that you must consider their rectification.
Firstly, you must know that Phlebotomy is not to be used except in the conservation of health, and the preservation of life, and the avoidance of diseases.
And as for the veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalica, and the Fusca, and the Basilica, these are suitable for Phlebotomy And as for the time of the year when Phlebotomy should be performed, it is best in the beginning of spring after the feast, in summer, and in autumn, and in winter after the completion of the harvest, when there are signs of fullness.
It should be performed on the first or third day after the three hours have passed
Phlebotomy for diseases does not have a fixed time: but when there is convenience and necessity for it, at night or day, at any hour, and at any time.
It is not permitted to perform Phlebotomy on children until they are at least fourteen years of age. Neither should Phlebotomy be performed on a pregnant woman except from the fourth month until the seventh month. Nor on the elderly who have passed their sixtieth year
When anyone wishes to undergo Phlebotomy for any reason: it is necessary to empty the intestines beforehand with a mild laxative, if there is much stool retained: so that they do not draw out harmful matter from the intestines towards the principal parts during Phlebotomy.
Phlebotomy should not be performed on a patient who is suffering from nausea, or who is intoxicated, or who has consumed alcohol: until these symptoms have passed from the body. Neither the infirm nor the healthy are unaffected by hydropisis.
Neither the infirm nor the healthy are unaffected by hydropisis.
Neither the infirm nor the healthy are unaffected by hydropisis. Consider carefully the condition of the humors before attempting treatment; if blood is thick with food and drink, and if the physicians are present: in such a case it is possible for them to do it.
Consider carefully the condition of the humors before attempting treatment; if blood is thick with food and drink, and if the physicians are present: in such a case it is possible for them to do it.
Consider carefully the condition of the humors before attempting treatment; if blood is thick with food and drink, and if the physicians are present: in such a case it is possible for them to do it. And perform phlebotomy in the chest, around the third day, as we have said: and endeavor to evacuate the belly of all harmful things: such as envy, anger, and fear: and from all bodily things, such as labor, pain, and excess, and such like these.
And make your food fragrant with things which are customary among men, such as spices, perfumes, and delights, and like these in quantity as is possible
And let the phlebotomist sit above the ankle, which is higher than the ankle of the phlebotomist: then draw out his arm and wipe it with the hand of the phlebotomist twice, or thrice Then bind the ligament with a bandage, and hold it twice.
And let the restraint be moderate, for when the restraint is too tight, or through excess in the restraint, then it hinders the course of the blood: or in softening, then it hinders the course of the blood also
Then after the stricture it is necessary that the phlebotomist should move his hand towards the inside together with the thumb, until the veins become full, and their filling is perceived by sense.
Then the phlebotomist should withdraw the vein with a slight pull, as before.</start_of_turn>
Then he places his index finger of his left hand over the vein at the place where the phlebotomy is to be made, slightly: so that the vein does not slip away, and the percussion should be set.</start_of_turn For from the veins is more like a fleeing cord at the phlebotomy: and from the inside is what is filled with air: and when you place the phlebotomy over the vein, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is thrown back, and the vein is not opened by the phlebotomy: and if it is opened, it is a stricture: because of this, therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist should be firm, and be solicitous in all these matters.</start_of_turn>
Then he lays down the phlebotomy.</start_of_turn If thus the vein is opened from the inside, then it is good.</start_of_turn And if not, then repeat it with another vein slightly under or over that one: if the place does not yield.</start_of_turn
And if it yields, or if the patient is weak, then let it go on the first or second day: and do not tie the ligament.</start_of_turn Perhaps indeed it will draw out the clot.</start_of_turn Neither should you introduce a sponge.</start_of_turn>
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.</start_of_turn
If the opening is small, or blood runs slowly: then take care that the amount of blood which escapes does not exceed what is desired. Then repeat the bloodletting in the same place according to the rule, and add a little more to the operation.
Do it with speed, before the place is closed. For the closed place is in many men at the time of the operation itself
If therefore you see that the thing is already closed, do not go over it any more, for that will not excuse you before the lord. And put something of the fat of oil upon it: because it will soothe the running of the blood. It is better in this place than pure oil, and than any other oil.
And do the same with the fat of oil in all your bloodlettings, which you do against the running of the blood: and make it become like tyriaca alfarach and sage, when you put some of it upon the place
The blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick
If it happens at the time of bloodletting that the clot is great, for it often happens to those who are not skilled in bloodletting except for a small opening, then take care and put upon the place a sponge wet with water and salt, warmed up slightly: and keep it for an hour: for it will dissolve
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has gone out of the vein, with the complement of the hand, or from another vein.
If anything black or yellow remains in the place after a few days, it does not harm: and if you wish, put upon it something of aloe or myrrh of resolvers, or something of the juice of mint, that is, camomile or something like that.
Many wounds occur at the ankles and knees among the phlebotomists of the Basilica.
Place your hand over the area being compressed; if you find softness there, the swelling is bad Therefore, put something over it as we have said. For perhaps blood flows from the artery.
But make a compress with something that has styptic properties to stop the bleeding at the source Then care for the rest with the other treatment until it heals
And it is necessary to draw out every man from blood in proportion to his virtue. And what appears from the color of the blood on the wound
For blood that is black, then let it go out until it turns red: and in like manner if you see it thick: then let it go until it becomes thin: and in like manner if it is acute: then let the sharpness pass away from it
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and indigent in bloodletting to use one at a time, so that he increases the phlebotomy of one and is wide in that one: and in him who is weak, the contrary is true
And it is necessary to extract it in small amounts, and that the puncture be strict: and it is better that it be administered in phlebotomy of one than by puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the cutting of nerves: and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by breadth and length.
And whoever has been accustomed to persist with phlebotomy during fainting spells should before phlebotomy give the patient a spoonful of honey mixed with water of pomegranate: or vinegar, if he is feverish: and draw from him in three or four amounts
If the complexion is frozen, then before performing a phlebotomy, take bread infused in myrrh syrup, or in scented honey syrup with spices, or in scented oil.
If during a phlebotomy syncope should occur, due to the excessive flow of blood: then it is necessary to take in the vessel water of meat and a mild scented syrup: and let it be flavored with caraway and linseed, and cover the chest with these. And do all that we have said in the chapter on syncope concerning evacuation.
Whoever wishes to remove his arm and restore his blood slowly: must take that from which the phlebotomy has been performed because of the great evacuation, and that is because of its weakness, so that it slowly restores the blood in quantity equal to the degree of weakness in continuous days.
Whoever wishes to remove his arm and restore his blood slowly, and his body is strong: then let him do so after seven or nine hours of the first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body in the opposite direction of its decline: must do so on the second or third day
In whose body there is much hot and acute blood, and which causes fever: must be driven out of it with one vessel, and a great quantity of blood should be drawn from it: and the opening should be prolonged until syncope occurs: after which time you must maintain all the conditions of the phlebotomy, and put your hand over the pulse of the blood-vessel, so that no further syncope should occur. Many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglectful.
And it is not proper when one wishes to restore the arm and restore the blood, when the orifice of the vessel is closed, and there is difficulty in the flow of blood, as it may happen too soon because of excessive speed, and the wound is extended too quickly. It is bad that it should be delayed, nay rather let it go, until the phlebotomy be done the second time.
When the blood has coagulated in the opening of the vein, remove it with the greatest attention, and pour upon it some salt dissolved in water. And pour upon it some aloes of aloes, or alum, and compress it gently, until the blood has drained out
If indeed the vein has been opened, then let it go, and do not press it, until the swelling has subsided
When necessity demands to evacuate the blood a second time, and this is not forbidden, then either perform the phlebotomy above the location, or in the arm or in another vein altogether
The veins of the arm are to be phlebotomized at the cubital fossa and the elbow, when they cannot be found, because they are hidden, for they are composed of bones.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient dips his hand into warm water, until the hand becomes red and the vein becomes visible again.
Then bind it above with a ligature of moderate tension Then perform the phlebotomy in a transverse direction gradually, not laterally, and not too deeply: and let the opening be wide, and your phlebotomy should be as near to the edge of the wound as possible
If the discharge of blood is forbidden, then dip the hand once more into warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have accomplished your purpose
If indeed you are in the summer days, then you are excused from the dipping of the hand into the warm water Much of the blood course is placed in warm water in winter.
Phlebotomy of this vein is more beneficial than all the others, because there is neither a pulsatile vein nor a nerve under it
Phlebotomy of the right hand is useful for treating liver ailments.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that you tie the vein with a thread or your finger, after you have introduced the vein into the warm water, until the vein swells and you can feel the cold sensation Then the phlebotomy is completed by cutting across the vein. And if you cut the vein completely, it will not cause it any harm in any way.
And let us preserve, that you do not cut off your hand with the phlebotomy Under this are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then return the hand to the warm water, and let the blood flow out of it For if you do not return the hand to the warm water, the blood clots in the opening of the vein and prevents its course.
When you have taken out the amount of blood necessary, then put on the vein oil and salt: so that it does not clot too quickly.
And in the same way you must do with every strict limb
The remedy for the phlebotomy of the left hand is: because it is useful for treating spleen ailments: and in the phlebotomy of this, do as you did in the second equally
The saphenous veins are useful for treating ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as stomach ailments, retention of menstrual blood, kidney weakness, ulcers of the buttocks and thighs of old age, and similar ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that it introduces the diseased limb into hot water: and makes above it friction, until the veins bubble forth: and binds above the junction of the limb with a bandage. The veins are located at the heel, appearing under the thumb: and are extracted from that on the face of the foot of many limbs.
The phlebotomy is therefore done in the greater branch of the limb, or at the heel in its collection: because that is better and safer
If the phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then it causes damage from the nerves that are under it over the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy above that from which the phlebotomy is made, as if you wish to cut through it: and let the phlebotomy be of Nile
But if the discharge of blood is prohibited, then repeat the limb in hot water: and let the blood flow out in the limb until it is evacuated.
But if the vein is mistaken in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy to the upper parts, for the place is safe, and does not often cause harm, when you cut from the nerves, as we have said.
And in the same way as the other vein of the foot is equal.
The veins of the sciatica are located at the heel from the side of the heel bone
The purpose of the phlebotomy is for the relief of the pain of the ankle, when it is because of the hot blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that it introduces the diseased limb into a bath, and makes haste: and ties the limb from the side of the ankle up to the heel for four fingers, with a fine long bandage: for it does not appear except for that.
When the patient appears, then the phlebotomy is performed according to whatever is possible for the patient, or according to the passage of blood: and it is better either to make the incision or to perform the section. The place of the vein is more beneficial, and it is hidden in many men.
The place of the vein is more beneficial, and it is hidden in many men. If you do not find it and it does not appear to the senses in any way: then the phlebotomy is performed on some branch of it, and that which appears at the back of the foot and is adjacent to the heel: and you should prick from nerves, and cause blood to flow out in the quantity that you desire
Then loosen the tight dressing, and place over the site of the phlebotomy the skin, and bind the place It will heal quickly.
On Windings, and the quality of the bandage.
Wounds are caused by horns, and by air, and by pus.
And the dressing is done in two ways One is with scarification and extraction of blood: and the other is dressing without scarification
And this dressing which is without scarification is done in two ways Or it is with fire Or it is without fire
And the dressings which are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number for the body Of these, one is the dressing of Aloe, and it is the most recent for the head: and Alkhel, and it is middle of the neck: and the dressings of Aloes of the Gardens, and they are two layers of the neck from two parts together: and the dressing of Mint, and it is under the mandible in the lower part of the mouth: and the dressing of the Two Spines, and they are two layers of the cheek: and the dressing of Alachosos over the end of the tail: and the dressing of the Two Grooves, and they are middle of the two arms: and the dressing of the Two Ribs, and they are under the two elbows: and the dressing of the Two Heels
Neither does external application of powder exert blood from small wounds scattered through the flesh; for that reason it does not cause the loss of vital force from the body, as is the case with phlebotomy. Neither does it suffice to apply powder with fire, or without fire, to any ailment that arises from excessive filling of the body until the whole body is evacuated
When need compels us to apply powder in an ailment, whether due to custom or for the benefit of the patient, we shall administer it at the beginning, at the end, and in the middle of the month, and at any other time as required
For indeed, when men are multiplied in their blood, until they crave its extraction through powder, they find in their head a burden.
And from the body comes the filling and redness of the face, head, and neck And from the body comes the itching of the face, the forehead, the temples, and the dimming of the eyes.
The body itself is the seat of powder application. The body's laughter is multiplied And from the body comes the taste of blood in the mouth: either the tongue swells up and expels blood. The body's sleep is multiplied. And from the body comes sweating in sleep, blood, redness, boils, and similar things
When we see any of these things, or at least in the middle of the month: we order powder to be applied immediately, after two or three hours have passed
The application of the Ventosation of the Neck is as follows: since it itself contributes to the gravity in the head, and what flows down to the eyes. It should be administered after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this is indeed the Ventosation of the Cephalic Vein.
It is not permitted to use it on those who are of a cold complexion, or in whom there is a discharge from the eyes For it brings about a great heat.
It is not suitable to use it in the elderly, or in those whose heads suffer from cold ailments
Whoever uses it excessively will cause great pain in the head
Therefore it is necessary to support the hand with the open palm downwards, away from the face, fearing the generation of a headache
The Ventosation or Alkehel is the place of the phlebotomy of the Vein of the Fuscus, and of the vein of the Basilica, and because of this it contributes to asthenia, and constriction of the chest, and pain in the instruments of the chest, and cough, and swelling.
It is necessary to apply the Ventosation of the Alkehel downwards, because if it is placed downwards, it will cause stiffness of the heart and the stomach
The application of the Ventosation is useful for headaches, dizziness, migraine, perforation and toothache: it is the place of the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
It is necessary to hold the hand firmly without grasping it during the procedure: so as not to damage the artery and cause the flow of blood to be obstructed
The windward side of the face, when it is wet, brings moisture to the mouth, corrupts the gums, and brings about similar ailments which are in the mouth: and it stands in the place of a bloodletting which is in two veins.
The windward side of the face, when it is wet, brings moisture to the lips, which is caused by reflection and heat.
The windward side of the face, when it is wet, brings moisture to the three angles of the mouth, Basilica, Fez, and Cephalic: because it attracts blood from all these small veins which are in the flesh: and it attracts these small veins from other greater veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary, in order to prevent the effects of the wind, not to make too great an incision: because the place is naked of flesh, and under it are nerves and blood vessels.
The wind which comes upon the cheeks brings about haemorrhoids of the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary, in order to prevent the effects of the wind, that it should be great and dry: because the place requires strong suction, and the fine veins may be broken by strong suction: and a great incision is made.
The winds of the cheeks cause the diminution of the disease: because they draw blood from the whole body, and bring about ancient pains in the buttocks, and the uterus, and the testicles: they cause menstruation, and bring about swelling, and inflammation: and they stand in the place of two saphenous veins, and the marrow bones
But they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many people.
The marrow bones are a proximate cause of the two winds of the cheeks.
The quality of the position of the veins is such that you should place the inflated [catheter] in the first cavity, and perform suction with a moderate degree: and do not prolong the position of the veins, but place them quickly, and move them quickly, so that the humors may come to their proper place at the same time: and do not cease doing this until the place is already red and swollen, and the red blood appears. Then indeed you should scarify, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider the disposition of the bodies.
For one who is of slender body, little-haired, he should indeed scarify himself once, not more: so that he does not ulcerate the place
And command the Surgeon to amplify the scarification, and deepen slightly: and temper the suction with ease, and speed, and movement of his hand
If there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary that he scarify himself twice. In the first instance open a small opening under the thinness of the blood, and its moisture: and in the second instance the meticulous extraction of thick blood
If indeed the blood is dark and feculent, then make a third scarification: so that the last thing remains.
And finally, when we wish to extract the blood gradually, or little by little, sufficeth for us one scarification. When we wish to extract much blood, we make several scarifications.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that he scarify deeply: and the equal endpoint of the scarification is the depth of the skin.
What is that which must be managed from the oils at the position of the veins, and what is the cause of the swelling?
When the skin is large, hard, tough, and its pores are strict, it is necessary to anoint the area with open, soothing, resolving oils: if it is in summer, like almond oil or oil of violets, or sweet marigold oil, or oil of cucumber seeds.
And if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or balsam: these are similar things.
If there is excessive moisture, great and cold: then apply amaranth oil, or balsam oil or white oil, or ivy oil: these are similar things.
If the wound is full of wind, soft and fleshy: then it is necessary to prevent moisture from adhering, and to wash the area with rose water, or cold water, or warm water, or cucumber water, or seawater: and like these things.
He who has much blood in his wound, wash the wound with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and alum: and like these things.
He who has large moisture, wash the wound with old wine, or with fennel water, or decoction of ivy, or chamomile: and like these things.
It is necessary to keep the wound moist in a bath, or in a basin, and it is necessary to administer after leaving the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And do not let anyone sleep after the wound has been washed.
What is it that is necessary to regulate the wound, or phlebotomy before washing?
And after that, it is necessary to consider in the first place: if the wound is choleric, or phlebotomy, and if the blood is acute and inflamed: then it is necessary to take chills, such as pomegranate seed: and also garlic with vinegar and lettuce, and rue, and ivy: and like these things.
Put the powder of the ointment on the wound, and the flesh of the body will be soft, and the food with the barley: thus shall it be like them.
If the consistency of the ointment is cold, it is necessary that you add to it a syrup of honey, or of aloes, or of poppy seeds: and add a moderate perfume, which is between a strong and a new one: and it is prescribed to use little food. Put the powder of the ointment on the wound, and the flesh of the body: and the sparrows, that is, small birds: and the pigeons, which is soot of doves: it must be like this
It is necessary that the drink of the days of rest and blood-letting be more than food: and it is necessary that it be given in a drink in some men at the hour of the hare and fox, or a medicine of musk, that is, myrrh, or alum before rest, or before blood-letting, or afterwards: in order to comfort the principal parts and temper the blood. It is not necessary to add vinegar to the drink.
Of vomiting without scarification. But those vomtings which are without scarification are those which occur above the spleen, and the loin, and the heel, and above the belly, the navel, and the kidney: because these members do not suffer scarification over themselves.
And it is not asked for in vain, except for an attack from a member of the blood to a member: as we put vomiting above the breasts in the flux of blood of the nose We must be cautious lest we cause a cold sensation in the wound by putting the vomit on it: as we put the vomit on the belly and the navel.</start_of_turn> The limb itself does thereby become rareified, and is heated, and the pain is removed thereby, because it resolves the swelling.
It is also applied over the kidneys, when it happens in the belly fat, or the spleen The bile may force out the fat perhaps open the swelling, or eradicate the stone from its place.
It does the same thing when it is applied over the liver, and the spleen helps to soothe the swelling in both of them
These winds are administered with a section only. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with warm water in pleurae: and thus the wind is produced, and it becomes great, only with warm water alone, or with water in which herbs that are appropriate are boiled
The form of the wind administered with fire is as follows
Its breadth is two open fingers; its depth is half of a palm; its side is in the middle, at a small opening; the quantity of air in it is according to the quantity of the needle: let there be air like this, or citrine, with rough edges, soft, equal, fine: so that it does not harm the limb in its position over it: and there is in the middle of it a transverse vein of air or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And thus this swelling is made great, greater than we have said, and a little less than that, according to the ailments and the age of the one who uses it
The winds of children, and extenuators are other things than the winds of the young, and of the fat people.
The quality of placing this [ointment] with fire over the limb is that you raise the license with fire from the navel downwards, or produce a flame from the palm of your hand from the heel: and place it over the middle of the veins which are in the middle of the ointment. So that the fire is raised around the lower part of the ointment, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
Then it is placed over the limb: and the finger rests on the hole which I mentioned, until the ointment is firm: when we have finished, we remove the finger, and the vapor rises from that hole, and the ointment is immediately dissolved
Then kindle the license according to its manner, and do it again, if you have not digested it well.</start_of_turn>
In Venus [ointment] which is administered in pleurisy with water, there is no vein or hole: and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed only on the limb.</start_of_turn>
This is its form.</start_of_turn>
And the larger the Venus is, the more it can absorb water, the better.</start_of_turn>
Of the suspension of blood-sugar.
Blood-sugars are not administered in multiple places, except in those parts where it is not possible to place the ointments, because of their smallness, such as the lip and the tongue, and things like that.</start_of_turn Or in a limb denuded of flesh, such as the finger and the nose, and things like that.</start_of_turn
And the quality of using these [ointments] is: to take them from blood-sugars which are in sweet waters, far from putrefactions.</start_of_turn
Then they are sent forth by day and night into sweet water, until the patients are satiated, and nothing remains within them. Then the body is evacuated first with phlebotomy, and with enema. Then strip off the limb of the patient, until it turns red. Then put on above it
When they are full, they must be let go of, and there is a possibility of sucking up the place with enema, then that is the last thing: and if not, then draw out the place with vinegar Then with much water, and it is beaten and squeezed out
And if the course of the blood should be prolonged after the evacuation of the blood-sugars, and that is that it remains running: then pour oil over a thread in cold water, and put it on top, until the discharge is stopped
And if the blood should be multiplied, then sprinkle over it the powder of alum or gall, and similar things from the styptics: until the blood is stopped
Or put on the place middle cloths of barks stripped off: and send away, until the cloths adhere to the place, for the blood is stopped.
And it is necessary if necessary to repeat the evacuation of the blood-sugars, when it is possible, to change them easily.
If however the evacuation of the blood-sugars is prohibited from suspension, then evacuate the place with blood recently. Or keep the sponge in the place, until something comes out of the blood Then put on, for they themselves when they feel something from the blood, adhere immediately
When any one wishes that they may fall, let them sprinkle something from aloe, or salt, or ashes upon their face: and they will fall immediately.
When anyone wishes to fall, let them sprinkle something from aloe, or salt, or ashes upon their face: and they will fall immediately. This chapter is also very necessary in the art of Medicine, and is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of accidents in bones.
When anyone wishes to fall, let them sprinkle something from aloe, or salt, or ashes upon their face: and they will fall immediately. Note that the sons of physicians and those who have not studied ancient books, and who have not learned anything from them, will reject this chapter as foolish
And because of this reason, it is because this method is private among the sciences of our land. And I have not learned of anything good from this in any way, and I am not sufficient in this from that, except for the length of my study of ancient books, and the study of their intellect, until I have extracted the science from them
Then I adhere to experience and the length of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter all that contains the science which is in my possession: and beyond that which has passed my experience, after I have abbreviated it for you, and I have published it for the purpose of abbreviation, and I have finished with the purpose of declension: and I have devised many forms of instruments which are administered in this case, as well as for the addition of declension, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Summary and collection concerning the condition of bone fractures, from which the preceding remarks are necessary, before we proceed to the recall of fractured members and their various forms.
As it is stated in the prologue of this chapter, we must now speak of summaries and chapters which are necessary for one who wishes to arrive at a true understanding of this art: for some have deemed it necessary to add this noble science, while others have omitted it from their work.
When any fracture, dislocation, twisting or turning of a limb, or any violent impact occurs: then it is necessary at the outset to draw blood from him and to treat the wound itself, or both at the same time: for if nothing hinders it, such as weakness of spirit: or if there is any child or old man present who is unable to give an account of himself: or if the time is unfavourable, either because of excessive heat or excessive cold.
Then let him be content with his food, with cold drinks, and with birds' flesh and herbs: and refrain from wine, and from coarse food, and let him nourish himself from food and every other nourishment that fills the veins Until then, when he is secure from the after-heat of the wound, and no longer experiences the discharge of pus from the limb: then let the sick man return to his ordinary diet as soon as he is able to do so, with the food which he is accustomed to eating
When the fractured bone begins to restore itself, then it is necessary to feed the sick man nourishing and wholesome food in great quantity, such as barley bread baked with water, barley porridge, heads of cabbage, feet and legs of pork, and fish: and strong drink, and things like these When used in this way, the regimen promotes the coagulation of fractures more quickly and effectively.
You know that broken bones, when they are in a state of decay due to their old age, and are decrepit, are not able to continue to harden and consolidate according to their natural course because of the drying out of their parts: and they harden and continue only in the degree of softness.
Truly, nature adds something like glue to every part surrounding the broken bone, which has the property of thickness, which adheres to it and tightens it until it is consolidated together, and binds together until it reaches the degree of firmness and strength which it had at first, without hindering any of its operations: and for this reason it is necessary to provide the sick person with food that has abundance, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said before
You know that there are different kinds of fractures, depending on the different parts of the body: for example, a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the skull: and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the backbone: and so on with all the other parts of the body. I have mentioned in my chapter the different kinds of fractures which are exposed. Fractures of bones also differ in their kind.
Because sometimes the bone breaks in an arched form, along with the splinters that occur in them. And sometimes the fracture is longitudinal of the bone: and there are fractures that are compound, that is, which have splinters, like in a quill, when a knife is applied to write with it Neither is it complete: and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption at the head: and that is a small fracture.
Every species has an innate faculty, or its own instrument, in restoring itself, according to the recollection that arises concerning it, distinguished in its places.
From this it is known that the fracture of a bone is its twisting, and its elevation: and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you press it
When therefore it is not apparent that there is twisting in the place, neither is there any sound at the touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor is there great pain: then there is no fracture there, but it is possible that there is twisting or a small fracture: it is not necessary therefore to move or compress the limb altogether, but rather to place above it a remedy which brings to mind the recollection which has arisen in that place at that moment. Then the stricture will be bound together with a subtlety.
You also know that when an arch is bent and broken into two, except when this happens by chance, all the parts are moved away from their companions: then it is necessary for you to begin at the beginning to restore it, equalizing it before the swelling has subsided
But if there is a cold swelling, then leave it for a few days, until the swelling has subsided Then restore it according to whatever method you can from gentleness and skill.
You know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than the bone itself in which the swelling happens
Then bind it up, according to the recollection which has arisen to you.
If there are bulges in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this limb from two parts, if the hand is involved, or the foot: or with your hand, if the limb is small: or with two bands, or with a bandage and a hand
And let your position be such that you place the limb above a level place, following its natural figure, until the parts of the fractured limb extend: then strive, with all your skill, to restore those additions to their proper place; and do so in whatever way seems best to you. And take heed of your strength, lest you cause pain or damage to the patient by your operation. And strive with your strength to apply one bone to its partner, following the better form.
And it should be in this hour that you grasp and touch the limb yourself. If there is anything else which hinders you there, correct it and make it equal in quantity to your power
Take heed of excessive extension and compression, as many stones do For many do violence to their operation by excessive swelling or contraction in the limb: as we have seen this to happen from the operations of many
Then bind on after the equalization and lower the operation, and tighten that limb, and quiet it, and tranquility: and praise the patient above all. And make him quiet, lest he move in the hours of night, and his sleep during his convalescence, and his waking in the morning, and his eating, and all his movements at the last behest of his strength. And take heed that the position of the limb is not such as to cause him pain That is to say, when he feels pain or discomfort in the position of the limb: then it is necessary to change it to another position in which he does not feel pain
And take heed of that, also, that his position be equal and straight: that no twisting occur in the limb when restoring it
The quality of the fracture of a broken limb is as I have described.
You know that broken limbs vary in size and shape, as well as in number.</start_of_turn>
Small bones, such as the arm, finger, ankle and their like, must be bound with soft padding, due to their tenderness.</start_of_turn Large bones, such as the thigh and shin, must be bound with a wide, hard dressing.</start_of_turn>
Because the broad ligament connects the large limb and tightens it from all sides with equal force, it does not allow it to be displaced.</start_of_turn
Then, after you have evacuated the bowels, commence to apply a bandage appropriate to the limb, on the support of soft cushions over the site of the fracture.</start_of_turn Then, bind the ligament over the site of the fracture three or four times, as needed for the limb: and tighten your hand along with the ligament.</start_of_turn
Then, support the upper part beyond the fracture site, and tighten less than the tension you used to apply to the fracture.</start_of_turn Then, keep the limb extended with the bandage beyond the fracture site, and gradually soften the tension until you reach a healthy state.</start_of_turn
Then, do the same again, and bind the limb once more over the fracture with bandages.</start_of_turn> Then, support the limb with the bandage below the fracture.</start_of_turn And let your operation be in the tightening of the bandage and the softening of it, as we said in the first bandage above.</start_of_turn
Then place between the sutures a soft lump of wax or cloth, so that the fracture's curvature is evened out if there is any curvature: but if there is none, do not place anything in it.
Then place another dressing over the former. Afterwards make the sutures even over the placed dressings immediately, if there is no swelling or hardness in the place
If, however, there is swelling or hardness in that place: then place above that which sits the said swelling, and it will expel the swelling: and remove the swelling a little every few days. Then string over that immediately the sutures once more
And let the sutures be of the middle size of broad barley, round, well-shaped: or they may be of wood which has become brittle from age, which is the pith of elder or wormwood, or palm branches, or nails: and let the width of every suture be according to this form, and this very figure.
It is true that the suture which is placed above the tract should be thicker and wider than the rest of the sutures: and the length of the suture should be according to the size and nature of the limb.
Then string over the sutures with another dressing, according to the first measure. Then tie over it with wire in the middle, immediately, according to what we have said concerning the measure: and it is that the measure should be greater over the place of the fracture: and the greater the distance from the fracture, the smaller the measure
And it is necessary that the wire should be of medium thickness and fineness, and that it should be of soft wood
For if the wire is thick, like oil from the operation of placing stones, it is a great mistake: for the measure will fall from the quality of the thread.
The fine thread does not meet again: for you do not follow through with strictness as regards that which you desire.
It should not be like that between the star and the star less than a finger's breadth
If the sick person is injured between the stars by the strictness in the healthy places: then put under the wound something soft, such as wool or carmine wool, until nothing is injured from that
When however there is a fracture with a wound, and there has happened a disruption in the skin: I will come with a reminder of it in the second chapter concerning the singularity
And you know that not every fractured limb needs to be bound with stars from the first day. For a large limb, it is not necessary to bind it with stars immediately. But after five or seven or more days, according to your security concerning the event of the after-heat.
And this is the manner of plasters which the ancient people used to restore, which they put over the fracture and dislocation.
A common abbreviated method of plastering which restores the fracture, suitable for various temperaments, especially women and children: because it does not cause heat nor cold to adhere to it.
And it is that you take from the flour mill, and it is the middle of the wheat which hangs in the mill-pails at the movement of the millstone: and you fashion it as such, except that you add to it some plaster of Paris and white lead. And you put on the confection of it not thick, neither thin. Then use it as needed.
Another method of plastering, which restores the fracture, dislocation and torsion Recipe of meal, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mugath: with ten myrrhas of succ, and five aloes of both, and twenty of alethil. They are all boiled together, and then cribellated, and mixed with lukewarm water, or with vinegar if the patient's complexio is high. Then use this plaster. For indeed it is a good composition, restores fractured bones quickly, and strengthens many people.
Another method of plastering, which also strengthens fractures and torsions Recipe of mugath, and meal, and white alum, with ten myrrhas of succ, and five aloes of both, and six acacia with twenty parts of boiled armenium. They are all boiled together, cribellated, and formed with water, or vinegar: and administered.
Method of plastering for joint injuries, and bones separated from their places: and it soothes the pain of an accident, and splits the bone, and fractures it Take a strip of lint soaked in vinegar, and dip it in decocted oil: and apply it over the place.
And in this plaster there is no power of restoration, but it is good in the suppression of a hot after-effect: and it drives away the pain itself.
Method of plastering which restores the fractured bone Take leaves of fennel seed and leaves of wild rue: and grind them both together to make plaster
Method of abbreviated plastering, administered for the restoration of a fractured bone: and when you wish for the resolution of the remaining after-effect. Recipe for the root of the elderberry, chamomile, violets, and barley herbs, all of which are taken in one part. They are boiled together with wine, unless a heated member is present.
If, however, a heated member is present, then confect it with warm vinegar, or with water, and use it thus.
Another strong method for healing, in the case of a hard after-effect following restoration of the limb. Recipe for the root of the elderberry, flaxseed, poppy seeds, melilot, chamomile, violets, and sambucus, all of which are taken in one part. They are boiled together with salty water, or with sweet water, or with wine. The whole of this should be done according to the degree of heat of the limb, and should be calmed by the heat of the limb itself.
Hippocrates himself did not say in his book that anything should be placed upon a fractured limb during its restoration, except for butter or oil: nothing else. He says that there should be an intermediate degree between the thickness and thinness
Galen, however, considers it useful to place upon a fractured limb during its restoration various things which contain an exication of heat, such as myrrh, aloes and balsam, and similar things to these
A method for applying a dressing which brings relief to the wound and the pain. Recipe for mugwort, ciceris, human hair clippings, or bird feathers, elderberry, and salt, taken in equal parts. They are boiled, crushed, and mixed together to form a dressing
The quantity, however, should be according to what is needed, so that the ligament remains, and then it should be dissolved, that is to say, that you should consider whether there is still pain, itching, or swelling of the fractured bone in its place: do not dissolve it for many days If it happen to him in a place of itching, or pain disturbing, or swelling: then let him rise up promptly, and resolve in an hour itself, and take away the plaster from him: and take hold of a soft cushion, or a sponge of maritime linen, moistened: and submerge him in warm water, and bathe with it until the itching subsides, and the pain settles.
If it happen to him in a place of itching, or pain disturbing, or swelling: then let him rise up promptly, and resolve in an hour itself, and take away the plaster from him: and take hold of a soft cushion, or a sponge of maritime linen, moistened: and submerge him in warm water, and bathe with it until the itching subsides, and the pain settles. And let him leave the limb quiet for an hour. And let him put upon him a dry wool blanket, immersed in vinegar and oil, or oil of roses: and bind up upon him at night one, until he is secure from the heat, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain ceases.
And do it again to the limb softly, and remove the plaster little by little: and do not bind it tightly at first, but bind it softly with him, until it is healed
If you have seen that the swelling has subsided, and the redness, and the pain, and the itching, and all the other accidents have passed away, and digestion of the plaster and the binding: then do it again in this way as you did at first equally
If nothing happens to the limb from these things which we have mentioned, then do not dissolve it, except after three days, or four, or five, or seven days. And when it has been a whole twenty days since the beginning, according as you see the limb recovering from the solution, as we have mentioned, until when the fracture has rejoined, and the clotting of the flesh has approached on it: add also to the binding more than the first binding you made: and also to the nourishment of the sick food, according as the remembrance of it returns.
If, however, you see the place of the fracture has been evacuated more than is necessary: then you know that the nourishment is hindered from proceeding to it Embroca it therefore with warm water throughout every cavity which contains it, and let it remain there for three days, and then gently tighten the surrounding area.
This treatment therefore runs to the nourishing limb, and heals quickly.
That which makes the restorers of fractures stumble from the fracture of the limb by the other side, when it is not restored at first, according as it should be, and is restored according to its curve, is an error in their operation, and great fear: for if it had been the rectum, the old men would have said of it in their books, and they operated with it.
I have never seen any trace of that in this at all, and it is better that it should not be done thus.
About the fracture in the head.
There are various kinds of fractures, and their figures are many: and their causes are diverse.
For a fracture is what is done by a blow with a weapon: and the blow raises the whole bone until it reaches the marrow, which is under the bone, like an axe in wood: and for this reason this kind of fracture is called Axial.
Or the weapon strikes something of the bone, and breaks its face, and does not penetrate to the end of it: and this kind of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, complete fracture
And there are two kinds of fractures, or a great one, or a small one
And the fracture is also that which is a tear, or a break: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a fall from a height, or something similar
This fracture is also either penetrating or non-penetrating, which approaches the nerve which is under the bone: or that is on the face of the bone. It is a wound of two kinds of fracture, or small or great.
The fracture which is hidden in the bone in the thickness of a hair: it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called the capillary fracture.
The fracture which is caused by a blow, or by a stone, or by things of a similar kind, which make the lamina of the bone break inwards, and makes a hollow space: as happens with blows of the air, when there is a blow and something goes inwards
It mostly happens in the heads of wet bones, such as the heads of children.
And all these kinds of fractures are separated by a swelling which comes from the fracture itself. And I will speak of all of them in their place.
We recognize all these kinds of fracture by their appearance on the surface, by their tension, and by the removal of the corrupted flesh which is above them
The capillary fracture is recognized by this, that it appears on the bone, is stripped off and is bound over with lead: for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the signs of the patient: then if you see signs which signify a serious matter above fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and swelling, and loss of consciousness, and loss of speech, and fainting, and high fever, and discharge from the eyes, and redness of the skin, and similar things which are caused by various conditions, even if you do not suspect them, do not delay treatment: and if you do not see serious signs, and you hope for recovery, then begin to treat it.
If it happens that a wound comes to you in the cold season, then on the fourteenth day after it occurs, it is necessary to study the removal of bone.
If in the summer days it occurs, then it is necessary to prepare for the removal of bone before the seventh day, before the soft parts beneath the bone become corrupted, and before these things happen which we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
If the fracture of a bone has reached the brain, and it is with small pieces and traction, then it is necessary to cut away the displaced part and the attached fragment, according to what has been told you.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary to support the head of the wounded person: and to support over the bone in any way possible: and according to the form of the wound, and what is soft over the infirm.</start_of_turn>
If it happens that during the detection of a flowing blood vessel, or a soft swelling: then oppose it with what is necessary.</start_of_turn And it is necessary to place a pad with wine-soaked cloths over the wound, and sprinkle with salt: and make the wound quiet, until the swelling subsides, and be secure from the flow of blood.</start_of_turn Then begin the treatment of the bone, and its removal.</start_of_turn>
And this is done according to two methods.</start_of_turn>
The first method is to cut the bone with a straight chisel.</start_of_turn
Then give another chisel wider than the first one: and this is the form of this.</start_of_turn
And then give another chisel even wider than the previous one.</start_of_turn
And the second method is that there be beside thee a number of diverse Incisors: some of which are broader than others, and some of which are narrower than others: and that they be at the utmost acute of their edges, and that they be of iron or steel, and that you use ease in their percussion over the Incisor, so that it does not crush the head and injure it.
If, however, the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary to perforate its circumference before you administer the Incisors, with needles which are called non-deep: and they are not called thus except when they do not pass through the end of the bony cortex to that which is beyond it: because the needle is a rounded extremity above that, which is under the acute angle of the head, similar to the margin, and a small circle hinders its immersion, and its passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting that you take from these needles a great number, of which each one shall be equal to the quantity of thickness of the bone, until present be in thee all around the Needle: the quantity of the acute extremity of which in length and breadth is equal to the quantity of thickness of that circumference
And this is the form of the three kinds of needles, or Trepanae.
The quality of the perforation in the circumference of a fractured bone is: to place the Needle on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced Then move the Needle to another place, and place that which is between every hole the quantity of the radius, or around that.
Then cut with the Incisors between every hole from the bone: and do this more subtly than the might from the end of the lesion, as we have said, until you have fractured the bone, or your hand, or with some other instrument which you have prepared for this: such as tweezers and fine forceps
It is necessary to take every precaution, lest you touch the Brain or any instrument from the abdomen.
When you have completed the perforation of the bone and it is separated from the abdomen, if it is continuous with the latter, you must extract it, taking care not to damage the surrounding structures with another instrument like an Incisor. It is necessary to make the hole small and fine, like other Incisors.
If anything small remains from the small bones and the fat: grasp them easily with the instrument that is beside you Then care for the wound afterwards as with the dressings that we mentioned before
Another method of operation is simple, far from fear: which Galenus praised highly: this is his saying. It is not necessary at first to remove the fragment of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious: until you have removed that fragment, and placed under it the tip of this lenticular Incisor.
The blunt part of the lenticular Incisor does not damage anything: and the acute part of it is wide on both sides, like water: so that the blunt part is close to the abdomen, with the acute part of the instrument facing the bone
Then pierce through the Incisor from one side with a small hammer, until you have pierced the whole bone easily: as if you were rotating it: and you will be secure from the nerve, which you fear will be injured in this process.
Even if the physician is not stupid among men, and is ignorant of this, or is asleep: if anything remains attached to the bone from the nerve in some place, he should remove it with the tip of the lenticular Incisor itself, and deliver it easily from that He is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
If a bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow cavity, and that which is broken off from the bone is its surface, and remains in the same position and slight roughness: then it is necessary to smooth out that roughness, and remove those slight roughnesses with fine files of various sizes, so that it is possible to manipulate them easily in any convenient place, and to correct their position, according to the thing which the operation requires, and the fractured bone itself, and its figure. And it is necessary to work with reason, that is, to begin with the coarser files, and then gradually proceed to the finer ones Then use the finer ones afterwards.
And it is necessary to work with reason, that is, to begin with the coarser files, and then gradually proceed to the finer ones Then use the finer ones afterwards. And do not cease working until you have reached the finest degree, and until you can manage them more tenaciously and delicately in everything
With regard to all small cracks and slight fractures, it is necessary to take care of them, according to what leads to their correction
It is a thing which does not escape anyone skilled in this art, and which has stood over what we have written and what we have said concerning great fractures.
If, however, the marrow cavity is detected to remain when you fracture the bone: then it is necessary to take a piece of gauze, according to the size of the wound, and to soak it in rose-water, and to place it over the wound opening And take another piece of gauze, doubled or tripled, and soak it in wine and rose-water, and place it on the first gauze: and make it as easy as possible for the patient to breathe over it, so that it does not suffocate him.
Then administer above the wide ligament: and do not tighten it, except for as much as is necessary to support the bone alone: and remove it with care on the first or second day, until you are certain that the wound is healed. Then cure it, and afterwards apply these medicines which are useful for excessive moisture: such as lily roots, barley flour, chaff, chamomile, and the like: and it is necessary that you make from these medicines a powder which will be scattered over the wound like dry things.
And in general administer all medicines which have the property of drawing out, and do not bite And be careful according to your skill, so that the wound in your care be soft: neither greasy, neither biting
And be careful according to your skill, so that the wound in your care be soft: neither greasy, neither biting Neither let pus collect in it in any way: for when pus collects on the brain, it corrupts it, and putsrefies it, and brings about great harm afterwards: and this often happens in the head, when its care is neglected, blackening its surface.
Consider therefore at that time, if there occur in the patient accidents which we have mentioned, you know that it is dangerous to delay treatment
And if blackening does not happen, except for the medicine which is put on it, and it is in the skill of that medicine, to make it black: then it is necessary to take from honey one part, from rose oil three parts, and lines with it like wool. Then put it on the wound: afterwards care for it with the methods which are suitable, until it is healed.
And concerning the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Know that the nose is not broken except for its two upper parts simultaneously, or one of them alone: because they are two bones. For the lower part of it is cartilaginous and does not break, and does not happen to it except for attrition, twisting, and similar things.
If one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary to insert the little finger into the nose-hole and break it with the index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and this must be done skillfully and with ease.</start_of_turn> And beware not to cause additional pain during your operation.</start_of_turn>
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and does not reach the little finger: then it is necessary to equalize the smaller extremity, in which there is a small bulge.</start_of_turn
If the fracture is in both parts, then do the same thing: and keep the restoration of the first day of the fracture as much as possible.</start_of_turn> And if not, then after seven or ten days of rest after the heat has subsided.</start_of_turn>
Then insert into the extremity of the nose a strip of linen from the cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two strips if the fracture is in both parts: and let there be in the strip a thickness equal to the size of the hole of the nose.</start_of_turn
And some of the ancient restorers say that they should be moistened with butter, and changed every day.</start_of_turn This, however, does not seem to me to be useful, rather it is necessary to moisten the linen with white chalk or dust it with fine powder.</start_of_turn Then release the license, until the bone has hardened, and induce the cartilage.
When the pencil of the license has been introduced into the nose in the place of the license, after it has been covered over with soft tissue: then the fracture of the nose is held more firmly, and the patient will not be obstructed by inspiration.
This is not necessary. If you wish, do so; if you wish not, do nothing.
If the nose is fractured again while you are working after the swelling has subsided, plaster the nose with gypsum, or with blood clot infused in putty, or with some other dressing
However, if the swelling has subsided, then it is necessary to plaster the nose with pounded barley and powdered gypsum mixed with glue from an egg-white or with albumin of eggs Then place over it a soft cushion, and do not bind the nose to anything whatsoever
If indeed the bones of the nose are fractured by a small fracture or a crack, then it is necessary to split these apart with instruments which are suitable for the purpose Then cut them through, and care for the wound with that which is appropriate, and consolidate with dressings which are suitable for this, or with glue.
If between the nose and the upper lip there is a wound, then it is necessary to care for it with licenses: and administer lead ointment until it has healed.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured
When the lower jaw is fractured and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then look to see if its fracture is only lateral and not broken into two pieces, and care for it inwards: then its knowledge is easy.
If there is a fracture on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's bone: likewise if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the index finger of the right hand. Impel with it the swelling of the fracture inwards with ease towards the exterior, with your other hand alter from the inside outwards, and with it equal the same.
If the fracture of the mandible has been separated into two parts, then it is necessary to manage the expansion from both parts, according to the direction of the fracture: until an equilibrium can be achieved
If, however, there is a displacement or fracture in the teeth, then string those from which you hope that the remainder will remain with a thread, or silver, or gut. Then put over the fractured mandible a cushion Then put over it a doubled sheet, and put over the sheet a large sponge made hollow: or a piece of skin equal in length to the mandible.
Then bind it up above, according to what is prepared for its ligation, and agrees with its application, until it is not destroyed: and command the patient, that he remain quiet and still: and give him food soft foods
If, however, you think that something is changing with regard to the form or mode of something: then correct it, and solve it on the third day. Then correct what has been altered from it, and cover it with pounded powder, with alum or with sesame flour, after you have removed the cushion: and put over the covering a soft wool blanket.
While therefore the plaster remains fixed over that, and the position of the bone is not altered, remove it, do not break it, until it is healed: or bind the fracture Many are the strings that bind this fracture in seven days.
If in the meantime the swelling becomes cold, then manage that which we have mentioned before concerning the strings of sedation until the swelling has subsided.
And if the fracture is with a wound, consider it For if the bone is fractured from the fragment, or from the suture: then make the suture of the bone with the instruments which are appropriate for the removal of that fragment
If indeed the opening of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a lancet according to the quantity of necessity.
Then when you have removed the fragment and no more remains of it: close the wound if it is large: and if not, put over it patches which will cover it, and hold them in place until it is healed.
Concerning the restoration of the wrist when fractured
Very often the wrist is fractured from the front part towards the bone of the arm, and the fracture of it is done in one of three ways.
Or it is fractured and separated into two, besides which there are sutures: and that is easier for its restoration.
Or that it is fractured in the bone of the suture: and that is more difficult for its restoration
Or that it is fractured with a wound.
And the operation in this case when the fracture is without a wound, is that you make two assistants present, one who holds the fractured wrist, and the other extends the forearm above the part
Then equalize the fracture of your fingers until its shape is complete, according to what is necessary: and let it not be prominent, nor concave.
If excessive extension persists, then it is necessary to place under the thumb of the patient a sphere of wool or lint: let the size of the sphere be according to the quantity of necessity; extend and elevate the fracture, and cover the sphere with your hand, until the fracture is equal, according to what is necessary.
If you are unable to draw the extremity of the fracture outwards: because it persists deeply: then it is necessary to recline the patient on his side: and place under the middle of the forearm a weight equal to the minister of the forearm: and press the minister of the forearm downwards until the bone of the fracture which is in depth is raised upwards: and then rectify the fracture and equalise the shape of your fingers
If, however, you feel pain from the fracture, and swelling: then it is necessary to find over that and draw it outwards with ease.
If, however, there is retention in the bone, then you must make an incision in it with one of your surgical instruments which you have prepared for this purpose: after you have placed under the fracture an instrument which will keep the soft parts open. And the instrument is of wood, or of iron. This is its form.
It is like a spiral which has no concavity
Let the width of it be according to that from which you must take out from the magnitude of the bone, and the extent of it. The length of it should also be as much as is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two extremities, like a U: and one extremity is wide, and the other is narrow
If, however, the rupture of the wound that you saw when you extracted the splinter of bone is wide, and you secure it from the after-burn: then you add together the two lips of the wound with suture.
If it is a small rupture, or sometimes there is a soft after-burn: then you close the wound with strips and small stitches according to the quantity of the wound.</start_of_turn>
If there is a soft after-burn, then pour oil of roses, vinegar, and wine over it and put on top of that.</start_of_turn>
The fracture of a bone that is without wound and without section, is, as you put on a plaster made from flour of wheat with barley or alum.</start_of_turn> And put a soft cushion over it.</start_of_turn Then put a ball under its head if necessary.</start_of_turn Then take a bandage, which is, the one which the Saracens hold, which is long and wide: and be its width the palm of one hand, or somewhat less.</start_of_turn Then put a doubled cushion over the cushion and the plaster.</start_of_turn> Then take a bandage from a thin board, whose width is three fingers, and in length similarly.</start_of_turn Then wrap the bandage in cloth.</start_of_turn Then wrap the oilcloth with the bandage in the place where it rests on the fracture and the place.</start_of_turn Then put the limb on the fracture so as to restore its position, and wrap the bandage over the neck of the limb and under the healthy and unhealthy parts: and reduce the bandage over all parts, so that the bandage does not cover the fracture, and that the bandage is stable. And for this reason, it is necessary to inspect the patient every day. How often, then, is the ligament to be softened, and how is the stone to be removed: then restore it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the patient’s sleep on his back, and put under his armpit in the sleep of him the little pillows in the night, so that when he wakes up the attendants will find him with them on the side of his body The fractured bone of the collarbone is elevated by raising the arm.
Or bind the arm to the chest: do not loosen the ligament unless it is necessary for the purpose of treatment, or from a swelling, for up to twelve days.
Then renew the plaster, if you see that the swelling of the face has ceased at that place And keep it firm, and let go of it, until it is restored and coagulates
And the fractured bone of the collarbone is stretched and comforted according to many people in eighty days: and when it is in any man in less time.
On the restoration of the fracture of the scapula.
It is rare for the scapula to fracture, and on its wide side: and they do not fracture from these except for the margins of it.
When it fractures in that place, and fractures in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then try to prepare it according to the figure of the fracture. And reduce it above the natural figure in every way of ingenuity, that is as much as possible
Then place over the place the powdered rosin with the alum, and the soft wool pad, and place upon that a small piece of cloth doubled. Then place over it a thick layer of sponge from the board as much as the whole spatula, or a little less.</start_of_turn>
If indeed under the sponge there is a cavity in some place of the spatula, then equalize that cavity with the soft wool pad until the sponge descends even.</start_of_turn>
Then bind above with long aloes, gentle constriction, and firmness of the sponge, until it does not move from its place.</start_of_turn>
Consider the ligament in every day.</start_of_turn Whenever it is softened the ligament, bind it and equalize the sponge if it moves from its place: and let the patient rest on his sound side.</start_of_turn
And the sponge is restored in ninety days, or in ninety-five days.</start_of_turn
When that time has elapsed, then loosen the ligament: and you will be secure.</start_of_turn For the bones from whose connection there is no haste, neither their solution.</start_of_turn
If indeed it proceeds from a fractured bone, and projects under the skin: then cut over that, and remove it.</start_of_turn And do as we said in the fracture of the collarbone from the softening of the after-swell, if anything occurs from that.</start_of_turn>
¶ On the restoration of a fractured breastbone.</start_of_turn>
When the chest is fractured in the middle, it is rarely the case. The limbs are usually fractured in such a case, and diminish from the violence of the accident.
When the middle of it is fractured, which inclines downwards, and there is pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps blood is omitted, and displacement is recognized in the fractured bone, and it is not hidden from the sense. The restoration of it is that the patient should rest on his back: and put between his thumbs and index fingers
Then bind his arms, and join the ribs from two parts or from the sides with the hands: and twist it gently to and fro, as much as is possible, until the shape of the bone is restored, as it should be
Then put upon it a compress and a dressing, and put upon it a bandage of a thin board of lead, or gypsum, or something similar in lightness, after having bound the hand in cloth. Then tighten the binding around the fractured bone, so that it does not move: and be careful with the binding according to the extent of the wound, and bind it loosely.
Then consider the binding at every hour, and every time it is softened, bind the hand: and if its necessity indicates its solution at the wound, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or swelling: then remedy it, and solve the hand, and remove the compress, and correct what has happened in the method of treatment of it.
Then reduce the compress, if you are able to do so: and bind it tightly, until it is healed.
As for the restoration of the ribs, when they are fractured.
You know that a fracture of the Costae does not happen except in great places following the back, and from the extremities of them from the anterior part. And it does not happen except by attrition, except because of that, for they are cartilaginous. And its knowledge is not hidden from sense at the inquiry with the fingers.
And its restoration is done thus, that it is equal to the fracture with the fingers according to the possible mode, until the figure is equal, according to what is necessary Then plaster, and bind the fractured bone with a staple, if necessary.
And if the fracture of the Costae is sloping inwards: then it happens with weak pain that arises, and a puncture, as is the puncture for him who has pleurasy: because the bone pierces the lung, and also there happens difficulty with breathing, and coughing, and blood-stained saliva: and this is a difficult cure.
And the ancients were learned in this with many learned men: and there are some who say that you should put on boards for the sick who generate inflammation and swelling, so that the belly inflates, and expands, and drives out the fracture outwards.
We indeed abominate that it should be the cause of making a soft swelling, if it does not happen. If however it does happen, then it adds in this.
And some of them say: put on a soft swelling over the place of swelling, then draw it with force, and this is similar to the ratiocination But indeed they fear that it will pull out the swelling with excessive force at the place of the fracture
And some of them said: The place must cooperate with the wool which is already submerged in the warm fat: and they put in puluilli between the ribs, until it is completed: that there may be an equal ligation when you bind it according to the roundness.
And then the patient is cared for by the dressing of the chest from food and medicine
If the patient is coarsened by the thing which he endures, which he cannot tolerate, and the bone is pierced with a wound that is painful, and we fear over the patient: then it is necessary that we split over the place and remove from the fractured rib And then we place upon it an instrument which preserves the fat, whose memory has preceded it: and we break the bone with ease, and we break the thing itself.
And then we join together two lips of the wound, if there is a great one with a suture: and we care for it with plasters, until it is healed.
And if there should happen in the meantime a hard swelling, then be careful, and pour in wool into the fat and put on it: and care for the patient with that which agrees with the swelling
And also during this time the patient rests upon the side upon which he sleeps, until he is healed.
About the restoration of a fracture of the ribs and neck.
The bones of the neck when they have suffered a fracture, and rarely happens to them from attrition: and in like manner the ribs also When this happens to anyone, and you do not know whether he is healed or not: then be careful For if you touch his hand and it is softened, and puffed up, and dead: and you are not able to move it easily, neither to extend it nor to compress it: and when you compress it with your fingers and bind it with an awl, he does not feel it, neither does he feel any pain in it: then you know that he is not healed, and that it is deadly in many ways.
If the limb is relaxed and feels constriction with the fingers and point: then you know that the bone is healthy, and the patient will recover with treatment.
If he groans like a patient with a sore back, and you wish to know whether he will recover or not: then look at his feet: if you see that they are softened and that this happens in both hands and in the foot: then when he lies over his back, vomiting and evacuation will go out without his will: and when he lies over his belly, evacuation will go out without his will: and when he lies over his back and wishes to eat, and is unable: then you know that it is fatal. It is not in vain that you are treating him.
If nothing else helps him, the matter is easier.
His treatment is that you should apply a warm compress to the swelling: or smear it with oil of roses alone: or with some other unguents or ointment.</start_of_turn>
Apply to the swelling several times a day until the swelling subsides: then place over the place one of the consoling cushions, evacuating and tightening over it with a bandage: and order the patient to rest quietly and peacefully.</start_of_turn Let him not sleep on the part which is painful until he has recovered.</start_of_turn>
If it happens at the junction of the bones of the thigh or something which has been separated from it: then you must cut through the skin and sew it up.</start_of_turn Then join together two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture.</start_of_turn Then care for yourself with any bodily ailment, from the unguents, until you are healed.
If the heel bone is broken and the ankle is hanging: then it is necessary to insert the little finger of the left hand into the ankle, and to make equal the fractured bone, as much as possible, and to support the equal parts.</start_of_turn>
Then place above it, and lift it up: and care for the wound with the care that preceded it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
On the restoration of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Chapter 11.</start_of_turn>
Rarely do the bones of the ankle break.</start_of_turn If they do break, then the fracture of them is not, except for the loosening of the extremities: and they are split in length, and lean inward: and this causes pain in the place, and swelling: and stiffness of the leg that is broken.</start_of_turn
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it, until you are over the fracture in the same figure.</start_of_turn
If the fracture is only in the extremities of it, then equal it with the preparation that you make from the equation, until the figure is equal to its natural form.</start_of_turn
If however the fracture is in length, or if it leans inward: then make the patient lie on his side over his foot, until the restoration of the fracture is prepared.</start_of_turn When you have equaled it, place above it a dressing: then place above it a bandage of wood, or of leather: and bind a tight bandage over which you do not fear the displacement of the fracture, nor the removal of the bandage.</start_of_turn
And the cavity shall be made even with that which is above, until it grasps the limb firmly according to its equality: and command the sick man to sleep over his back or over his side which is sound.
If, however, a callous abscess should happen to arise: then cease from the extension of the limb and restore it, until the abscess becomes settled: and place over it that which is placed beneath it, according to what has gone before, and then return to the restoration of the limb: and bind it as seems best.
If indeed in the bone there should happen swelling or inflammation, extract it.
Concerning the restoration of a fractured bone.
The aid is that which is between the elbow and the head of the scapula.
If therefore it is fractured, then the restoration of it is according to one of two methods.
The one is: that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this shape which follows
And two ligaments are bound at the two extremities
And it is suspended from a raised place: and the sick man shall sit upon it And he shall project his fractured arm over the wood, until it reaches the midpoint of his elbow, where the curvature of the bone is located
And suspend from above something heavy, so that it extends the limb downwards. And the physician shall equalize the fracture with his hands until the fracture is healed, according to what seems best
And the other method is that the sick man should lie upon his chest: and suspend his limb from the neck with a ligament.</start_of_turn> Then command two assistants to hold one above the fracture with their hands: and the other to hold below it, and let each of them extend their hands to their own parts.
Or if necessary, in order that the extension be stronger, then bind under the fracture with a ligament and above it with another ligament: and let each of the two assistants extend their hands to their two parts.
If the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary to place one ligament under the olecranon and the other under the fracture beyond the elbow
Similarly if the fracture is close to the forearm: then it is necessary to place a ligament above the place and another above the forearm itself.
Then keep the fracture still with ease without labor, until the fracture is equal according to what is necessary, and apply a good dressing: then bind it, if necessary after the swelling has subsided.
If however swelling should arise, then remove the binding until the seventh day. And put upon it a soaked bandage in vinegar and rose oil, until the swelling subsides: then bind it again. The manner of binding is that you place an plaster over the fracture.
Then place a new bandage over the plaster. Then support the arm over the aid, and put their hand open over the arm.
And put on a sleeve, and bind over the arm support so that the arm remains in the place of the bones that are fractured: if it does not prevent you from doing anything else, do not change anything about that which is above the fracture
Which if at any time anything changes above the fracture concerning the bones, then use a greater and stronger bandage than the others. And thou shalt place between every star a breadth equal to the breadth of a finger: and let the length of the stars be according to the fracture, with the addition of three fingers from every side.
And string over the stars a strain as I said at the beginning of this chapter.</start_of_turn>
And it is, that the strain over the place of the fracture be more strict.</start_of_turn> And the more the fracture is prolonged, the less strict the strain shall be.</start_of_turn>
If therefore you have placed the stars and the strain, as we have said, at the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do this: and if the swelling is cold, then remove the strain and the stars until the seventh day, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Then consider the ligament in every three days, that it do not happen in the place of itching, or swelling, or that it be hindered from nourishing the limb by the disposition of the excessive strain.</start_of_turn> Thus do all things according as we have said.</start_of_turn>
If indeed you are in great doubt, that nothing worse may happen: then do not loosen the ligament for more than three days, or more.</start_of_turn
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his hand on his stomach: and put under his thigh a cushion filled equally with wool.</start_of_turn
And consider at every hour of the night or day, that the fractured limb be not disfigured, or the ligament be not softened.</start_of_turn Thus do all things with your skill.</start_of_turn
And give food to the patient according to the order which we have prescribed, so that the food be soft at first, until the bone is begun to be strung: then it is necessary, that he should increase his food.</start_of_turn
The use of an assistant and a crutch is necessary in the treatment of such cases. It should be continued for forty days. Then it is necessary to dissolve the [condition] and apply a poultice, and to administer unguents which restore it.
If the fracture be of the bone, bruised: then do not dissolve it from the ligament and the fragments until the lapse of fifty days, and until two months.
On the restoration of a fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two radii
One of them is the forearm: and that which follows the thumb And the other is the upper, and that which is placed under the forearm from the lower part.
Perhaps therefore the greater bone is fractured alone, or the forearm: and perhaps both are fractured together.
When therefore the greater bone of the forearm is fractured above, then the restoration of the same is easy, and its healing is more favorable
And when the lower bone is fractured, the fracture is bad, and the healing is difficult
And it is worse when both bones are fractured together
If therefore the bone which is fractured is the greater bone above, then the doctor agrees to support the forearm with ease until it be equal.
If however the greater bone is fractured, then it is necessary to apply a stronger bandage above all
It is necessary also to apply the figure of the hand to the restoration of the limb and to extend the limb beyond the wrist And let the thumb be above all the fingers, and the wrist below all the fingers, or the like: and the patient sitting square upon himself, and let the palm of the hand be towards him, or in direct line with it, in height, that the patient may not incur labor.
Then extend the arm from the lower part, or the hand itself, or with the ligament. And the other minister extends like this from above.
Then the physician must equal the bone, until it is reduced to the best possible figure
Which if there are fragments of bone, then try to reduce them in their place without displacement of your forces
If however it appears that there is a separate fragment which has pierced the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it: then find above it, and remove it in the manner which has been mentioned previously
If however the fracture is with a wound, I make of that head single, and take care of the cure from that point on
If at the beginning of your treatment you find a callous swelling, then stretch the skin with a piece of rough cotton wool, and white wool, and let the middle be between the thickness and fineness: and bind up the hand tightly with the thread above, until the swelling subsides: then remove the cotton wool, and apply a prepared plaster made from pounded pounded barley with eggshell and alum Then place sponges, and let the sponge which is placed over the fracture itself be wider and stronger
And know that the number of sponges of the arm is six in various positions: whether the fracture is in one hole, or in two holes at the same time.
Then place a firm and tight dressing over the stronger and more extended part of the fracture, and somewhat more above or below it: or place a softer dressing than the previous one in proportion to the remembered indication at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that cover the fracture be soft, moist: and not hard, rough.</start_of_turn> And let the thread which is passed through the linen be of medium thickness between the fine and the coarse, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And consider the limb and the ligament after days.</start_of_turn> If anything happens which requires the rectification, such as itching which occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to bathe the limb with warm water until the itching subsides, and then remove the limb without constriction, until it is quiet, and then repeat the dressing.</start_of_turn>
If the dressing is now softened, and the bone is now removed, and things are similar to these: then rectify all this by your skill, and consider it again.</start_of_turn
For if the nourishment is hindered from reaching the limb because of the excess of the dressing, then it is necessary to soften it somewhat and remove it for a few days, until the nourishment reaches it, and then tighten it again.</start_of_turn
But if no other illness occurs with the patient which we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to dissolve the dressing except after twenty days or thereabouts.</start_of_turn
Then suspend the hand of the patient to his chest.</start_of_turn> And let his chest be even, and protect his skill from disturbing influences.</start_of_turn And make him sleep upon his back.
And know that this fracture will be healed in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps in eighty days. All this is according to the temperaments of the complexion, and the temperaments of virtue.
Concerning the restoration of fractures of the hand
Know that the bones of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers rarely fracture.</start_of_turn> And they do not occur except from great attrition.</start_of_turn
When therefore it occurs, that the bones of the hand are fractured, or that there is attrition: then it is necessary that the patient sit with his buttocks square: and before him let there be a seat at an equal distance.</start_of_turn Then place his hand above his extended arm.</start_of_turn
Then extend the bones of the fracture, and the physician must keep them even until they are united by good union.</start_of_turn
Then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, if there is no sign of a soft swelling.</start_of_turn Then put on a collar according to the quantity of the place: and I will cover the arm with a linen cloth.</start_of_turn
If however the fracture is below the middle of the forearm, then make a sphere like a ball from the cloth: and command the patient to rest with his forearm resting on his fractured hand: and bind it with a long cloth.</start_of_turn
And let the collar be of leather, in which there is softness, that the skin may be applied with the body of the forearm: and bind the arm according to what is necessary.</start_of_turn
If the fracture is outside, then it is necessary: that you put on a bandage above, and a bandage below in the sole: and let the hand be open straight. Then put on a support, as it is turned back: and extend between the fingers with the ligament
Which if it happens that a fracture occurs to any of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it is equal in measure as it is necessary Then bind it with the sole: and if it is loosened, put on for it a straight bandage, firm: so that the fracture is elevated, and does not move.
If however the fracture is of the remaining fingers, as the middle, and index, or ring, and little finger, then it is equal in measure, and is bound with the healthy finger which follows it: or they are all bound together: and that is better. Or put on above it a firm bandage, as we said concerning the thumb.
And consider in the restoration of it, and after the position of the dressing has been made: and oppose with it what is necessary, when anything happens from that, according as its narration is repeated.
(The provided text does not include the translation of this section.)
The hip joint fractures often, and is declared by sense: because it turns inward and outward towards the parts.
And its restoration is done thus, that it is bound above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And the cripple is returned over its face
Then extend all the ligaments around it according to the equality: and this when the fracture is in the middle of the bone
If the fracture is near the root of the coxae bone, then let a ligament be passed to the part above the pectinis, so that the extension may be cast upwards: and let another ligament be passed under the fracture.
And thus in like manner if the fracture is near the knee, then let a ligament be passed close to the knee, so that the extension may be cast downwards
Then the physician must set the bone with his two hands until it is reduced to its natural position: and it must be joined with a good suture.
Then it is necessary to apply a dressing and bind up, if the limb is not otherwise supported If this happens in the case of a limb that is still swollen: then leave it for a few days, until the swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The binding must be firm enough It must be bound over the fracture with strong material, that is, leather: and doubled twice, or three times: and let there remain from this excess. Then bind the thigh, until the heel reaches the root of the nail
And insert a long thread between the coxae and the thigh near the knee, and bring the extremities of the thread from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll up the thigh and the coxae what remains from the excess of the material.
Then place upon the coxae in the place of the fracture itself small cushions, and place upon the bone of the thigh one cushion.
Then fill up the space between the thigh and the coxae with cloths and wool, so that the binding may be even
Then begin with a strong binding from the middle over the place of the fracture three or four loops The more you lengthen the ligature at the site of the fracture, the more stricture will be lessened and the softer it will be.
Therefore stretch the two extremities of the ligature that you have placed between the hip and thigh bone Bind it with three nails as with both hands Then stretch out both ends of the ligature towards the lower parts until you reach the heel of the foot And when you have bound both ends, string also the extremities of the nails from the other side so that the ligament does not slip from its place.
Then release the tension over it, while it remains, so that no fracture of the limb, no swelling, no inflation or anything similar happens to it Which if anything happens from that. So when you have solved the problem, and corrected what happened before, as we have said many times before
If indeed there is a fragment of bone that is protruding: then it is necessary to remove it, if this is possible. And if not, find over that and remove it: and care for it as before, until the patient is healed.
And when the fracture of the hip has been sutured, besides adding nails as we mentioned before in the introduction and the body.
Be careful in restoring it so that the patient does not become lame And if it is restored alone, besides applying the other thigh, it is necessary that the limb which was lame should become lame always
You know that the hip is sutured in fifty days, or a little more or a little less: all this is according to the variety of constitutions and the condition of the rest of the body.
On the restoration of a fracture of the Rotula genu.
You know that fractures of the knee-cap are rare, but they do happen frequently.
If it does happen, then it is not without fracture, or split, or a hole in its parts And it is like a wound, and without a wound And the limb hangs suspended with sensation
And its restoration is thus, that it is made equal to what was disrupted from its parts with the fingers, until it is reunited and joined together as much as possible, and fabricated
Then put on a plaster of wheat flour or barley meal with albumin, or oil: and put on a round bandage above it if you deem it necessary: and bind around it a strong dressing appropriate for this.
Then consider all the arrangements which we narrate in the other fractures: like a cold pack, and similar things: thus, so that you oppose every cause of this with what is appropriate for it, until it heals
On the restoration of a fracture of the leg
You know that the leg has two bones, of which one is thick and is called the Cruris: and the other is thin and is called the Focile
And it happens with both of these kinds of fracture as it happens with the bones of the arm: and because of this its restoration is equal, and the operation is the same
If both bones are fractured together, the Cruris is bent towards all parts.
And if a bone is fractured more subtly, the knee turns towards the front part.
And if a bone is fractured more coarsely, the knee is found below: and it is from that which does not cover your thigh
Then perform extension, and equalization, and ligation of the ligaments according to that which is equal
However, it is necessary, if the fracture of the knee is a compound fracture, having many fragments: that the extension be less, and the alleviation more gentle to you.
And in the knee there is something from the operation which is over the arm: and it is that when you equal the bandages, and have completed all your operation, then grasp two strips of pinewood, which are administered in the making of sandals which are put under boards: and they are made from the nails of the palm: and choose from those which have a small thickness, and do not be from the small ones: and let the length of them be according to the length of the knee from the knee to below
And then cover over one and a half fingers with two layers of bandage according to its length. And put one part of the knee from one side, and the other from the other side: and they are from the knee until below the foot
And then ligate two bands in three places from two extremities and the middle When the limb is bound up, the knee bends to the right and left, and remains in a good position.
And indeed a bandage is administered from wood according to the length of the knee, and is put in the knee, so as to keep it still
And it is necessary above all, that you make the limb whole when it is fractured when its own bone is broken
Consider the crura every day, and study them with the utmost care from the apostemate, or inflation, or any other thing. If anything happens to them, then oppose it with that which is appropriate, until it is healed, if God wills it.
Concerning fractures of the bones of the foot and fingers.</start_of_turn>
The calcaneus bone does not usually fracture through.</start_of_turn
The bones of the foot sometimes fracture, and the fingers also sometimes fracture: and they do not fracture except in the event of a violent impact in various positions.</start_of_turn
If the bones of the foot fracture, and you wish to elevate them above the level of the heart, then put the patient's foot on the prepared earth, like a walker.</start_of_turn
Then stand still, and place your foot on that which will elevate these bones: then press down, or place a weight on it: and keep it equal, until it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
Then put on a bandage, and apply a cushion on top: and place under the foot a board which has two flat heads.</start_of_turn
Then bind up the foot securely with a bandage, after you have enveloped it with cloth and other things as needed.</start_of_turn
When three or four days have passed, then loosen the ligament.</start_of_turn For indeed you will find the bones even, whether they are fractured or dislocated.</start_of_turn The treatment for this is like that for an abscess.</start_of_turn
If, however, any fingers are fractured, then restore them and keep them equal to one another as I have told you concerning the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Restore the fingers to their original position according to the length of the fingers, and make them equal to one another: then place under the hand the board which I have mentioned, and bind them securely with a suitable bandage.</start_of_turn>
If two, or three, or more bones are fractured, then place over every finger a bandage of the same quantity, enclosed in linen: and bind the board to the lower part of the foot. Let the upper part of the board rest outside the foot, so that it may support the fracture adequately.</start_of_turn>
Remember also what I have said concerning all the other fractures caused by accidents which we have mentioned: and oppose every accident with what is necessary.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the fracture of the forearm of a woman, and the bone of the forearm of a man.</start_of_turn>
When the forearm of a woman is fractured, then make her sit in a square position.</start_of_turn Then incline her towards the part of the back which is towards her, and support her backwards.</start_of_turn
Then let the midwife put her forearm across her breast, until she has placed her hand: and make the forearm like a sphere.</start_of_turn
Then bind the woman, and elevate her back gradually.</start_of_turn This is how the bone will be restored, until the fractured bone returns to its normal position.</start_of_turn
Then put a cushion on her back.</start_of_turn When he wishes to urinate, he should move his buttocks easily, then urinate: and reduce himself afterwards in the manner in which he introduced himself at the beginning. Then he should return to his original position.
Do this every seven days, or thereabouts, and his bones will be restored in this way.</start_of_turn>
And if you wish, take the bladder and suspend its outlet above its opening with a barley straw tube, and introduce the bladder completely into its belly.</start_of_turn> Then blow air into the tube with force, until the bladder is inflated inside the belly, and the fracture returns.</start_of_turn
Then implement it with the buttocks, and keep it for a few days, as we have narrated, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And when the breastbone of a man or a woman is fractured, then administer to its restoration, and to it apply the same thing which we narrated concerning the bone of the armpit.</start_of_turn
And the rectum is not hidden in its nearby fractures, which are few in number, especially among those who have something to study or do.</start_of_turn
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself signifies to you in many ways the way of restoring and strengthening itself: understand therefore.</start_of_turn
In the gut of a man when it is fractured, take the tip of the tongue: and introduce the tongue into itself.</start_of_turn Then place over it a fold of cloth, and fold it inwards, and leave it for three days, or thereabouts, and it will heal, if God wills it.</start_of_turn
Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when there is a wound.</start_of_turn
It is fitting for him whose fracture has happened with a wound, especially if it is great, such as a thigh bone or a buttress or the like thereof, to make an incision immediately: if these conditions of the incision are attested.
If blood flows from the wound, then it is necessary, that you make an incision above it, in order that the powder should be poured over it: if nothing else is present.
Then commence to restore the fracture on the same day: and do not delay it, if it does not happen spontaneously.
If indeed spontaneous healing has occurred, then suspend the restoration until the ninth day, until the swelling has subsided. And do not approach it on the third and fourth day in any way, for you will cause him to suffer further harm.
If indeed the fractured bone is prominent above the skin detected: then it is necessary, that you reduce it and make it even with your hands with ease and slight extension.
If indeed it is not prepared for extension with your hands, and its equalization with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument And the instrument is made of iron, whose length is the quantity of seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the quantity of the wound. And because of this it is necessary for the physician, that he take from these three, or four according to the quantity that he needs for the care of every kind of fracture.
And be rounded: and be in such a small size, that it does not double under compression over it in the hour of operation: and be acute at the extremities, which have a margin at their extremities And be above it to the height from the middle to the lower parts.
This is its form.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary in this operation that you place the acute curvature of the limb at the extremity of the prominent bone: and push it in with the same, until the bone returns and is equal in height to the surrounding parts.</start_of_turn>
So do you make the extremities of the fracture equal to each other.</start_of_turn
If its extremities are fractured slightly, and do not grasp well with the instruments, then you must cut off the extremity of that bone, until the instrument has sufficient power.</start_of_turn
If indeed we are unable to reduce them as we have said, then cut through it with the instrument which we mentioned before: or grasp it with a clamp in any convenient way.</start_of_turn
Then remain only the rough parts of the bone and the small pieces of cortex.</start_of_turn
When the bone has been reduced and has been found to be loose after reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.</start_of_turn
Do this.</start_of_turn> For you confer great pain on the sick man when you complete your restoration of the bone.</start_of_turn
Then soak the bandage in lukewarm black wine.</start_of_turn And in summer it is proper.</start_of_turn And do not place upon the wound a greasy ointment, or anything containing oil: so that it does not cause it to become infected and corrupted.</start_of_turn
Then administer the stars at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone. And discharge the wound detected: thus, that you may cut with scissors the opening in the incisions according to the quantity of the wound.
And take care of all precautions, that you do not tighten the wound with the fracture. Many have done this carelessly, and they have caused many patients to suffer either death or decay or corruption, that is, harm. And be your stricture soft, gentle, diverse from the strictures of the remaining fractures
If the wound is bad, or if it is large, and the times are great for some harmful events which we have mentioned, and if you find pain in the place of suspension: then it does not suffice to put on the stars over it And make for it incisions from hard papers in the place of the stars, and string it with them.
When, however, a day or two have passed, and the wound has begun to heal, so that pus is generated: then remove the paper which you put over it with wine Then administer balsam and unguents which are customary to us, to soothe the wound: such as the balsam of tetrapharmacon, and the like of it.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the ligamentum And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening, until it is consolidated and healed
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus may flow downwards with ease
If the wound passes many days and does not consolidate, neither does the pus separate from it: then you know that there is a fracture of the bone there Why should one inquire about a wound with a tentacle? How many of these tentacles are separated from the wound, remove them and extract them themselves. And what remains of them which is not separated, and which pricks the limb, and causes them to swell, endeavor to cut them out, and remove them in every way possible for you
If it happens that a wound is bitten by a dog, or has worms, that is, swelling, or some other corruption and decomposition: then it is necessary to oppose each of these with what is appropriate for it in its treatment, as is narrated in its chapter
And concerning this, as to what I have said before, and to which you must pay attention when a bone is fractured, and protrudes beyond the limb, such as the thigh bone, and joints, and similar parts of great limbs, do not presume its attraction, for much harm often happens from this moisture, indeed sometimes it is better to let it go rather than to retain it until it has decomposed
Perhaps it will fall away by itself after eighty days, or a hundred.
Then indeed care for the wound, if you see it: and otherwise, let it go.
Note: The provided text does not include the next section of the translation, so I am unable to provide the translation of that part.
Many times this swelling occurs in the process of healing a fracture.</start_of_turn> Especially concerning those parts which are close to the sutures: and it is caused by that figure of the limb.</start_of_turn And perhaps it hinders the limb from its natural operation.</start_of_turn
Consider therefore, if the wound is still bleeding: administer in it medicines which have styptic properties, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar things.
Consider therefore, if the wound is still bleeding: administer some or all of these things: and mix them with a styptic liquid, or with albumin or vinegar: and apply them over the wound and bind them securely.</start_of_turn>
And remove the dressing, and do not keep it on for many days.</start_of_turn> Then wash the wound, and repeat the process until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn>
Or bind over it a sheet of lead in the middle.</start_of_turn Lead has the property of removing all that is feared from the members.</start_of_turn
If however the wound is already covered with blood, and is tightly closed, and the bleeding persists: then find above the wound from the upper part of it, and cut off the excess: or scrape the wound with some instruments, until the bleeding stops: and care for the wound until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And as for the care when the wound has healed, and the limb remains under its natural shape, not contrary to its nature.</start_of_turn
When the fracture of a bone has healed, and the limb remains under its natural shape, it is weak: then it is not done except for many causes.</start_of_turn For one, there are many causes of loosening of the ligament and its ligation which are not according to what is necessary: either because of the excess tension of the ligaments, until it hinders the circulation of nourishment to the limb: or because of the excessive quantity of superfluous dressing: or because of the scarcity of blood in the body of the patient, and its weakness.</start_of_turn
And its care is to feed the patient and keep his body firm until the blood multiplies in it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and laughter upon him.
Then apply oil to the limb: so that it attracts nourishment to itself much And diligently anoint its embrocation with warm water, until nourishment runs and returns to its natural shape
When restoring fractured bones to their natural position
When a limb has been restored after healing from a fracture, and when the fractured bone or joint remains bent: and it is pained through that, but the limb is not prohibited from its natural action: then it is not necessary to break the limb again for that reason
And there are many proud doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is very dangerous, often leading to death or great fear, as indeed it is mortal.
But if the fracture and bending are recent: then it is necessary to anoint with warm water in which decoctions of emollient herbs are boiled, such as rue leaves, and the root of it, and honey, and similar things And make for him a plaster with a soothing plaster, such as gypsum made into a center
Or take the slime of the rue root, and mix it with chicken fat, or with beeswax: and plaster with that
Or take figs of gum, and mix them with meal, and things of that kind which are named by doctors to decrease consolidation
When the nodulation is resolved with persistent friction, ancient and gentle, which occurs with moist hands. The movement of the limb is administered to every part at all times of the day.
If, however, stiffness has preceded it [the swelling], and has become strong, and has become congealed in stone, and has necessitated treatment with an instrument: then it is necessary to cut above it [the swelling], to resolve the continuation of the bone, and to remove what is superfluous from the nodulation or bone with fine scissors: and this should be administered with attention and care
Regarding the dislocation.</start_of_turn>
Dislocation is the exit of any articulation from its place.</start_of_turn Therefore it is prohibited from its movement, and deforms the figure of the limb.</start_of_turn And causes the occurrence of excessive pain, and serious injuries.</start_of_turn
When, therefore, such a dislocation has happened, then it is necessary to hasten to restore it: and do not delay at all.</start_of_turn
For if it is delayed, the place is apt to become stiff, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is not necessary to move or extend it in the hour following its displacement.</start_of_turn For it causes many to suffer spasm and painful sensations.</start_of_turn
But when it has happened, then it is necessary to order a bloodletting of the patient.</start_of_turn And afterwards let it be allowed to rest until the swelling subsides.</start_of_turn
Then the limb is bound with warm water and oil. Then it is reduced with ease
And all the limb is cared for so that its memory remains in its place
I command that the head of the dislocation be reduced, even as has been said in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to the lower part of it.
Concerning the care of the dislocation of the lower jaw
Rarely do two mandibles dislocate except for a little while.
And the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods. Or they are moved from their places with a small removal, and are softened around Or they are dislocated completely, without any removal, until they are softened up to the breast, until the saliva of the infirm person softens them, and they are unable to hold it together, and are unable to close their own mouth, and their tongue is swollen with the saliva
When however the dislocation is slight, then it returns by itself in various positions with little effort
If however the dislocation is complete, entire: then it must be immediately administered, and not delayed: and it is necessary that the minister of the infirm person should hold the hand of the hand which is near to the dislocation of the mandible between the bones of the dislocation, if the dislocation has occurred from one side only Or he may insert two fingers of his hand together if the dislocation has occurred from both sides And the rest of the fingers of his hand remain outside, which is equal
And command the patient to loosen their teeth and make them capable of biting throughout. And the physician must stabilize the jaw and press it until it returns to its place
If its reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are simultaneously displaced: then apply heat with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both becomes easy: neither reduce them both at once, as we have said
When they have returned and are aligned, and the patient's bone is closed, and they are not softened: then place over the teeth pieces of wool felt, with wax that has been made from beeswax: and oiled with rose oil.
And it is bound with soft bands.
And the patient should rest on their back: and their head should be fixed between two cushions, so that it does not move to the right or left: neither should they be forced or commanded to bite: rather let them take a soft diet, until when they feel relief from the pain, and the jaw is relaxed: then they may eat what they wish, and this should be administered with ease
They should not toil over their oral surgery with eating and drinking, and with biting, until the jaw is healed and restored
If the reduction of both jaws is difficult, when they are displaced at some time and do not return to their place: then many times they cause fever, and bitter soda: and perhaps the patient's condition improves, and perhaps vomiting pure bile.
When you have done this: then you know that it is lost, and many people die from it within a month
(The text continues with further instructions regarding the reduction of dislocation of the jaw and the extremity of the humerus.)
The thyroid bone is not displaced from the inside outwards, because of its continuity with the sternum. It is displaced sometimes towards the outside: and this is declared by sensation
Its restoration is that the patient should lie upon his back, and extend his arms. Then cover the place with the palm of your hand with a strong bandage, for it will itself return
Then put upon it a compress, and sponges, and bind it around it.
The extremities of it which follow the elbow, and which continue with it, are not displaced, except rarely If it is displaced on some other day: then it is necessary to reduce it and make it equal according to what has been said, and to prepare the patient for it
Then put upon it a compress, and sponges, and bind it around it And command the patient to adhere to tranquility and quiet, until he is healed
And when the same cure has been made, the extremity of the humerus is separated even from its place.
¶ On the reduction of the dislocation of the humerus
You know that the humerus is not displaced except in three ways.
One of them is that it is displaced towards the elbow towards the lower parts. Secondly, it is necessary to displace the fragment to the part of the chest. It is also possible to displace it to the upper part of the arm: and that is done rarely.
It does not go to the back because of the spleen It does not go to the front because of the nerves
Most frequently, however, it is displaced downwards towards the nipple: especially in those whose flesh is sparse. For it comes out quickly and goes in quickly.
In those, on the other hand, whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, for it comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty
And sometimes it happens to some people that they receive a blow or suffer a fall, and the arm is dislocated by the heat, and it is supposed that because of this the arm is dislocated
Therefore it is necessary to experience this until you are certain that it is truly dislocated, and then you can proceed with its treatment.
It is recognized as being dislocated when it is displaced downwards towards the nipple: and you must distinguish between a dislocated arm and a healthy arm. For you will find among them a clear difference, and you will find in the head of the arm a depression and under the nipple at the touch of the hand almost like two bones joined together: and you will not be able to reduce the arm to its normal position, neither by pulling nor by any movement
And in the same way, if it is displaced towards the breast or upwards: then you will find a clear mark, and it will not be hidden
And in this case of dislocation, the reduction is easily accomplished when the limb is still firm or when the patient is a child.
And the reduction is to elevate the limb upwards by the hand of the minister Then put your thumbs under the joint, and elevate the limb with force upwards to its place: and the minister will elevate the hand and extend it upwards. Then place the lower limb below, and immediately the limb will return to its place.
If however it does not return by this, and has been since the dislocation several days: then it is necessary to immerse the patient in warm water, and to apply a bandage which will soften and soothe, like decocting wild herbs, rue and melilot in water, and applying these things
Then the patient is placed on his back: and under the joint is placed a sphere and a bandage, which is equal between softness and tension
Then the physician places his heel on the sphere, and elevates the arm with force, and pulls the patient's hand downwards.
And if necessary, reduce it in this way: make the stronger limb of the patient to be standing on the side, and let it intrude the arm under the patient's joint: and elevate the joint upwards until the patient is suspended in the air And another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards into his body. If however the patient is light: then it is necessary to suspend him with something else, in order to lighten him: for the dislocation will immediately return.
Also, it is reduced in another way: as when a long stick is placed in the ground, its head being rounded off like a glove of a corpse: neither thick nor thin. Then it is placed under the patient after the stick's head has been covered with soft cloth: and the patient will be resting in accordance with the length of the stick.
Then his hand is extended downwards from the other side, and his body is extended from the other side with force: for the suture returns to its place with speed.
If its reduction is difficult by all that we have said, then take care of it thus: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance from the elbow to the wrist, and whose width is equal to the distance from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the little finger, and whose thickness is equal to the distance from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the index finger: and its head shall be rounded off, so as to facilitate its entrance into the depth of the wound, in this fashion
Then the soft cloth is placed over the rounded head of the stick, so that it does not irritate the patient's wound
Then it is placed under the wound, so that the hand or arm is extended over the stick down to the lower parts: and the stick is bound to the aid and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then the arm is placed over the edge of the step for the width of the hand, and the hand is extended downwards, and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side The suture will enter immediately.
When it has been completed as much as possible according to any method: then it is necessary to place under the wound a sphere equal in quantity to the wool. Then place a prepared plaster made from pounded wool with oil and white of egg over the whole arm, as is usual above
Then tighten the string under the nail: and the ligament will be returned over the cartilage above: and its hand will be connected to its column and let go, neither hand moving for seven days.
It is necessary to put nourishing food in the mouth of the patient until the limb is comfortable: because it is quicker for its healing.
Then put on a wider dressing after seven days, or five, and it is taken away when there is movement. If it is firm and does not soften, then it is healed.
If, however, the suture is torn away many times, because of the humidity which has happened to it, or for another cause: then it is necessary to administer cautery with three holes in it, as is prescribed in the chapter on cautery
If one does all this, and the ligament is dissolved after seven days, and the suture is not confirmed, and the cartilage and the stricture above it are reduced, and it does not harden, and falls away, and cannot be raised up to the upper part: then you know that the nerves which are at the head of the humerus are either cut, or stretched, or softened: and you know that the suture will never take hold in its place again
As for a dislocation which happens at the shoulder and the armpit, or to the back: it is reduced with a push and an extension with the hands: until it returns, and cautery is administered in the remaining stricture and care, until it is healed.
If after healing there is greatness in the limb, and slowness in its movement: then the patient is put into a great bath, until the greatness is softened, and it returns to its first nature.
(The text provided does not include information regarding the curation of a dislocation of the cubit.)
Know that the dislocation of the cubit is difficult, and returns with difficulty: and it is displaced to all parts, especially towards the front or the back.
Its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it lies under the skin and under the touch, according to whatever form it is displaced And when you unite the displaced cubit with the healthy, you must declare that to be visible It must be united again, and you must not double the arm, nor touch it with the other arm.
And it is necessary that you do this promptly, and reduce the dislocation immediately, before swelling sets in
For if swelling sets in, its reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it will not be healed at all, especially when it is towards the back It is harmful in all kinds of dislocations, and increases pain: and it descends very much with it.
And the restoration of it when it is possible to reduce it, is that you extend the limb with two hands: and the arm is expanded, and the hands of the physician are above the elbow and under it, and he pushes with the thumbs of both hands simultaneously, or with the root of the palm of his hand, until it returns to its place
Or else the dislocation is towards the front: then it returns in such a way that you double the hand with the hand of the patient, until it reaches the displaced cubit with the root of the palm of the hand
Which if it does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension, with force: and it is that two ministers extend the limb: and they hold it firmly also, so that it does not move during the extension
Then the arm is returned to its entirety after it has been folded over the hand, and a broad ligament is doubled in length, or a wide ligament is stretched.
When the doctor grasps the hand with his grasp, let him smear it with oil: that it may be from that which will aid in the lubrication of the joint with ease Then the grasp is driven forward with a violent push, until it returns.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to place upon it a dressing, in which there is stypticity, and drying with alum: and tighten the constriction slightly. And the arm is suspended from the collar of the infirm person: and omit for a few days.
Then it is healed If, however, the joint remains fixed in its place, then solve the ligament from it, and omit it
And if you do not bind the joint well, then repeat the dressing, and the ligament, and omit it for a few days, until it is bound Then it is healed.
If, however, there should happen to him greatness after the reduction of the joint, and the position is immobile: then manage moisture in the bath, and slight friction, and compression, until it is aligned, or place over the joint a cushion of wool, that is, fat of sheep. Then it is bound, and omit it over night and day Then remove the bandage, and introduce it into the bath When it is wet, then gently friction the joint with temperate friction. And repeat over it again oil once, and twice, and thrice with the introduction of the bath, until it is softened
If necessary, place upon the stool a cushion, wet, warmed with butter, and bind over it.
Do it thus. The swelling itself will soften, and will return to its normal state.
From the treatment of dislocation of Almahassem
The limb of Mahassem is much dislocated, that is, the junction between the arm and the hand
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. Except for the remaining joints However, it must be known that speed is in the reduction of its dislocation in the hour in which it is dislocated, before it is set in place: or else it will happen that in setting it will cause stiffness.
And the reduction of its dislocation is like this: place the lower limb of Mahassem upon a board, and extend the hand: and the doctor places his palm upon the prominence of the junction and urges it until it returns
It must be known that the hand must not be forced backwards towards the belly: then the infirm person should place the back of his hand upon the board alongside the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation has arisen from the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be inside the board, that is, let the inner part of the hand be placed upon the board, so that the hand of the doctor may rest upon the prominence of the junction
If it returns immediately, that is good: and if not, then bind the limb with a bandage while it is being set: and let it go, do not do it again
For if it does not tolerate it, neither can you force further reduction of it after a few days: indeed, the joint will remain bent according to its own crookedness: and it does not harm the infirm person anything, except that it makes the hand stiff, and you must not bind anything: know that it has slipped away, or that there is swelling
There is no natural opening in it, except that it be bound with a cautery near the case. It may perhaps suffice without that.</start_of_turn>
When the soul does not return, then place above it a plaster as we have described.</start_of_turn> It is then bound and left for five days: afterwards it is dissolved and dismissed, and the hand is exercised.</start_of_turn
If, however, its movement is withheld, and something heavy has happened in it: then soften it with warm water and friction until it is softened.</start_of_turn
(Continuation of previous sentence)</start_of_turn>
When the Digit has been displaced from its place towards the whole of the limb, or from the back of the palm of the hand, or from the inside of the limb: then extend the Digit and drive out the displacement with your thumbs, until it returns.</start_of_turn
Then support the head of the Digit, and suspend it over the part from which it was displaced, and leave it for two days.</start_of_turn
Then suspend it, and extend it, until it is straight on that day.</start_of_turn
When night comes, bind it according to what has been narrated: and do not stop dissolving it until the next day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it at night.</start_of_turn
Do this for a few days, until it is bound.</start_of_turn
And do the same with the ulnar bone if it is displaced to the inside of the hand: and bind it to the part itself, and do the operation as before, until it heals.</start_of_turn
Likewise do as with it when it is displaced to the other parts.
Likewise do as with it when it is displaced to the other parts.
When anything of the spine of the back, or the neck, is completely displaced, or when many spinal processes are displaced from their places: in such a case there is no cure for it, because the marrow is softened for the sick person.
And the sign of it is that the sickness departs without being willing, and cannot be held back: and many times it softens some limb of it, or two limbs of it, or two arms of it, or one of its bones: or it displaces one of its vertebrae from its place
Many times it displaces, because many times it is displaced to four parts
The one which is displaced to the back is called gibbousness.
The cure for it is, if the gibbousness happened from infancy: then there is no cure for it, and no healing from it at all
But in such a case as happens by blow, or by percussion, or in like manner, as the ancients said in a long discourse about the methods of treatment. Most of them do not return when the treatment is finished
I myself, however, have abbreviated this, because of my proximity to the matter: and I have shown it in a different way from how it was shown by them, and I have made an instrument out of it in a different way from how they made it.
I say, therefore, that in the gibbousness which happens from the front part, there is neither wisdom, nor healing from it
Likewise, in whatever is done to the two sides.
It does not matter from which side, except that which happens in its own place, as I have said: and that is, that the patient should be extended over his face towards the platform near the wall; and let the instrument be extended under him, so that it does not irritate his chest.
Then place a fixed stool of wood in the fire in the ground, at the foot of the bed, round about the head of him: and another stool of wood round about the feet at the other foot of the bed: and the minister shall hold the stool, and let it not be fixed in the fire. And the other minister shall hold the other.
Then draw over the head of the patient, and under his chin the ligament is to be made firm: and extend the extremity of the ligament to the limb which is at the head of him: and bind it in that place
And bind the other ligament above his shoulders, and above his knees of him, and at his buttocks. And gather together all the ligaments, and bind them in the other limb which is at his feet.
And let all the ministers extend to the part of the limb of the ligament, and do not move the two limbs from their places where they are fixed: indeed they are not to be fixed, as we have said
And the physician puts his palms on the spine with force, until he returns: or puts them on the chest board. And then he joins his feet on the board until he returns.
If however he does not return by this cure, then take the board whose length is about three arms And the cavity in the wall from which we said is close to the patient, is the place where the extremity of the board enters. Then place the middle of the board over the spinous process And let the physician place his feet on the other extremity And tighten well, until the spinous process is firm, and then return to his place.
And if you wish, work with the ankle which is involved with your hand: and it is that two boards be placed beside the head of the patient at the end of the two feet, of which the length be the forearm of one hand: and beside the head of these two boards at the end of the two feet.
And the length which is between every two boards is the palm of one hand: and it is finished in every place where there is a hole, in which the ankle runs: and the board is fixed firmly in the earth much, that it does not move at all
And introduce the round bone: and it is the ankle in which the ligament is rotated in two holes of the two boards
And at its extremity is a hole in which the bone is fixed, whose length is the palm with that which is rotated: and in two other boards is like that
And tighten the ligaments which you bound in the patient's chest around the ankle which is at his head: and the ligaments which you bound in his thighs around the ankle which is at his feet.
And stay at every ankle minister, who will twist his hand with a loop, with which the ankle is rotated: and the physician will equal the spinous process, as we said before
This is the form of the ankle which follows.
Then, once Spondilis has returned and the place is equal, it is necessary to place a plaster of dried exsiccata with albumin. Then, plaster. Then place above the plaster a bandage of tabula, whose width is three fingers, or thereabouts. And its length as much as covers the part of Gibbositatis, and over the healthy part of Spondilis
Then it is bound with the ligament which we mentioned And the patient is kept nourished with a mild diet until he is healed
And if anything remains prominent in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines which soften and soothe, along with the administration of tabula as mentioned for a long time And they are administered in that lamina plumbi.
And sometimes it happens that prominence appears behind the last part of the spine: and it is thought to be dislocation, and that is the bone which is now prominent Therefore it is not proper to make a presumption of it with this medicine: perhaps because of that it may cause death
Of the treatment of dislocated Anchae.
You know that the dislocations of the Anchae and of the humerus do not happen except in dislocation: neither does it happen except in the case of a slight displacement and a concavity.
And the dislocation of the Anchae is divided into four parts. That is, because it is dislocated towards the front and towards the back
Most often it is displaced inwards: little displacement is to the front, and little to the rear.
The treatment of such displacement inwards is: for when you join the limb of the sick with that of the sound, the latter is longer: and the knee of the sick limb is more prominent than that of the sound limb, and the sick limb cannot double its foot at the ankle: and the place which follows the ankle after displacement is the knee of the hip, because the head of the hip is then carried there.
The sign of its displacement outwards is that its accidents are contrary to those of its displacement inwards.
The sign of its displacement forwards is that it expands the sound limb alongside its complement: truly it does not double itself without pain in the knee: and if it attempts to walk, it cannot do so forwards: and it retains its urine, and its ankle is displaced, and at walking there is swelling of its heel
The sign of its displacement backwards is that it does not expand the knee, neither can it double itself before it doubles the ankle: and its limb is even shorter than the other: and the ankle is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of the hip bone
The reduction of this displacement of various kinds is that it must be reduced immediately, if the displacement is old, which has become accustomed to its being there Then if you administer the reduction and it remains according to its position: then there is no healing in that treatment at all. It does not suffice that a presumption should be made of it.
In that case in which the displacement is recent, and is of one of the four kinds of displacement: then it is proper for this purpose that you wish to join, and extend it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left: perhaps thereby it will return, and no other treatment will be necessary.
If it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare the strong minister and extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a ligament which is bound above his knee: and another minister extends his hand above, so that he may insert his hand under his buttocks. Then bind it with a soft ligament above the root of the hip, and keep the extremity of the other ligament fixed.</start_of_turn>
And let the extension be either from the front of the groin to the part of the shoulder blade, or from the back to the part of the loin.</start_of_turn>
And let the extension be all at once, until the patient raises himself with his body from the earth, and remains hanging.</start_of_turn>
And this is indeed a common kind of extension among the four kinds.</start_of_turn>
If, therefore, the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary in every case to perform that which we have mentioned concerning proper treatment.</start_of_turn>
In reducing it, however, when the dislocation has gone inwards, it is necessary that the patient be placed upon his sound side.</start_of_turn> Then bind the ligament upon the root of the hip, in that place which is between the head of the hip and the groin.</start_of_turn Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the shoulder blade.</start_of_turn
And then another strong minister grasps his arm and moves the lower part of the hip downwards, and extends it outwards.</start_of_turn And thus it returns to its place.</start_of_turn
This kind is easier than the others for treating this limb.
If, however, it is excused beyond thy power, and does not obey thee at the entrance with this kind of treatment: then it is necessary to bind together both feet of the sick person along with strong ligament, soft and strong, over two calcanei and over two knees: and let the length of each be equal to four fingers; and let the limb which is sick be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
Then suspend the limb above the head of the limb: and let its length from the earth be equal to the quantity of two arms
Then command a strong youth to hold fast the hip: and suspend it with the sick limb together: and let the youth push the other limb forward with force, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
But in its return itself, when there is dislocation outwards, it is necessary that the limb should lie upon a cushion, as we have said in the case of a gibbosity And bind the ligament over the limb itself, and over the hip.
And put two boards, one at the feet and the other at the head of the limb. And put a board added in the middle of the foot, fixed well: over which are placed wet cloths, so that it does not irritate the limb: and let the board be between the knees, so that it does not draw towards the lower parts on extension.
Then extend all the limbs to their proper parts, and the physician will equal the reduction by his hand.
If therefore it obeys the reduction, it will be good.
And if not, place over the limb itself a board, and press on it, as we said in the case of a gibbosity, equally The patient must lie upon his healthy side.
When the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to extend the limb quickly: and it is in accordance with this that the doctor places his right hand over the patient's knee Then he grasps the limb with his other hand, and when he has bound it in this way, he extends the limb downwards to the knee part
If the dislocation is backwards: then it is not necessary to extend the limb downwards, but rather to elevate it above the ground: indeed it is necessary to place it upon a firm object, as it is also done when the dislocation is wide outwards, as we have said concerning its recumbent position upon two cushions: and this is upon its face and with extended ligaments: as we said a little while ago.
It is necessary to apply a compress with a board also upon the place where the fracture has occurred, when the reduction is completed as it should be done.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden: and it is that you extend both legs of the patient: and when you remove these equal, and the patient tightens his limb and expands it without pain: then you know that the limb is returned, as it should be done: then you must join the two thighs together, and put on an bandage, and bind as before, that is, with a rotation: so that it does not move widely to any part: and the patient must rest quietly for three days, or four.
Then loosen the ligament and the bandage, and compare the limb with the other: then if you find them equal in position, then you know that the dislocation is fixed: absolutely so that the patient can walk again.
And if you find any softening: then rest, put on the bandage once more, and bind it as before: and leave it for three days.
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable.
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable.
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable. Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it walk slowly over the next few days until it is comfortable.
Neither does the sickly man walk for some days until he is healed.
If, however, the limb remains immobile, you must perform reduction of the limb with ligaments, as has been mentioned previously in the treatment of fractures, until it returns
Until it returns
The calcaneus is sometimes remoulded with a slight displacement, and sometimes dislocates completely It is displaced either inwards or outwards
Its sign is that the calcaneus is swollen, proceeding to the part where it is displaced
The treatment of its displacement is easy: to restore it, extend it gently with the hands, and stabilize it until it returns to its place
When it is completely displaced, it is necessary to sit the patient upright: and hold the limb firmly from behind its ankle, in the middle of the limb itself
Then hold your right hand from above the foot, and your left hand from below the foot at the ankle bone
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand And with your left hand support the ankle bone with two fingers.
Then extend with your left hand, and push the ankle bone downwards without straining.
Do this twice as we have mentioned
Then push the ankle bone towards the shin in the third space, and you pull the heel.
If therefore it returns to its place either in one space or in two, according to this method, and if the foot is equal, it is good: but if not, do the operation again over it: because it will return
If, however, it is forbidden to reduce it [the swelling] with that which we have mentioned: then make the patient lie upon his back upon the earth, and fix a pillow under his feet, so that it shall fall between his thighs. And you shall be covering over him with your hand, so that it does not injure the patient.
Then take hold of his thigh: afterwards extend the other limb, either with your hands or with a bandage which is tied about the ankle Then extend all the limbs against the extension of the limb: and the pillow shall be standing between the two thighs of the patient, holding him, so that it does not draw his body downwards towards the extension.
Then the physician must adjust the dislocation with his hands, and the other limb must be held at the ankle. For the dislocation returns with speed.
When the dislocation has returned, and it is declared that the limb is in a state of recovery: then apply a plaster and bandage, and bind the limb firmly with ligaments, and bind the foot to the ankle
And it is necessary to beware of the nerves which are above the heel behind, so that there is no tension on the ligaments over them, and that it does not injure them
And discharge him in two or three days. If the ligament is softened, bind it: then dissolve it on the third or fourth day: and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. If he nevertheless attempts to walk before that space of time, there is no security that the dislocation will be dissolved and will not be corrupted, and will not recover after that treatment
If he has a cold swelling: then it is necessary to administer for its sedation in that place where our narration proceeded elsewhere for the treatment, and embrocation, until it is removed.
On dislocation of the toes and their treatment.
It is necessary that the dislocation be reduced without great pain, for this is not difficult but rather easy.
If, however, the dislocation is in some part of the ankle: then it is necessary to make the patient sit with the foot resting on the ground or on a table: and to be able to walk again
Then you must stand, and put your foot on that which is between the joints Then lift up your foot with your foot until you feel it is equal, and does not appear elevated
Then put under the middle of the foot a board which can support the whole foot, which has two heads. Then bind it with a bandage for three days. Then let it rest, and make it quiet from walking for many days, until it is bound up and secure against reduction
On the varieties of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When something like this happens, and you know its cure and its restoration, many times a wound follows: and because of this it is not proper to be proud of your cure, which is indeed useful only when a wise man of long experience, merciful, compassionate, punctual, not cowardly, not arrogant, is found: and that he should learn from the mistakes of other doctors who sit on their laurels only for a little warmth: and that he should send the patient away with a good judgement Unless you believe, or hope for the healing of the wound with lenity of treatment, and in which something appears of hope. Attempt to reduce it immediately at the outset of the operation, before the swelling becomes cold.
If the limb has returned, as we wish, then institute a regimen that will quiet the swelling: and care for the wound with those things which are suitable for it from the drying unguents.</start_of_turn>
If the dislocation is with fracture, and the fragments lie apart in the marrow, then attempt to remove them, and make in that which we said in simple fractures from that which preceded in their places.</start_of_turn>
And be cautious according to your skill, and protect yourself from the entrance of fear: according as I have foretold you.</start_of_turn>
For it is better for you with your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthy for your body in this life.</start_of_turn
