After I have finished with you, my son, this book, which is the latest work of science in medicine, alongside the completion of my own, I have reached the end of it through its exposition and declarations. It seemed to me that it would be useful to complete it with this treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand is a matter of our region and our time, and since its science has been abandoned for a long time: until perhaps its science has perished, and its sign has been abolished: and nothing remains of it except for brief descriptions in the ancient books, which have been altered by the hand: and there has arisen from this both error and hesitation, until its intentions have been closed and its desire has been prolonged: I have seen that it is necessary to restore life to it with the ordination of this treatise in this way, according to its position and declaration, and its abbreviation: and that we should come to know the forms of the instruments of cautery and other instruments of the operation, with the addition of their declaration and their preparation which is necessary.
However, because a good surgeon of the hand is not to be found in our time: because the art of medicine is long, and the author must be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy as Galen has narrated, until he knows the movements of the members, and their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, lacerations, and their number, and their emergence, and the pulse of veins, and quietness, and the exits of places.
And thus Hippocrates said, that the name is much, and the work is little, especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken of this at the beginning of this book.
Forasmuch as he who is ignorant is not skilled in the things which we have spoken of concerning anatomy, he will not avoid falling into error, for he will be among those who interfere with men: as I have seen many of them who form opinions of these things without knowledge and without experience.
For indeed I saw a stolid physician who followed the swelling of a scrofula in a woman's throat and cut some arteries in her throat: whereupon the blood of the woman flowed until she died between his hands.
And I saw another physician who presumed to extract a stone from a bladder which was in a state of inflammation, and the stone was large. So it came to pass that he extracted it along with the remnants of the bladder. Because the man died on the third day.
And I myself was called to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took charge of a certain Duke of our land concerning medicine: and it happened that a black slave who was with him fractured his leg near the heel: and the physician, in his ignorance, bound up the fracture with nails and pins, and did not permit the wound to drain.
And he died according to his desires. Afterwards he dismissed him for a few days, and forbade him from tying up the ligament: and he remained thus until the swelling of his leg and foot had gone down, and for the loss of his leg and foot, and he came to his end
I was called to him again: and I advised him to loosen the ligament: and there was peace, and he was freed from his pains
Truly, corruption had been confirmed in the limb: and I am unable to restrain it.
The corruption has ceased its progress in the limb, until it passes away
And behold, another physician who performed an incision upon a cancerous tumor: and it became ulcerated after days, until its malice grew great with its master himself.
For when cancer is pure and proceeds from melancholy humor, then it does not suffice to keep it at bay with all the iron in the world, except in the limb which can tolerate it, that it may be excised entire
And because of this, O Son, you must know that an operation is divided into two parts: the one which is associated with health, and the one which carries risk in many conditions.
I have been stirred in every place in this book in which an operation is mentioned, in which there is terror and fear.
For you must be cautious of this, and humble yourself: that you may not find fault with anyone, and be dishonest
Receive therefore measure with humility and care, and the sick with facility and firmness, and use the better means for healing, giving thanks to God for the success and praiseworthy outcome: and banish terrifying anxieties that make fear dwell in your heart, that there may be confidence in your spirit and comfort in your soul.
For there remains a great glory to your credit, and a sublimity in this world, and finally in the number of your souls.
Indeed, Galen has said in some of his instructions. You do not cure a bad sickness: do not give it a bad name
I am therefore divided into three Chapters.
Chapter One.
Concerning the use of the Cautery with fire, and the Cautery with acute medicine, the Chapter, arranged from head to foot, deals with the forms of instruments and materials for the Cautery operation.
Chapter Two
Concerning incision and perforation, phlebotomy and packing, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures, the Chapter is arranged concerning the forms of instruments
Chapter Three
Concerning restoration, dislocation, and treatment of torsions, and similar procedures, the Chapter is arranged concerning the forms of instruments from head to foot
But before we proceed with any operation, we must mention the quality of the instruments and materials to be used: and in what complexions this should be displayed
I say, that the discourse concerning the quality of the Cautery instrument, and its preparation, is a lengthy, subtle, scientific, and secret discourse.
And many learned men have spoken of this, and they disagree among themselves: and indeed little is to be learned from their discourses, fearing the prolongation of the subject
I say therefore, that the Cauterium is universally applicable to all complexions, whether with matter or without matter: except for two complexions which are a hot complexion without matter and a dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexions with matter, the Cauterium is dispersed. Some have said that the Cauterium is useless in these (complexions). Others have said the opposite, that the Cauterium is not suitable for an abscess, which is caused by heat and dryness: for the nature of fire is heat. And it is unsuitable to heal an abscess with heat and dryness, along with heat and dryness
He also says that by the Cauterium is made an application in all heat and dry abscesses that occur in the bodies of men: for when you compare the body of a man and moisten it, with the complexion of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
I also say, by his sermon, that I have learned from experience the same thing.
It is true that one should not approach this matter rashly, without having been tested, and having exercised in the last exercise of the Cauterium, and having recognized the diversity of the complexions of men, and the disposition of abscesses in themselves, and the causes of these, and the accidents of these, and the time space of these.
Except for these complexions, there is no fear of them: and especially in cold and wet abscesses. I have observed that all doctors agree on this: and they do not disagree in applying the Cauterium in these (complexions).
And behold, the sons say that from the secret of the curing of fire with the Cauterium, and the goodness of the Cauterium with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, whose action does not extend except to the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm any other connected part with it, except for slight damage.
The action of inflammation extends to that which lengthens from the limb: and it may cause an accident in the limb, producing an illness difficult to heal, and may even cause death.
Fire, however, on account of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not make this [inflammation] happen, unless it be excessive.</start_of_turn>
I have learned from experience, by the length of service and study with art, and by observation of things: and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the discourse.</start_of_turn>
And if it be not [within the scope of this book], because it is not permitted for this book of mine, I will nevertheless confess to you a secret hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies of its expulsion, which expels diseases with a philosophical demonstration that agrees with the minds of the wise.</start_of_turn
Note that the wise men also dissent in the time when it is permitted to make a cautery, and they say that it is better to delay the operation.</start_of_turn
I also say that a cautery is useful at all times: for in the meantime the document [ie. the wound] is covered over with moisture, which is attracted by the cautery.</start_of_turn Above all, if the cautery is for necessary and painful wounds, strong, fast, which do not tolerate delay: for in that case they fear the evil which results from the delay, which is greater than the little harm done by the wound in the meantime.</start_of_turn
Do not listen to the minds of the vulgar or stupid doctors, who do not understand that an inflammation which is healed by a cautery does not always return: for they put this down as a consequence, but this is not the case: for a cautery is not, except in the place of medicine, which changes the complexion and dries up humours which are the cause of pain.</start_of_turn
The burn surpasses the medicine in swiftness of its action, in its skill of operation, and in its confidence: and it is possible that the disease will vanish at some later time according to the complexion of the patient, the location of the disease, and its skill; and what is prepared in his body from the collection of superabundances in him: and what comes to him from food, and like things from the wound, except in the case of a disease in which the burn is administered.
A mild disease in a limb with few superabundances, and moisture, like the burn of a tooth, because of pain, and things like these, is possible that it will not return in it after that pain But this is in few cases.
Indeed, in this matter the saying is true that the burn is later than the medicine: for they believe that there is no cure which can be compared with medicine, neither with anything else after the use of the burn.
But the thing is contrary to that: for the intention is not that the burn should be later than the medicine, except when we administer modes of treatment for some disease and do not confer them with the medicine: then we finally administer the burn, and it confers: thus the burn is later than the medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar people and many learned physicians understand
The ancients said that the burn is better with gold than with iron: and they did not say that except for the equality of the gold and the fineness of its substance: for they said that it does not make pus at the place of the burn This is not absolutely true: for I myself have seen that in some bodies it does not make it in any other way.</start_of_turn>
The cautery is good with itself, and better than with iron, as they say. When you ignite the cautery with fire from gold, do not be afraid, when you ignite it according to its quantity, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the flesh, and if you add more fire to it, it will melt in the fire and turn into flakes.
Therefore the craftsman departs from that with this job: and because of this the cautery with iron is faster and closer to us, from its straightness to the operation.
And I have also set out this Chapter on Cautery, according to chapters: and I have set out from the head to the feet: so that they may learn what they wish from this.
Chapter II.
Here is the cautery of the lord of humidity and cold upon the brain: which are two causes of sweat, and of the flux of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and of the multitude of sleep, and of toothache, and of throat pain: and generally of all ailments that happen from cold, such as palsy, and sweat, and seizures, and apoplexy, and things like these from ailments.
The method of cautery is to apply the cautery to the patient immediately: to evacuate first with a soothing medicine the head for three or four nights, according to the nature of the patient, his age, and his habit.
Then command him to make a mark on his head with his finger Then make him sit between your hands square, so that you can place your hands on his chest
Then place the root of your palm over the root of your nose between your eyes. When your middle finger touches the mark, it indicates that the area is scorched.
Then ignite the Cauterium Olive: this is its shape
Then place it over the marked area with the burn, and with gradual tension, the hand will retract itself. Then lift your hand quickly and look at the place
If you see that the amount of bone or cartilage or herbs is escaping, then lift your hand again And if not, repeat the process with the burn, or with another burn if it has cooled: until you see the bone, which I have told you of
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it, and apply it to the place: and keep it there for three days.
Then apply butter soaked in the liquid to the place, and cover the burn with a clean dressing, until the burn is healed by the fire. Then care for it with unguents containing tetrapharmacon, until it is healed
I have said that the more the wound remains open, the more pus it emits: which is better and more healing.
Some people say that the skin should be cauterized until the bone is reached: and keep the Cauterium until something of the thickness of bone has hardened
Then remove what has been cauterized from the bone, then care for it.
Others say that the burn should be continued until the bone is clearly marked, so that the bone will fall out as if from a burn of a woman's ring: or an instrument which women use to pierce the alphabet with a small letter: and they say that from this place vapor escapes which makes the head swell, and let the wound be open for a long time
Then he cares until it is consolidated.
Neither of two species of cautery is to be used on anyone except in some cases according to the temper of the patient.
And dismiss it [the cautery] quickly, for it is better with me for the health of the patient.
The head grows weaker from the continuity of its natural solution: as we have seen in other parts of the body: and especially when the head of the sick person is weak of its nature: for the first species of cautery is most safe and better with me than the other, and it is useful: to work therefore with it in health
Head [Chapter] III.</start_of_turn>
When in the whole head there occurs a chronic pain that prolongs in the sick person, and there is used hyssop, and saffron, and alum, and oil, and application of these things And especially if it has been cauterized with one cautery, which we have mentioned, and you do not add anything to it: then consider it For if the head of the sick person is strong of its creation nature, and is not weak, and has found fever or heat: then cauterize with another cautery under that little one.</start_of_turn> Then cauterize it over every horn of its head with the cautery, without piercing the skin, and uncover the quantity of bone from which we have spoken.</start_of_turn And cauterize it once with the cautery in the occiput of its head, in the place which is called the vault: and that is the place where the marrow is put: and elevate your hand in this and do not uncover the bone.</start_of_turn The sick man complains of that pain which is causing him distress, and diverse from the pain of other head wounds.
I say concerning this wound: it is a cauterium which is performed in its place. It must be that the horn of the head and the back of the head are cauterized by a finer cauterium, and the middle part of the head by a greater cauterium.</start_of_turn>
Chapter III.</start_of_turn>
When in the part of the head there is a pain and swelling, or when the pain extends as far as the eye, and it is driven out with physicians who apply compresses to the head, and the rest of the treatment is administered as I have said in the treatise on diseases, and it does not suffice: then the cauterization in this case is performed in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with a burning instrument.</start_of_turn
The cauterization with acute burning medicine is like this: you take a tooth from another person and burn it, and you apply it to the wound.</start_of_turn Then you split the place of the pain in time with a wide incision, until there is in that place under the skin where the tooth has been caught.</start_of_turn
Insert it into that place under the skin until it is hidden: then close over it with a bandage of fine silk, and leave it for fifteen hours. Then take it out, and wash the wound with oil for two or three days. Afterwards put over it a wet bandage soaked in butter, until the place has healed. Then care for it with an unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Even if one does it like some doctors who burn with them, as I wrote in the twelfth tractate on physicians who endure.
Burning like this is indeed according to this method. The cautery, which has this shape.
It is called Clauis: for its head has the shape of a key, in which something curved is, and in the middle of its head there is a small prominence
Then place it over the place and hold your hand: and gradually move the iron back and forth: and let the quantity which burns from the thickness of the skin be like half of it And lift your hand, so that the artery which is below is not burnt, and the blood flow is not increased
Then soak the wound in salt water, and place it over the place, and leave it for three days: then put the wound with butter: afterwards take care with oil until it is healed.
And if necessary, burn this half of the cranium with the second extremity of the cautery. Burn from the incision of the artery in this half of the cranium, not the old way directly
In the old way, the cautery was done in the half of the cranium directly
When you treat a headache, when that which we mentioned in the preceding discourse and which we mentioned in the enumeration of diseases has not been helpful: and when you have used up the treatment which we mentioned from the cautery with the physician, or the cautery with fire, then you must burn the cautery with a knife until it turns white when you place it on the place of the pain with a line whose length is half of a finger, or as much as that: and hold your hand firmly so that you do not cut the artery, and pull it until you reach the bone.
It is necessary to cauterize the jaw, lest it should endure from the movement of the jaw during mastication, and cause the lateral surface or the nerve which moves it to spasm.
Take heed also of the guarding of the blood vessel which has been severed. For in its severance there is peril, especially for him who is ignorant of its work and is careless and inexperienced: and he abandons the operation immediately upon doing it the first time
And I come with the reminder of the method of the treatment of the flux of blood which is from the artery mentioned in this book of mine.
If indeed the wound is of such kind that it will not suffice with this cautery, and if the body of the patient bears the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have narrated, take care of the wound, until it is healed
And if you will, administer the cautery, which we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with the cautery which has two blades. For the cautery is better and more secure than the ligature of the artery
On the method of cauterizing in the pain of the ears.
When there is pain in the ear from cold, and it is treated with solutions, and the rest of the treatment which we mentioned previously, and the pain does not vanish, then you must cauterize: and that is called the Punctum, which has this shape
Then you must cauterize the surrounding area of the whole ear, as it is twisted: or around both sides, if there is pain on both sides And prolong thee with the Cauterium from the root of the ear downwards, after you have signed the place with the cautery: and let the quantity of the cautery be ten points in every ear, and as much as that.
And then care for the place until it heals
So as to cauterize in the Tortura
Chapter VII
The torture which is cured by cautery is not except of those which happen from phlegmas, as we said in the discourse of the diseases.
And you must cauterize the species which happen from swelling, and the spasm of the nerve.
When you have cured this species of torture with wine, and purging-pills, and gargling, and the cure does not suffice, then you must cauterize the patient with three Cauteriums: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little lower from the earlobe, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And put your Cautery on the side opposite the diseased part. For the softening does not happen except in the part which appears healthy
And the form of the cautery is that you cauterize the Cautery itself at the tip of the upper ear under the earlobe slightly: and the other at the temple. And the length of each is as long as the thumb And hold your hand with the Cautery until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is consumed
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is of a knife whose form is as aforesaid: but it is not more acute than that of a knife for oil. And it must be a knife of moderate thickness
Then take care of the place, until it is healed.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then take care of the place, until it is healed.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then take care of the place, until it is healed Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then take care of the place, until it is healed.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed Then take care of the place, until it is healed
Then care for yourself until you are healed: and let the Cauterium be applied according to its form, as has been stated beforehand.
Concerning the cauterization of paralysis and the softening of the parts.
Chapter X
It is necessary to proceed with care in the dressing of the head with wool and with what we have already mentioned.
Then bind the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize the middle of the head, and the cauterize over every horn of the head, and over the back of the head, and three times over the joints of the neck.
If, however, you are unable to endure the heat of the cautery in the treatment of the body in its entirety, and the patient is tolerant, and the inflammation is severe: then cauterize four times over the joints of the back, and the last one with the greatest heat, until the greatest part of the tissue is consumed, and lift your hand up Then care for yourself until you are healed: and let the Cauterium be applied according to its form, as has been stated beforehand.
Concerning the cauterization of epilepsy
The epileptic is not cauterized, except for that from which the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
It is necessary therefore to dress the brain of him in the first place with wool, and with the rest of the treatment which we have mentioned: when the patient is great or is tolerant of the medicines
If, however, he is a child, who does not tolerate the medicines: then is administered gargling and nourishing foods for the brain, before these many days with the improvement of the nourishment of the body
Then burn the head, afterwards cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, as it has gone before: and cauterize with another cautery in the nape of the neck, and over all the hair of the head. If the patient be strong and endure pain, then cauterize it with cauteries, as has been said in the case of paralysis, and the softening of the body over the cervical and dorsal vertebrae: and let the cautery be olive oil as before.
If the patient be a child, then apply the cautery gently, as in this manner.
Of the manner of cauterizing in melancholy.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries as has been said in the case of paralysis.</start_of_turn>
And if the cause of melancholy is excess of slippery humors which lead to melancholy, and the body of the patient be moist, then give him something which will temper his brain, as has been said in the treatise on reduction: then burn the head of the patient, and afterwards make a paste from saffron, as a circle.</start_of_turn
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting upright is to be held fast from all sides.</start_of_turn
Then apply liniment.</start_of_turn> And it is proper to use old butter or oil.</start_of_turn And warm it over a moderate fire, as the finger can tolerate, when it is introduced into it.</start_of_turn Then I will evacuate the eye in the middle of its head in a circle, and let it go until it is cold.
Do this every week to the patient, with the rest of the treatment being good, until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small punctures on many parts of it, except that you hold the hand with the cautery: smell it.</start_of_turn
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.</start_of_turn
Then put over it a cushion soaked in butter, or fat from a hen.</start_of_turn>
In descending water, cauterize the eye.</start_of_turn
Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
When the water in the eye is declared by the signs which I mentioned in the preceding discourse, then begin to pour and bathe the patient, with which the head of the patient will be made softer.</start_of_turn>
And keep it away from all moistnesses, and make him sit in a bath for a few days.</start_of_turn
Then command him to move his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head.</start_of_turn Then cauterize it over two temples with two cautery instruments, if there is an incipient descent of water in both eyes simultaneously: or from one side, if there is an incipient descent of water in one eye only: and cut off with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and make the cautery marks long in the width of the temples: and burn from the flow of blood.</start_of_turn
If you see anything else from it, then immediately cut it away with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting off of them, and care for the flow of blood.</start_of_turn
And when cauterized in the cartilage, under two bones, two cauteries are produced in the last place.
And thus cauterized in the ancient lacrimal bones.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, they are sticky: and they are over one, and the arteries which are in the exterior of the head, it is verified that these are from excessive cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cautery which I have narrated at the beginning of the descent of water, the cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries over two temporal bones, and two cauteries in the cartilage under two bones And if digestion is not sufficient, then cauterize itself everywhere around the eye, over the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
And thus cauterize in the wisdom of the nose
When you are treating this, when that which we have said in the explanation has not taken effect: then cleanse, and give in the patient's mouth barley-bread three times a night: then burn its head, and cauterize it with the middle cautery, with an olive cautery. Then cauterize it with the claw cautery with two cauteries, over two superciliums under the hair a little bit
And guard the artery, so that you do not cut it.
And this is the form of cautery with claws
And thus cauterize in the softening of the Palpebrae
When the Palpebra of the eye is softened by inflammation or humidity, then cauterize the Palpebra with a single cautery, like the lunar cautery.
And if necessary, cauterize above the two upper eyelashes with two small cauteries in every part: and prolong for two times: and let the length of every cautery be according to the length of the eyelash: and do not touch your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity which is to be cured of the third eyelid.
As for the manner of cauterizing the Palpebra when the hair of the eyebrows is burnt by the inflammation of the eye.
There are two kinds of cautery: either with fire or with burning medicine.
But in the cautery with fire, it is recommended to put the patient before the fire, so that he may expel his hair, if there are any that are falling out, until they are prolonged and equal If however they are pricked at the root of their hair: then tighten the eyes with the thumb and the index finger, so that they do not move, until they are healed
When they are healed and equal, then place the head of the patient in your lap: then sign over the Palpebra of the eye with charcoal, in the manner of the figure of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair
Then put a soaked bandage over the eye: or in hairgum on the eye.
Then burn the cautery, whose form is this
Then burn over the figure, as you have marked gradually in many bodies, until the surface of the skin is consumed, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, throughout its appearance.
The sign of the completion of your work is: if you strike the eyeball with your thumb and pull out the hair at the point of the eye.
Lift up your hand then: and let it go in three days.
Then place upon it Butter with the Buttock, until the Eschar is eradicated. Then care for it with Unguent, until it is healed
If some hair remains after an hour, and the Palpebra is softened: then repeat the Cauterium over the place, as you did at the beginning.
If they are in the lower part: then burn the place until they rise to their natural place: and make them equal so that they do not prick the eye
Just as with the principal diseases, you must let the hair go, until it becomes long and equal Make from parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf
Then take from Soap which is well pounded, and from Chalk which has not drunk from anything of its weight an ounce I or almost as much: then mix these together with a good contortion, and make it with a bit of friction, so that it does not become cold. Then take from this Pande a piece as thick as the leaf of the myrtle which you made, and put it upon the eyeball of one, or of two. Place under the eye a soaked cushion in albumin, and let the patient's head rest in your lap.
Place your finger upon the medicine and press it gently. Move it whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine: for its bite is like fire.
While you are doing this, you will have discovered its bite: then withdraw the medicine and move it with your finger When the bite has subsided, then withdraw the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Consider then, if the eyelid is swollen, like swelling with fire or incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat the application of the medicine in the place where the medicine did not cause damage, until your operation is completed and the eye is closed
Then place upon it a cushion with butter, until the skin of the wound is separated from the underlying tissue Then care for it with ointment or other things until it is healed
And it is necessary that you take care of the last care, that nothing of the medicine should fall into the eye
If the eyelid is softened after a few days, and some hair has grown in the eye, then repeat the application of the medicine in the place where the eyelid softens itself, as you did at the beginning. Then care for it until it is healed
This is the form of the myrtle leaf
Know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape Therefore be attentive to this: and do not neglect the rightness of this work which is the study of this art
On how to cauterize in the Lacrimal Fistula.
When you have treated the fistula, when it has not yielded to your treatment: then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Direct the patient to place his head on your lap, and keep his head minister between your hands in such a way that it does not move or be disturbed with his head
Then apply the cautery stick soaked in alum or in the hair-powder over his eye: then apply the Cautery, which is of this shape
Make a cavity as wide as the shape of a twig of a feather at its widest point, with the Cautery: if it should penetrate to the other side, or if it should go upwards, do so cautiously
It is better to make the cavity wider.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and remove the pus from it, and dry it up: and if it is not open, then open it up and remove its pus.
Then place over the fistula the Cautery which has been made hot
And keep your hand close to the Cautery from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not slip, or cause discomfort to the patient: and place the Cautery on the fat of the eye, and burn it through
If you do this at the beginning of the Cautery, it will be good If not: then repeat the Cautery once or twice if necessary: and keep it for three days.
Then place the cotton with butter and care for it with an unguent until it heals.
If after forty days it has not healed, then place above it a sharp corrosive medicine, until the bone is exposed: and then dress it according to what is written in its chapter
And thus is another way of cauterizing the fistula, which some have said before. Direct it to the place of the fistula and find it: then place under the opening of the fistula a soft cushion, that is, a bandage of soft wool, of such a form And pour into it the quantity of lead which is equal to a drachma in liquid form, and hold your hand with a good bandage, and do not move the patient in any way, so that it does not run, or that the liquid lead should not reach his eye
And it is necessary to place over the eye of the patient cotton soaked in albumin or in water.
Lead thus burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a remarkable healing.
If the fistula is healed, with what we have said of cautery and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nasal opening, and reduce the fistula to the curve of the nose, according to what is written in its own place
About the cauterization of fissures of the lips.
Many times there occur fissures in the lip, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you have cured them of these fissures, when the cure has not taken effect, then you must burn slightly with a small knife, according to this form.
And let its shape be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then put the flame quickly into the cuts, until the cautery reaches the depth of the cuts.
Then care for it with the cautery, until it is healed.
Concerning the cautery of the fistula of the mouth.
When there is swelling in the root of the tooth, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus forms, and the tissue ruptures: afterwards it becomes firm, and pus comes out, and a fistula forms: then you must care for it, and do not be sparing in the treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize according to the quantity that has escaped through the fistula.</start_of_turn> Then put the flame into the cavity of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the iron of the flame reaches the depth of it, and the end of it: do this once, or twice at most.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it afterwards, as we have said concerning the care until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If it is excised cleanly, and heals, it is good.</start_of_turn And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place, and remove the corrupt bone according to what comes to light in its head.</start_of_turn
Concerning the cautery of the gums, and the softening of teeth.</start_of_turn>
When the gums are softened by moisture, and the teeth are mobile, and you care for it with physicians, and do not spare them: then put the head of the patient in your lap.</start_of_turn
Then ignite the cautery, whose shape will emerge afterwards, so that you may place the cannula over the tooth: and introduce the cautery into it quickly; and keep your hand steady, until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand up: then repeat the cautery a few more times, as you wish.</start_of_turn>
Then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt-water, and keep it closed for one hour: and then expel it.</start_of_turn>
The tooth will henceforth be firm, and the gum softened and stretched, and the foul moisture will dry up.</start_of_turn
In this way the cautery is done for a toothache.</start_of_turn
When the toothache is due to cold, or if there is cold or worms in it, and no relief is found with the doctors: then the cautery is done in two ways: either with butter or with fire.</start_of_turn
The cautery with butter is done as follows: take a piece of butter the size of a barleycorn and put it into the crucible.</start_of_turn Then take the cautery and place it over the tip of the tooth.</start_of_turn Then immerse it in the butter which is boiling: and place it over the painful tooth quickly; and keep it there until it cools down: then repeat it a few more times, until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
Or if you wish, immerse a wool or a piece of cotton in cold butter, and place it over the painful tooth: and put on a piece of burning iron above it, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.</start_of_turn
The cautery of it with fire is useful, in order to reach the air tube or the iron tube. And let there be something of bulk in its body, so that the heat of the fire does not reach the diseased bone
Then the cautery is applied, whose form will be as follows: place it upon the tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery is cold.
Do this cautiously, for the pain will vanish, or in the same day, or on another day.
And it must be impressed upon the burn of the cautery, so that the diseased bone will be filled with good marrow, and hold it for an hour: then expel it.
This is the form of the cautery
The cautery is done with whatever extremity you like according to what is possible: and this is the form of the tube.
In the case of cautering of the veins.
When the veins are swollen with phlegm, and by cold humours, and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to expedite their digestion: then make the cautery concave, whose form is as follows:
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke of the cautery may escape from the other extremity: place the flame upon the heel once, and then again if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the lesion
If the lesion is small: then apply the cautery according to the size of the lesion.
Then remove it after three days, and place upon it a poultice soaked in butter, until the burned part has healed
Then care for yourself with the unguent of the tooth, until the shape of the cannula is restored.
In the ulcer of the tooth, cauterize and constrict the pain-causing tissue.
When the gum becomes soft over the alveolus of the teeth, and especially when that exists with the coldness of complexion, then it is necessary to evacuate the sickly one first with the physicians' solutions
Then cauterize in the neighborhood of the root of the tooth in the depressed place: and burn, so that you do not burn the tooth itself, nor the gum, except for what is necessary.
Then cauterize with another cautery at the juncture of the cheek in the last space of its tooth: and let the cautery be small according to the mode that went before
Then care for yourself with the unguent of the tooth, until the shape of the cannula is restored
In the cavities of the tooth and the cavity of the gum.
When the cough and the gum disease of the teeth are from the coldness of the humidy, and the sickly one does not have fever, neither phthisis, neither old ulcer: then cauterize with two cauteries above the root in the depressed places, in the lenes, and in the groove And another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples: and let the cautery of the cannula be according to its shape that went before
And if you wish to cauterize with a puncture with a cautery, which is called Punctum, whose form went before in the puncture of pain in the ear: and let the puncture be from thirty punctures up to almost to the others
Then care for yourself until you are healed.
And I am a cauterium having three branches: according to this shape.</start_of_turn> Why does the cauterium rejoice with me when I make with it a triple knot?</start_of_turn
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn
When the head of the assistant is displaced by the cause of humidity, and does not return to its place within an hour of its displacement, until it has become accustomed to its repositioning, then it should be displaced again by a slight movement, as we have often witnessed, then it is necessary to reduce the displacement at once.</start_of_turn Then the patient is put to rest on his back, or on the side of his health.</start_of_turn Then lift the skin which is inside the tibia to the outside with your left hand: and if the fracture has displaced inwards.</start_of_turn
Then take the cauterium having two grooves.</start_of_turn Whose shape is this.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize the skin until it pierces through to the other side, and comes out with the figure of the cauterization having four cauteries.</start_of_turn
And when the cauterization is made with the cauterium having three grooves, because of this the figure of the cauterization will be of six cauteries: and there will be three grooves following the curvature.</start_of_turn
And this is the shape of the cauterium having three grooves.</start_of_turn
When one adds more than one in this way, what are the nails of eight?
Then place over the burn salt-coated sponges. Then make the patient adhere calmly, so that the limb does not move at any time, until it is comfortable.
And if dislocation has occurred above, and this is rare, then burn the upper part with a needle cautery, or with multiple punctures.
For the joint will become firm, and moisture will be removed: and the patient will be healed
Regarding the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and much moisture occur in the stomach, until it is expelled from its composition, and the carbuncles multiply at it, and constant methods of treatment are not sufficient: then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back, extend his limbs, and clench his hands Then burn with three cautery instruments: a needle cautery of the size of a single digit under the breastbone, and two lower cautery instruments from the two lower flanks of the single cautery, until the triangular figure of the burns is completed And lengthen between each other so that they do not join, when pus is made
And the depth of the burn should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin.
And the figure of the burns should be like this without addition: and if you burn with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this figure: then let the burn be as much as this single burn according to the circle figure
And it is cauterized with the stomach by puncturing it where it returns from this cauterization: and it is that the signs above the stomach-puncture be according to the quantity of the encasement. Then cauterize it with the cauterization of the puncture. Then care for it with care until it is healed.
And so it is cauterized with cold.
When it happens in the Epate that there is pain from cold and moisture, or from great swelling, until it comes out from its natural configuration through excessive evacuation, and the sick person is cared for as we have said, and not otherwise: then it is necessary that the sick person be placed upon his belly, and that three cauteries be made above the Ep like this figure and in the same quantity as below the hypocundri, where the cubit of a man reaches: and let there be space between every cauterization according to the width of a finger: and let the cauterization be according to the length of the rectum of the body: and do not press your hand too much with the cauterization
And let the quantity of the first be that which is absorbed from the thickness of the skin, the middle quantity not being added: and let the sick person be standing on his feet
But if he is not standing, then let him be lying down, who has extended his limbs and raised his arms.
This is the form of cauterization.
And indeed it is possible that these cauteries be made with a surgical knife, when there is skill and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not go too far with the cauterization, and that the thickness of the whole skin is not overheated, because the body is heated throughout, and comes to the intestines: for the skin is thin there, as you know well
How to cauterize the spleen wound.
When an incision occurs, and one wishes to write, if the wound is in the liver itself, or in its tunica: if it is in the liver itself, there is blunt pain without sharpness: and if it is in the tunica of the liver, with sharp pain existing: then the physician must be fatigued from his care of the patient.
The patient must therefore rest over his wound Then the figure of the wound is placed with the cautery: then the cautery is applied which readily absorbs the radiation. This is its form. And cauterize with one cautery until the entire skin is consumed, and has passed to the fat, until the whole wound is evacuated: then care for the wound itself until it is healed
And do not let anyone use such a cautery except one who has studied the art of medicine for a long time: and by whose hand these diseases have often been cured: for he alone will dare to perform such an operation
Or let me send her away, for it is better with me.
How to cauterize in the pleura.
The ancients say that a cautery with roots of aristolochia is applied to the cold pleura according to this method. And it is that you take from the dry roots of aristolochia some long pieces, one of which is as thick as the breadth of a finger Then immerse the wound in fat: and raise it in fire. Then burn with a cautery one at that place which is between the continuation of the curve with the collar, and with two small cauteries under guidance slightly depressed at the part which is under the beard.
And with two cauteries also in that place which is between the fifth and sixth ribs depressed slightly backwards: and a cautery in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach And three cauteries from behind: one at that place which is between two spatulas: and two cauteries from both sides of the chest, the lower cautery which is between two spatulas.
And it is not necessary that you should press your hand with the cautery, but that it should smell freely from the skin.
And some ancient men say that there are some people who use a cautery like iron: they burn and throw it into that place which is between the ribs, until it is consumed with that to the very end, and comes out whole: as we said concerning the spleen.
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear that either the sick man will immediately die, or that a fistula will happen in the place which has no healing.
In this way burn the spleen head only as we have said.
When you are treating a wound of the spleen, when with that which we have said concerning the treatment of diseases, and it does not confer healing, then burn in that the three ways which are all straight forward
One of them is to make three cauteries, or four in a line following the length of the spleen according to the shape of the cauteries of the spleen which precedes this figure
And be between every cauterium the quantity of the breadth of a finger, or more or less.
And be the quantity of the cauterium as we have said in the cauterization of the liver, equal
And do not press your hand with the cauterium: and let the patient lie relaxed above his back
And another manner of cauterization is: as when you have two rings of cauterium, as we have said in the chapter on the dislocation of the humerus: and elevate the skin which is over the spleen, where the left elbow of the patient is: and elevate your hand as much as you elevate the skin according to the breadth of the body, so that the cauteria may fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two rings of fire downwards until when the fire has pierced the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cauterium: there will remain four cauteries.
And if you wish to cauterize with another cauterium which has three rings.
Then take care of the cauterium after you have put it away to emit pus for many days: for thus will it be more beneficial than any other thing which has preceded it in the treatment
In the treatment of Hydrops
The cauterium does not fall in Hydrops, except as it is properly grasped.
When you are treating Hydrops with the methods of treatment which we have mentioned in the chapter on wound-healing, and the cure does not suffice, then it is necessary that you cauterize the four corners of the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two on the back between the ribs, and one in the breast and one under the stomach: and let the quantity of the depth of the cauterization be equal to the thickness of the skin.
Then withdraw the open cautery, so that it emits pus over a long period.
Do not abandon the patient from treatment after the cautery: for it is necessary that two intentions should be joined together for healing to occur. It will hasten towards healing with the aid of God.
The form of the cautery with which the inside is cauterized is a claw: as it has been before. And that with which the back is cauterized is an olive: as it has been before
Concerning the cauterization of the feet and legs:
When the swelling has subsided in the Hydroponicum, and the skin has become citrine: it is necessary to cauterize over the back of the foot between the cubical and great toes. Place your hand over the cautery and do not twist it: then lift your hand and do not move it altogether
The skin will then become citrine again, and the cautery should be of this form.
Then make over each ankle two cauteries at the lower part of the limb: and perform the cautery with the tip of the cautery: and perform the cautery along the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below it, around the middle of the limb: and over every heel make two cauteries: and withdraw the open cautery without treatment for a long period: so that some water may remain from it. Then care for the limb as we have said before.
Concerning the cauterization in the solution of the belly
Chapter XXXV
When the solution of the belly is cold and humid, until it has lost its power of retaining and digesting, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured with the methods of treatment, and not by nature: and give the patient strength that he can tolerate the excessive virtue, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach, as it is done in the cauterization of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four cauteries around the navel, with a claw cautery below the ribs, and a large cautery over the spleen, or two cauteries.
If the moist humors are excessive, and the patient tolerates it, then burn the affected parts with the cautery over the belly and over the whole of the intestines: and perhaps you will add two small cauteries near the great one on the stomach.
There is indeed a valuable cure which does not err in its effects.
Method of cautery for haemorrhoids.
Chapter 6
When in the rectum are many old haemorrhoids, or one, and are of gross humours, cold or corrupted by moisture, and are cured by this which we have mentioned in the discourse, and not by treatment: then burn three cauteries over the lower spin of the back under the almond-shaped piece triangularly, and a cautery under the navel as if with two fingers
And if you think that his stomach is hardened, and his food does not digest, and that his face is covered with fluid after eating, then burn him over the stomach with a large cautery, as we have said before: and a cautery over the spleen and another over the liver, with a cautery of the navel: and remove the open cautery at a convenient time: then care for him until he is healed
Chapter 7
When you have excised the almond, then burn a cautery which absorbs the heat Then introduce the burning cautery into the excised almond: and your last hand, until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice
If there are many almonds, then burn each one according to what we have narrated Then care for it until it heals, when it has received what is necessary from the unguents.
And if you cauterize it with a great cautery over the ulcer, that is the last thing in treatment
In this way cauterize the fistula in the rectum.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the section and the work we narrate in its place, and returns from it, perhaps he will heal with cautery
When this happens to any fistula, and it becomes old, pus comes out of it, and it moistens the corrupted parts. Therefore it is necessary to test it with a subtle touch Then recognize the quantity of its depth with the touch
Then burn the cautery, which is like a ray Then enter yourself with the burning into the fistula and the quantity in which the clamp has entered
And repeat the cautery over it until all the corrupt parts are consumed, once, or twice, or three times, according to the necessity
And take care that you do not burn the nerves, if there are any, or the veins: or if the fistula comes close to the outer body, or to the inner organs, then take care to be away from all these places
Do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think that it is not penetrating
Then care for the place until it heals.
But if the place is sealed, and material is detached from it, and remains so for a long time: then you know that it has healed completely
If they do not cut away from it the material, then you know that it is penetrating, or that there is a fractured bone in its depth, or as if from these it is excised.
In the event that they do not excise it from that material, then you know that it is penetrating, or that there is a fractured bone in its depth, or as if from these it is excised.
When it happens in the kidneys that there is pain from cold, or from large swellings, and that it is diminishing because of this the thing which is causing the infirmity, then it is necessary to cauterize over the whole of the kidney and over the navel of the kidney, with a cautery that has preceded the recollection of the matter.
And perhaps we must cauterize it a second time in the same cavity. Because three lines come together. Therefore there are two remaining lines.
Chapter XL
When the bladder suffers from disease and swelling from bile and moisture until the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the lower part of the belly above the bladder where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right side of the belly and from the left side of it: and let the length of the cauterization on each side be according to the quantity of the thumb node. And cauterize the lower back, or two cauterizations if necessary.
When the bladder suffers from disease and swelling from bile and moisture until the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the lower belly above the bladder where the hair of the testicles begins, from the right side and the left side of the belly. The length of the cauterization on each side should be as long as the thumb. Cauterize the lower back or twice if necessary.
When the uterus suffers from cold and moisture and is hindered by that from conception, and its menses are corrupted, and its discharge is delayed, and there is pain in its neighbourhood, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we said concerning the bladder, and cauterize the lower abdomen, or two cauterizations: and let the cauterization be as long as the thumb.
Chapter 42.
When moisture of the mucous membrane flows down to the testicles and causes them to be expelled from their place: and the sign of this is that one knee hangs over the other knee when they are compared with each other, and the place of dislocation is found in that crease
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient above the testicles with a cauterization of the same size as a circle: after which one should mark the sign of the cauterization around the testicles, as is done with a ring: and let the testicles fall into the middle of the circle.
And if this cautery is not present, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a great olive cautery: and make the cautery deep according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole skin
Then care for it until it heals.
In the manner of cauterizing for Sciatica.
When it happens that there is pain in the heel of the ankle, and the cause of it is cold and humidity: and the infirmant is cured with that, as we said in the explanation, and the cure does not suffice, and it is aged: then it is necessary to remove the infirmity from the gross humours with fleshy pills, or with artificial pills, or the like.</start_of_turn> Then cauterize it.</start_of_turn
And the mode of cauterizing in this is according to two ways: either with cautery with burning substances, or with fire.</start_of_turn
Cautery with fire is according to many ways.</start_of_turn
One of them is that it is made over the heel of the ankle itself with three triangular cauteries, according to this shape.</start_of_turn And make the burn good depth, or bad.</start_of_turn And let the space which is between every cautery be of the quantity of the thickness of a finger: and let the olive cautery be.</start_of_turn
When the burn is made in the middle over the heel of the ankle itself.</start_of_turn Why are there four carpus?
If one cauterizes with a circle whose shape precedes that of the dislocation of the ankle, one: to encompass the ankle entirely with the circle.
And burn the thickness of the skin whole.</start_of_turn>
This is the method of cautery in Sciatica, when the pain adheres to the ankle itself, and does not extend up to the knee and thigh.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it extends up to the knee and thigh, then cauterize with two cautery instruments above the knee, above the place where the said painful area is, where the pain is, and your cautery above the ankle of the four digits up to the outer side of the heel: and let the cautery be circular.</start_of_turn>
And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.</start_of_turn
And if the patient says that the pain extends up to the toes, then cauterize there where the cautery of a point, or three, or four, or several, is needed for that.</start_of_turn
And if he says that the pain is under the outer knee, then cauterize there with one cautery instrument.</start_of_turn
And cauterize in all your cautery, so that you do not reach the nerve or the great artery, and that you do not draw towards you by that over the painful area the harmful document.</start_of_turn
And indeed I know one who, having cauterized above the ankle, and having finished cautering, the ankle was swollen, until the whole foot was swollen, and the whole foot was perforated and corrupted: then the solution of the belly ensued, and death followed shortly after.</start_of_turn
If pain exists in both parts simultaneously, burn each one according to this manner.
Some wise men have said concerning cauterization of the anus, that this is the manner of its cauterization. Make a mark like that of a nail, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and be at the orifice according to the thickness of the kernel of the thumb, or less: and there be within it a third of itself.
And there be space between every mark according to the quantity of the thumb node: and let the marks be opened from both parts: and let the height of them be like a node, or two nodes: and make a handle of iron adapted to the center of the marks
Then it is to be ignited in the fire, until it turns red, and throws sparks: then it is to be put upon the lower part of the anus resting on the outer side of the healthy part Burn thus each three cauterizations in oil once
Then let it be left for three days Then anoint with butter: and let the wound be opened for many days. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed
Albucasis says, concerning this kind of cauterization, that we are little used to it, because of the terror of its aspect: and because of this, few expect it from us
But truly it is from the good ones that it receives benefit, and finds its place among them.
And the cauterization with physicians is more perfect, as you make two holes in the palm of the hand, in which the wrist of the hand will descend from the air, or from iron, the length of the wall: and there be two nodes in the height of them, or as many as these
And there shall be space between each two quantities of the greatness of a finger, and there shall be an opening below and above: and that which contains itself to the inside, according to this form.
And lay it down upon the heel of the foot, the sickly one being placed upon the broad side of the sound foot And press your hand down upon the heel of the foot very much. And then pour between two circles of warm water, which is heated with a little fire, and keep it for the quantity of an hour of time: and the sickly one will bear its own biting, and its own bringing-forth, for it finds biting like fire until the biting subsides
And then lift up your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from the whole foot with sweet water: then leave it for three days.
And place upon it butter, until the black of the bringing-forth be removed: and leave it for a few days, and it will come out with pus This is the end of the treatment.
And take care of it with poultices, until it is healed
If the pain extends up to the hip, or the thigh: make for it a position in which there is water contained, as you did in the foot above.
This is the way of warm water: and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine. Take alkali, and unburnt lime of both, and take a portion of each and put them into a new jar, the lower part of which is pierced with a small hole according to the quantity of the radius itself: and put under the bottom of the jar another jar filled with vinegar: and pour over the alkali and the lime from sweet water, which covers both through a finger: and when you have pressed them with your hand with good pressure: and pour out the jar, until the acute water of the lower part of the jar of vinegar is gone.
Then add all the water, and pour it over the other heel: and wait until it recovers.
The water itself then becomes strong and acute, which is administered in many medical operations, and in cauterizing the rest of the limbs. Because it performs the work of fire itself
And among the physicians, those who cauterize widely, also like surgeons, and acacia gum, and chalk with soap, thus that both are mixed together.
And Galen himself reports that an old physician of the ancients, who cured him of pain in his knee and sciatica: and he praised its strength He said that it did not require any other cure, and that he was healed from the bath alone, because perhaps he himself had entered the hot bath and came out of it healed
And it is taken from the green barley of a wise man: and if it is not found green, take it dry, grind: and give him much with some fat, and put it on the knee, where there is pain, or the thigh, or the hip: and bind it, and leave it for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels the pain diminishing. Then put it into the bath.
When it becomes soft, put it into the socket. For the pain departs, and it is healed
And know that no other cautery should be used along with these physicians, except after the evacuation of the body.
Dioscorides himself says that the dung of goats, when cauterized with this, heals the sciatica: and does the cautery in this manner. Let a lancet be taken, and let an old oil be drunk, and let it be placed over the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and between the nails, and is nearer to the nail.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it, until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it over the lancet and let it go, until it is extinguished. Do it again. Do not cease doing this until sensation returns by sensation through touch up to the edge, and the pain has ceased
And this method of burning is called the cauterization of the Vaccinum.
Of the cauterization of the pain of the back
When pain occurs in the back from many bites, or from a wound, or from evacuation of excessive fluid, or in similar cases, from the infusion of cold and wet matter: and the cauterization is not useless, except in this single kind, which is done from the infusion of cold matter
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the sick person with foetid pills and like things, to make three lines on the back, where the pain is, following the width of the palm of the hand, after having made signs with the cautery in every line five burns, or more according to the quantity which comes from the patient's tolerance or the degree of his illness: and let the cauterization be done with the cautery needle.
And if you wish, burn three or four times with the middle cautery needle, according to this form.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the groin.
Many such ailments happen to young children.
And the sign of the beginning of this ailment in children is: that it happens with tension in the neck when the head is bent forwards, and movement: and you will find it in the last rib and the nodes of the back, which begin to protrude over the rest of the ribs
When you have done this, and you wish to make it, then cauterize it with the cautery that is in the shape of a circle according to this form
And grasp the cautery over the whole of the rib equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the rib with the cautery, make two or three points close to each other.
Then care for the place, until it is healed as we have said.
And be careful, lest you administer the cautery in a spasm of the nerve, which happens in swelling
In the same way as for cauterizing in Podagra, and for joined pains.
When pains of the joints are from cold humors which flow upon every limb of the body, then when such pains happen in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call it Podagra.
When thus Podagra is cured of its cold cause with proper methods, and the pains are not removed, then the cautery will remove them
And it is necessary to cauterize after evacuation around the joints of the feet with many cautery needles: and let the cautery be of Olive oil
And if digestion is obstinate concerning the points upon the foot, then make with the cautery the points. If pain ascends even to the knees, or if the other bands remain, and many times this happens, then burn the knee with three burnings, or four from every side, with the same cautery of Claudius.
If indeed further burnings are necessary, then burn it with these again. Do not immerse your hand in the burning, but rather keep the thickness of the skin around it only.
If pain ascends to the knees and the back: then carry out what we said concerning the cautery in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands: then burn around the nails, as two lines are made to revolve.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the pain remains in the toes: then burn the points upon every nodule of the toe and upon the nail of the thumb.</start_of_turn>
If pain ascends after a few days to the elbows or shoulders: then burn both from every side.</start_of_turn>
Do not neglect the infirm from the use of good remedies, from the administration of medicines.</start_of_turn> For if a good regimen be made and the phlegm be evacuated, recovery will take place with the help of God with this burning.</start_of_turn>
 On the method of burning in ruptures.</start_of_turn
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or the bladder descends to the testicle, and this has begun nearby: then it is necessary to send away from the patient the people who have eaten in their day.</start_of_turn And it is used from soft things, from which the stool descends from its belly.
Then sit between your hands over his back: and command him to keep his breath, until he goes out, or until you see a wound or an intestine
Then draw it down with your fingers, and sign with the imprint of the thumb under the fracture above the pelvic bone, with the sign which is like half of a circle to the upper parts of the body.
Then apply the cautery, which is like this in form, until it turns white, and then remove the scabs. Then reduce the intestine or the wound to its cavity. Then put your hand ministering over the place, so that the intestine does not go out: and you will open between the ribs, and put under it powder, and another over the ribs that holds the hand.
Then place the cautery over that sign, your hand with the cautery standing straight. And hold it there, until with it you follow the bone: or repeat it with it again until you have followed it with it until the bone.
And watch prudently from the discharge of the intestine at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn it, and that it goes through over the patient or the wound, or great malice
And know that when you do not follow with the cautery the bone, your operation is useless.
And it should be subtle like the cautery of infants, according to their measure
And take care of the rest of the bandages, until the patient is healed.
And let the sickly man rest upon his back for forty days, until the swelling subsides.
And he must be given nourishment during the whole course of his treatment, that he may not suffer from hunger pangs or evacuations.
When the swelling has subsided after forty days, then administer the ligature that has been performed, and keep it for another forty days.
Let him rest from work and take nourishment of food and drink, and engage in healthy exercises.
For when this regimen is followed, the patient will recover completely.
And I say that the treatment of ruptures with incision is in this chapter.
When, however, ruptures happen in the remainder of the belly, and are just beginning, and one wishes that they should not grow larger, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and let it be as if a third of it had been burnt from that time forward And treat it as we have said: and do not add to it
Others say that it should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form
When it has been cauterized with the brand, and a line has been drawn that runs through the width at the upper side of the rupture, and a line that runs to the lower side. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery handle.
But the first cautery is easier and better
In the case of pains caused by a fall or blow, or any other similar cause, cauterize with the tip only, without the handle.
Chapter XLVIII.
When anything happens in some limb through wound or blow and pain remains fixed: and does not yield to treatment with physicians: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery of a Puncti.
And let the cautery be of every limb according to its size, and its proportion, and its toughness, and its nature, and the place of torsion, and the pain from it
If it is healed from the first cautery, it is good If not: then repeat the cautery over it again.
Because of the custom of these pains, they change from one limb to another that approaches them. Therefore it is necessary to follow these with the cautery until the infirmity is healed
 As to the cautering of Lepra...
Leprosy however when they are cauterized they require the greatest cautery. And especially the kind of Leprosy that comes from the putrefaction of phlegmas and melancholy: with such it is necessary to consider the cautery itself.
If the Lepra is not very deep and the swelling subsides with it as we have said in the discourse, and does not remain: and times over the infirmity which includes the corruption of the whole face: then cauterize over the head five times: one in the middle of the head known as the nucha, and the second below it facing the front at the end of the hair, and two over the two horns, and one behind the neck of the ear.
And lastly, you must apply the cautery to your hand close to the bone, until an imprint is made in the bone: whereupon the cortexes will be split apart. Thus will the emission of thick vapor from the cavity be alleviated, and the cautery must also be applied over the spleen itself, as has been stated previously.
If, however, the leprosy is sparse over the diseased part, and is apparent clearly: then it is necessary to cauterize with these cautery instruments, as we have mentioned at the head, and with the cautery over the tip of the nose, and two over the two upper jaws, and two over the bones of the neck, and six over the bones of the back, and one large one over the boils which are at the root of the tail and one above the spleen itself: and two over the flanks: that is to say, over every flank one, and two over the knees: one over every knee, and two over the upper arms, and two over the elbows, and two over the wrists of the hands and feet: and cauterize over every heel of the feet.
And cauterize from the nerves which are over the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them.
And when the cautery is applied to the bones of the pelvis, and to another over the bones of the stomach, and to another over the spleen.
And know that the more you add cautery, the more is the suffering, and the more painful it is.
And know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as he does in health: because his body is already stupefied.
And it is necessary that the cautery should be of a suitable size, and of equal thickness according to the parts and the joints: as has been stated from the species of instruments
Then care for the cauterium with herbs and honey, and for the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
Regarding the cautery in the wound
When some part of the body is swollen and requires treatment with medicines, oils, and poultices, but does not heal, then cauterize the swollen part with cautery, according to the size of the part or its hardness.
And let the cautery not pass through the thinness of the skin. Then care for the cauterium with herbs and honey, and for the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
And when it is cauterized at something of swelling, which happens to the hand and foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves which move that limb: then it will move the swelling
But it does not necessarily follow that because of this it should be avoided, except for those who are learned in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves moving the body
When some part of the body is swollen and requires treatment with medicines, oils, and poultices, but does not heal, then cauterize the swollen part with cautery, according to the size of the part or its hardness. And let the cautery not pass through the thinness of the skin. Then care for the cauterium with herbs and honey, and for the rest of the treatment, until he is healed.
When the Albaras has subsided, and there is no sign of any healing from the medical arts: then cauterize over the deep cautery at once, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the white is removed and the color is changed
Then care for it with herbs and honey, and lentils with oil of rose, and arnica leaves, and columbine blood and hyssop blood: take a little of each. Mix these all together, and make a line over the wound, and bind it up in place, until he is healed
On the method of cauterization in Cancer.
When Cancer is beginning to form, and you wish to remove it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference, as it turns around.
Wise men, however, say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle
I do not see that; for I fear that it will ulcerate: and I have seen that happen many times before
It is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we said: or with multiple cauteries.
On the method of cauterization in Adubelati.
When someone has Adubelati, and it is delayed in maturation, or because of excessive fat, or because of age, or because of weakness, and wishes to hasten the maturation of the Adubelati: then cauterize around it with multiple small cauteries by puncturing Then remove the dressing For it will itself hasten with maturation
If you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then burn the cautery beforehand to this shape
And place it in the middle of the Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be below that which follows the infirmus, so as to alleviate the course of the wound.
Then care for it until it heals
On the method of cauterization in a corrupting tumor
Chapter LIV.
A wound is not harmless unless it be in an immobile limb, for it consumes itself: as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a wound consuming something which can bear the application of fire, then apply much fire, small and great blisters, according as it will be convenient in the place where the wound is consuming
Then burn it from all sides until you have eradicated the whole corruption, and let nothing remain of it inside or outside
Then keep it dry for three days, and apply above the burnt place powdered sulphur with oil, until all the scabs are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
Then care for it with nourishing unguents of flesh.
If therefore after three days new flesh has been born without corruption, it is good
And if not: then repeat the burning over that which remains of the corrupted parts
The wound is to be treated with acute medicine. It itself comes up in the place of the burn.
Indeed, the burning with fire is more rapid in healing: and I myself have said that the burning with medicine is in the proportion of two to one: take therefore two parts of the former and one part of the latter.
In this way burn in the Claw and in the Verucca.
Chapter LV
Many times this disease happens in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a great and widespread disease which damages the foot.
And the burning in this case is done in two ways: with fire and with hot water
As much as with fire, so too with the cautery iron must it be concaved like a feather quill: for it is made of iron, according to the quantity that contains the hand from all sides: and let the margins be slight.
Then place the flame above the hand. Then draw the hand with the cautery around the circumference of the hand, until the cautery reaches the depth of the hand: and leave it for three days, until pus begins to discharge from it. Then plaster the hand with sponges soaked in salt, and cover with a bandage: and leave the bandage on it overnight The cautery will thereby be eradicated from its roots
Then care for the place where the burn has been generated until it heals
If these are not concaved, and many times they happen on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply the cautery with warm water: and it is that you take a sponge of air, or iron, or feather quill: and place it on the hand, or over the wound.</start_of_turn> Then pour a small quantity of warm water into the sponge: hold your hand still, and draw the sponge with pressure from your hand downwards, so that the mark of the sponge be impressed at the root of the hand, and find the warm water to the depth of the hand: and expect the patient to remain still over the warmth of the warm water for an hour.</start_of_turn>
Then remove it, for the hand is eradicated with its roots.</start_of_turn>
Thus do with one after the other, until you reach all those which are from the cautery in the body.</start_of_turn>
Then care for them afterwards when they have been extirpated, when there is what generates flesh from the oozing.
Then care for them afterwards when they have been extirpated, when there is what generates flesh from the oozing.
When anything happens to cause tremor from cold in the nerve, or from the fourth fever, or anything like this: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cautery instruments, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize, and in the belly of it cauterize, and over the stomach cauterize.
The tremor will cease when it is cauterized with olive oil, and the health of the cold will return to normal.
The tremor will cease when it is cauterized with olive oil, and the health of the cold will return to normal
When anything happens to cause tremor from cold in the nerve, or from the fourth fever, or anything like this: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cautery instruments, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize, and in the belly of it cauterize, and over the stomach cauterize. The tremor will cease when it is cauterized with olive oil, and the health of the cold will return to normal.
When pus and matter are expelled from the body of Albathir, that is, large abscesses which arise from corrupted matter
It is necessary therefore at first when these appear to cauterize over every head of the abscess with fine cautery with a twig of myrrh whose extremity is kindled with fire Or with the root of long asparagus Or with needle cautery
And when they have been cauterized enough at the beginning of their discharge in this way: and they do not increase: and the superflux is broken, and they heal from the inside out
It is necessary to perform this after evacuation with a phlebotomy.
In the flow of blood from an artery to the wound.</start_of_turn>
Many things happen with the flow of blood from an artery which has been incised at the wound, which happens outside [the body], or at the incision of the afterbirth, or the cautery of the limb, and the like: and this makes it difficult to close them off.</start_of_turn
When this happens to anyone of them, then do it properly with your hand at the opening of the artery, and place over it your index finger: and tighten it much, until the blood is overcome under your finger, and does not escape from there anymore.</start_of_turn
Then place in the fire a small olive pomade, and many in number: and blow over them, until they are ignited gently.</start_of_turn
Then take from this one, or a little, or a lot, according to the wound and the place where the artery is ruptured, and place the cautery over that very place: and immediately move your finger away: and hold the cautery, until the blood is closed.</start_of_turn
And if it escapes when you lift your finger away from the opening of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those which are prepared in the fire.</start_of_turn
Do not cease doing this until the blood is closed.</start_of_turn
Be careful not to burn the nerve which is there, and do not leave any harmful malice on the wound.</start_of_turn
And know this, that when blood flows from an artery, it is impossible to clamp it off; especially when the artery is large, except with four fingers. Or as with a cautery, as we have said before. Or by extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities are contracted, and the blood is clamped off. Or it is bound with a strong ligature. Or there are placed upon it medicinal things which have the property of clamping off blood, and are bound with a proper constriction.
Whoever, however, performs an excision with a ligature, and tightens with a cloth, or positions the burning things, and the like, does not give him great pain, except rarely
If, however, this should happen to anyone, and there is no physician present, neither medicine: then one should begin by placing the index finger over the opening of the vein, as we have said, and constrict it tightly, until the blood is choked off above the part wounded, and above the artery And the finger should not be moved, but be kept in place with cold water or ice always, until the blood is congealed, and has become tough, and is clamped off
And meanwhile consider what is needed with a cautery, or with medicine
 On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and things like these.
As we said in the first chapter, every ailment in which it is expedient to use a cautery or burning medicine, and the occasions when it is necessary, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauteries.
And I place the heads from the vertex to the foot.
And I proceed in this chapter in the same way: as it is necessary to join what is severed.
Before I begin this, it is necessary to mention that which is in this chapter is from the error of that which is in the first chapter of cauterization
And because of this it is necessary to be cautious in this operation, because in this chapter there falls out a great amount of blood with the opening of the vein, or the incision of the apostema, or the opening of the orifice, or the cure of the wound, or the extraction of the arrow, or the incision of the stone, and such things: from all of which is associated with tremor and fear, and falls in many of them.
I remind you that it does not fall to you to be hesitant in this thing, for when they fall to you in this art as in the art of men so also in the art of sickness. From this it is known that he who is raging with his illness is light in spirit: because of the intensity of his ailment and the length of his suffering And when an illness is from fear, it signifies death.
From this it is known that he who gives the antidote and says to you to hope for health, while his ailment is mischievous.
It is not proper that you consent to him who comes to you from this thing, whose way is like that And be cautious above all of suddenness and harshness And do not presume of anything from this thing, except after a certain knowledge has been shown to you which confirms that it will bring about a successful outcome
And thus be used in the treatment of all women's ailments, in prognostication and indication of that which is convenient for health.
For in this lies help for you in the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, son, your intellect, and does not take away from you direction and inspiration: because it is in his hand
And I have set this chapter apart by chapters, according as it follows the chapter of Cauterization, from the navel until the feet: so that you may learn what you desire from this and what you need.
Of the treatment of water which collects in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
Know that this ailment often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without gentleness.
And sometimes it also happens for an occult cause which is not known
And I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than children: and wherever I have seen it in anyone else, it has disappeared: because of this, it seems to me that it is appropriate to omit the operation in this case
And I have also seen among children whose heads were filled with water, and whose heads would swell up every day, until they could no longer sit because of the size of their heads: and the moisture increased until they died
And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and the bone: or accumulates under the bone on the soft part
And the operation in this case, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the swelling is slight, then it is necessary to make a single fissure in the middle of the head, about the length of two knots, so that the moisture may drain out
This is the form of a sponge.
If there is too much moisture in the [wound], and the swelling is great, then make two incisions according to this form.
If the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that the fluid bursts open the hair all around: and the water is driven out when you press your hand inside, and it does not remain hidden: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And after the incision, remove all the moisture Then suture the incisions with threads and wool Then leave it covered with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligament, and care for the wound with tension and caressing.
And do not make the head tight. And feed the patient with dry food with little moisture, until the limb is comfortable and healed
And another method of incision is to consider the size of the swelling and the collection of water
For sometimes it is in the occiput more, or in the eyebrow, or in the right, or in the left
Go up therefore with the incision where you see the swelling and the collection of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you
And observe, that you do not cut an artery, and that there is no flow of blood, and that the patient does not die from that flow with the evacuation of the moisture.
As for the incisions of the arteries that are behind the ears.
Chapter II.
When any swelling occurs in the eyes or the chest, and the condition persists without benefit from medical treatment: then the last remedy in such a case is the incision of both arteries.
It is necessary therefore when one wishes to make an incision, that he should seize the patients head firmly Then grasp the place with rough cloth so that the arteries become visible. Then tighten the patients neck with whatever cloth is available to him Consider where the vein is pulsating And the places where both of them are found are those which are behind the ears which are depressed: and they are rarely hidden except in some people.
Then mark with a branding iron upon each of them: and cut both of them with a lancet as sharp as possible, cutting through to the bone: and do this through the breadth of the head.
And if you wish, introduce a sponge under the artery, and cut upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with the pulsation, which jumps inside with great frequency.
If however the artery does not appear to be sensible, then it is necessary to measure from the ear to the quantity of three fingers space. Then mark with a branding iron, and find until bone.
And that which must be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less is emitted from it Throughout this is according to the quantity which appears to you from the patients vomiting and the filling of the artery itself.
Then consider the vein. Then if something remains on the bone from the incision, then cut that away, so that it does not cause a thick scab: then bind the vein with threads from linen cloth.
Then care for it with oil until it heals.
As for the extraction of arteries, which are in the temporary condition.
Chapter III.
When a man has an old wound of the head, or acute catarrh of the eyes caused by bitter humilities and heat in the lacerations of the times, or old salt, or urine, or similar things: and when they are treated with the methods of medical treatment, and not confirmed: then we are experts in extracting arteries from the times, or cauterizing them, as we have narrated.
And the method of the operation for extracting them is that the surgeon shaves the hair that is in the times, and then approaches the apparent artery in the time. It itself is shown to you by its pulse, and rarely is it hidden except in a few people, or by excessive cold.
If it is hidden, then the surgeon ties the head of the vein with whatever he has: then he rubs the place with rough linen cloth Or he boils the place with hot water, until the vein appears visibly Then take a hook, which is like that which I have previously described. Then scrape with it the skin with ease, until you reach the artery Then cut into the vein, and draw it upwards, until you have extracted it from the skin, and make the vein retract from all sides
If the artery is slender: then enclose it with the extremity of a ligature. Then cut from it the part which extends as much as the extremities of the ligature, and tighten, and do not permit the flow of blood to proceed. For if it is not cut and if it is not bound off, the blood does not ascend fully.
Then evacuate from the blood six ounces, up to three ounces.</start_of_turn>
If the artery is large: then it is necessary that you bind the two extremities of the ligature from double silk, strong, from silk: or from hemp cord, so that it does not become putrefied before the wound is consolidated, and that the flow of blood proceeds.</start_of_turn>
Then cut off the excess, which is between the two ligatures.</start_of_turn> Do this in an hour, or after an hour.</start_of_turn>
And if necessary, cauterize the artery with a cautery until bone, with a knife cautery: until the extremities of the ligature are incised, and it is stable in the place of the work.</start_of_turn>
And it is better to do the work when the patient has a low fever, or one with a pale complexion.</start_of_turn For the cautery is from a substance that dries up humors.</start_of_turn> Therefore it is better to apply a dressing.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, that the place be covered with dry lint: and put upon it feathers of a fowl around the work.</start_of_turn
And after the completion of the work, care for it with dry physicians, which make the meat grow, and with compresses, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If during the operation blood flows from an artery, then promptly bind it off with cautery, or place a plug in the opening: and suspend your hand until the bleeding stops. If neither of these is present, then place over the site of the digit your hand, until the bleeding stops. And immerse the site with cold water, until the pain subsides, and tighten according as necessary
And from this, that which is more gentle and easier for the extraction of the artery, is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two blades: and let the pain of the two blades be like an almond Truly, these are much less painful than two blades. For if they are acute, like two blades, they prepare both [the artery and vein] with cold: and do not bite the flesh with speed When there is somewhat of thickness in this, it is held in the palm of the hand with the heat of fire, and the flesh is quickly severed: with this therefore the work is better in every way, gentler and easier
This is the form of the cautery.
And let the space that is between the two blades be equal to the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two points with the cautery: and withdraw both flames until they reach the bone, and pierce the vein in two places: so that the length which is between the extremities of the vein is elongated For with this cautery the vein does not coagulate completely.
Chapter III.
Take care of the sharp tears of the eyes which are constant from the eyes.
When tears are excessively abundant, and their course exceeds the upper part of the head, and do not confer any benefit with the aid of medicine, and stain the face of the patient red, and he feels a sensation of wandering in his front, like the wandering of ants: and his eyes are dilated, humid, as though they are corroded, for the hairs of his eyelashes are corroded along with the corrosion; and his eyelids are inflamed from the intensity of the tears: then the ancients deemed it appropriate to intervene in their treatment by means of an operation, and they named this treatment "Ense.
And it is appropriate to pluck the hairs that are on his front.</start_of_turn> Then make three equal incisions on the front, according to the length of the front: and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and let one incision be at an equal distance from the length of the nose in the middle of the front, and the second according to the length of the prominence of the lacerations, and the third from the other side: and take care to avoid the arteries that are on both sides. And extend your hand from the continuation of your two mandibles, and let the space of the incision be as much as three fingers together. And let there be prepared a sponge or dry sponge, with which to soak up the blood.</start_of_turn>
Then introduce the sponge with two sharp extremities, whose following shape is like that.</start_of_turn From the incision on the temporal side, up to the second incision: and scrape with it the whole skin that is between the two incisions, with salt, which is over the bone.</start_of_turn Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision.</start_of_turn Then extract the sponge, and introduce into the first incision a different instrument, which is called the acute cultellare, from one blunt end, not from the acute end. This is its shape.
And place the acute end towards the flesh with the attached skin and the blunt end towards the bone: and push it in until it reaches the middle incision: and cut through everything that descends from the head to the eyes: except that which continues from the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision until you reach the other incision.
And when the bleeding has ceased, express the clots from the wound
Then place in every incision a patch of old cotton, and place upon these soaked sponges in wine, and oil, or vinegar And take care that there be no formation of a cold abscess
And on the third day strengthen the ligament, and give a plentiful infusion with warm water. Then take care of the basic wound, and the rest of the wounds which need healing: until they are healed
Chapter V.
And take care of the acute tears of the eyes from the inside of the head.
When some acute, acrid, and sticky catarrhs occur: and you see the eyes extended, parched, and the sight is blurred: and the eyelids ulcerated, and hair falling out from the eyelashes, and there is severe pain in the depth of the head, with sneezing following: then take note of these signs, for these matters and the catarrhs do not come from these substances alone, except from many tears
The best treatment for wounds is this. The best is that you shave the front of the wound from the root. Then make a single incision in the middle of the front, or on the other side according to the width, and commence the incision from the left side towards the right side: and let the incision reach the bone: and stretch your hand away from the teeth, which move during chewing: until the bone is revealed. And dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the wound with a piece of cotton wool, or with strips of linen cloth Then tie above with threads: and soak the threads with wine and oil, so that they do not cause a cold abscess
And when you have finished, and you see that the abscess is diminishing: then it is necessary to anoint the bone, until the flesh begins to grow there anew
Then care for it with the regimen of drying which makes the flesh grow: thus as if you took two parts of barley and four parts of colophony, and prepared from these a plaster, and administered to these wounds.
Chapter VI
And in summer care for it
All things that fall in summer are of four kinds: either a mineral substance, or one like stone, such as iron and copper; or it is a plant, such as lentil and bean; or it is a fluid, such as water, vinegar, and blood; or something akin to it.
When such a substance falls in summer, that is not derived from earth, nor does it grow in summer, it exposes the summer sun: if you pour oil on the stone, then distill from the oil something from vinegar or urine. Then perform the extraction forthwith, and make the patient sit upright with his head supported. Then pour oil into the nostrils close to the point of discharge of the wound, after you have placed around the ear a plug of cotton wool or wool, and have extended the ear upwards.
Many are the things that are done with this care.
If this does not suffice, then perform the extraction forthwith with sponges, that is, fine sponges: whose form is like this.
If they do come out with the sponge, that is good.
And if not, then perform the extraction forthwith with a blunt needle of small diameter.
If these do not come out with that, then make a hole in the air, and insert the extremity of the cannula into the ear very much, and pour oil around the cannula with powdered plaster, so that there be no air remaining except that which is in the cannula: then draw out with your hand with great force
Many are the things that are done with this care. If these methods do not suffice: take from barley or wheat flour, that is, ground barley, with which you thicken soups: and put it on the extremity of the radius after you have wrapped around the thumb the lower part of the wrist: then insert it into the ear with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If these things do not come out, then prepare to make an incision, before the swelling becomes severe, or a spasm occurs.
And the manner of making the incision is like that of a phlebotomy in the forearm: and draw out from the blood according to the measure of his virtue. Then make the patient sit between your hands, and support his ear upwards, and find the wound alongside the fat in the hollow of the ear: and make the incision in a crescent shape, until you reach the bone: then remove it with the instrument.
Then seal the wound from this hour until it heals.
If a foreign body has fallen into the wound from a piece of barley that has sprouted and swelled: then perform its extraction then.
If it does not yield to evacuation, then take a small, fine sponge, according to this fashion.
And perform the excision with it of that kind of grain which has fallen into the wound, and do not leave it there, when you know that it is wet with earwax, until you put a lot of cotton over it: then extract it with forceps, or with a gentle hand, or with a suction, as we have said, for its extraction will alleviate it.
And when water enters the wound, the patient must keep vomiting until the condition is better: and immediately apply a bandage to the wound with some old cotton: and it lies upon the wound where the water is. If it comes out through this, that is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of a finger, tight, soft, and heat them with fire from below, and let the patient pass it through his ear hole: and salt his foot on one side, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the wound. Do not cease doing this with the stone and the stone until all the water has come out.
And when the water comes out like this, take from the fire, or from a sponge, one extremity and introduce it into the wound: and kindle the other extremity with fire, until most of it is burned up And do it again with another sponge, and do this many times, until all the water has come out: and extract it with a tube according to what has been said in the stone
In extractione autem animalis intrantis in eam, si est parui corporis, ut pulex, et ei simile, cura ipsum sicut dixi in diuisione.
In the extraction of an animal that is inside the body, if its body is small, like a flea, and is similar to it, take care of it as I said in the previous discussion.
When the worm has been generated in the belly and you have treated it as we have said in the previous discussion and in the treatise on distillation, and if you do not confer cure, then you must touch the belly only. If anything appears there from the worms, then extract it with the hand, or with fine tweezers.
If nothing appears there, then take a needle whose form is like this, narrow below and wide above: and introduce the blunt end into the belly according to the capacity which the sick person tolerates: then draw out with that strong suction Do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
If they do not obey you in coming out, then smear around the circumference of the needle with grease, as I said in the stone
When they do not come out as we have said: then perform distillations which the ancient experts have learned for the interception of worms: and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be like the effusion of oil and medicines into the belly with this instrument whose form is depicted here Like the way you make it from silver or from air, narrow below and wide above, in which there is a small hole, wide above
Let the driving force that is in the curvature of the needle be made from air from the center If so be it, grasp the radius and immerse its extremity in the cottum of the solution: then pour oil, or succum, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the cannula: and let it remain there. Then introduce the radius with the cottum above and express it with your hands compression until the oil is driven into the auditory canal and the patient feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear should be heated with fire at a low heat: and beware lest anything be distilled in the ear when it is cold: for medicine tolerates not this.
Chapter VII.
If so be it, grasp the radius and immerse its extremity in the bottom of the solution: then pour oil, or succum, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the cannula: and let it remain there. Then introduce the radius with the solution above and express it with your hands compression until the oil is driven into the auditory canal and the patient feels it inside: and that which is poured into the ear should be heated with fire at a low heat: and beware lest anything be distilled in the ear when it is cold, for medicine tolerates not this.
When some children emerge from the birth canal uninjured.
And sometimes occurs also that some people suffer from hair in the ear from a wound, or from flesh born in it.
And this hair sometimes happens in the deep cavity of the ear, as it does not usually happen: and sometimes it happens outside the cavity of the ear slightly, and it usually happens thus.
That which happens in the deep ear, and which does not comprehend the aspect, is in many situations difficult to heal
And in that which happens thus, it is necessary to put the ear of the patient on fire only, and to touch it: then if you see the hair appearing, open the ear with a fine spatula, whose form is like this which follows, so that its extremity is in which there is a slight width, whose some part is acute: and the rest of the spatula is smooth: so as not to injure the ear
If any swelling has arisen from meat of the ear: then hold one finger under the skin, and cut through with ease until the whole flesh is removed.
If the swelling is deep in the ear: then take a fine needle, thread it, and cauterize with fire: then remove it from the flesh of the ear.
If you feel swelling along with pain, which comes from an infirm person with a heavy deafness, try to open it with ease: and cut through, so as not to damage the nerves of the ear.
Then put in the ear a compress according to the quantity of the opening which you have made in the incision: do this for a few days, until you are certain that the wound has healed
Or take a compress, and moisten it in rose-water, and sprinkle upon it powdered alum, and use it.
If you have put in the ear some remnant of pus: then it is necessary that you remove the compress, and allow another compress to be put in, which has been made with rose-water, until the swelling has gone down: then care for it until it is healed
If blood flows: then submerge a sponge, or pack wool in cold water, and put on the ear: and use the remaining treatment which expels the said blood-flow according to the treatise on distillation
About the care of the eyelids of Al-Thaili.
Chapter 8.</start_of_turn>
These are the things that cause Al-Thaili to swell in the eyelids, when they are wet and when they are dry.
It is necessary therefore to hold them with nails: or with a finger, and cut through with ease from their roots Then place upon the wound a layer of cheese.
If blood flows from the wound, then cauterize it with a fine needle cautery.</start_of_turn>
And cauterization is better after the incision.</start_of_turn> Many things indeed return when something remains of their roots.</start_of_turn And when cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the care of the great palpebrae of the eye.</start_of_turn>
Chapter IX.</start_of_turn
Many things happen in the palpebrae of something which assimilates with Crandinus in its magnitude, its hardness, and because of this it is called Grand: and it is an aggregation of gross humidity in the upper and lower palpebrae.</start_of_turn
The operation therefore is like this, as you see, if there is a Grand proceeding from the palpebra, which appears from the palpebra and moves to every part, and its result is easy.</start_of_turn
Find therefore above the fissure for the width.</start_of_turn Then scrape away the whole thing with ease until it bleeds.</start_of_turn Then suspend the wound with a suture, and cut it off.</start_of_turn
If however it is not prepared for you to cut, except when you penetrate the palpebra with a small incision, then it is harmful to the sick in some way.</start_of_turn
If the incision is large: then gather it together with a suture: and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If it is small, it will not bring any harm from it. The ointment will restore the limb itself and heal the wound.
If it is great, it inclines towards the inner parts of the ear towards the surface, then turn the lid, and suspend the large quantity with a single thread: except that you do not wish to make an incision, and press from all sides.
And if the lid is prolonged by incision, it does not harm in any way
Then wash the eye after the incision of the large quantity, with salt water: and take care of the place with it that is inccised, until the infirmity is healed
As for the care of the eyelids...
Chapter X.
The scab that is formed on the upper eyelid is called Axirnath: and this most often happens to children: and it weighs down the eyes of them, and causes mucus to collect in the mornings, and they are unable to see the sun, because the tears run down to them, and because of this their eyes are always moist over their face, and over their eyes they sleep, and their eyelids are always wet under their eyebrows: and the prominence of Axirnath appears in the eye, and when you press on it with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between them.
And the way to treat it is to put the patient's head in your lap
Then take a piece of linen, and prepare it with oil, and make from it a circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from all sides Then place it over the eye, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that humidity with the stamper applied there are incisions made for the width, and let there be no incision greater than that which is made in phlebotomy at depth.
Or it may happen that you must find the whole skin, until you reach Axirnath in the midst of many arrangements of things, for Axirnath comes out from the incision following the shape of the white crust of bread.</start_of_turn>
Extract therefore the blood with the sponge which you have infiltrated between your fingers outwards: and you turn your hand to the right and left, until it is dispersed: and take heed, lest you add anything to the incision, lest you reach the eye with the stamper, and damage it.</start_of_turn>
If however Axirnath does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you add a little at the incision with ease, until Axirnath proceeds.</start_of_turn> Then extract the blood as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Then soak the sponges in vinegar and water, and put them on the place, and bind them with threads.</start_of_turn>
And from men there are some who pour salt there, and put it in the hollow of the incision, so that the moisture remaining from that humidity will liquefy.</start_of_turn
Then take care of it until it heals.</start_of_turn
If however a thick blood clot occurs in the place of the stamper, take care of it with soothing compresses, until it heals.</start_of_turn
As for the way of treating the eye, that is, when the eyelashes are softened, from which it results that the eye shines like it should not.</start_of_turn
Chapter 11.</start_of_turn>
When the hairs on the eyelashes are added beyond their normal course among the natural hairs, and when they become numerous: then they themselves harm the eye, causing the discharge of tears, the softening of the eyelids, and inflammation, until such time as the cause of the destruction of the eye is produced.
The eye is treated according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as has been previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery Or by Ataxmir through incision and suture Or by cannas, as I shall say
You must place the head of the patient in your lap Then grasp the eyelid of the eye with your left hand
If it turns white, it is good And if not: insert the needle through the fold of the eyelid, where the hair arises, and let the needle penetrate with the thread, and place it close to the eyelashes, that is, at the margin of the eyelid where the eyelashes arise: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and suture the wound with the thread.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added eyelashes with a sponge, the matter which has escaped from the greater lachrymal gland up to the lesser lachrymal gland.
Then draw out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cotton wool or gauze: then close the eyelid with a suture, which should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf
However it is necessary to know that this figure is to be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for this varies in men.
From the eye inward is he who demands that an incision be made from the eyelashes as much as is necessary, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelashes.
Then when the sponge has been found above two lines which you have marked, and you have begun from the greater lacrimal gland up to the lesser lacrimal gland, and there is one incision near the natural eyelashes, as is the thickness of a radius
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape the whole thing off Then gather together with two sutures the two lips, with a needle and a fine thread: and bleed away the blood, and cause to adhere what is superfluous from the threads over two eyebrows, with some useful things, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not worry
Then let go of the suture and the thread for three days, or four: afterwards care for it
And if you wish, let go of the wound without a suture, and care for it like that, which will dry up and contract. For the eyelashes are raised towards the sealing of the wound and the gathering of it: but the future is better.
Thus the old doctors taught of Ataxmir.
But indeed in this is solicitude over the infirm, and it is from a good operation, and not in this is there any fear.
And another way is in Ataxmir also: and it is that the sign on the eyelid should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate hooks, or gathered together, according to the form of this which follows, and then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors, according to the form, with equality of the incision.
If, however, it is not possible to retain the hook, and it does not suffice: then grasp the point where the thread lies and introduce it into the middle of the figure. And introduce another thread near the larger tear and another near the smaller tear: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then elevate your hand with an equal elevation: and elevate the skin above that which is signed with the mark of the cut, as we have narrated
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with the suture: and care for it until it is healed.
If, however, swelling occurs at the incision or the wound: hold that swelling with the cauter, and with like things, from the settled unguents.
And when the eyelashes also swell, as their hairs turn.
It is necessary therefore that you should use what we have said concerning the incision: but the sutures in both places are artificial. Of the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is that you cover the eyelash, and split the wound which is inside, according as I have narrated Then make two needles, or two thin sticks: of which the length is according to the length of the eyelash, and the width of them is less than the width of the pupil: and you will insert them at the extremities from both sides where you have the thread.
Then gather together both things with slightness over that which remains from the eyelash of the eye, and string two needles from both sides firmly, and let go of it every few days. The skin, therefore, being tightly closed, will die, and become black, and putrefy, until it falls away by itself
If it tarries, then at that time cut with the shears. Then care for it until it heals.
When it solidifies, elevate the eye: and do not prick the hair
This is the form of two needles which you make according to this figure, and in length and breadth.
Chapter XII.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the elevation of the hairs pricked in the eye with the needle
The operation in this is that you take a fine needle and introduce it through the silk thread, which is fine Then you gather its extremities and knot both ends with a fine knot: and let the length of the thread be one palm
Then make another fine knot on the thread under this one in a short space, and knot the extremities of this.
Then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it rest against your chest so that the operation is evident: because the operation is slight, or even insignificant.</start_of_turn>
Then introduce the needle with the knot at the root of the eye, and make it penetrate the eye quickly, until you have extracted the natural hair from above.
Then draw out the hair until above the knot: and introduce the needle into the knot with the hair: if there is one, or two, or three, not more.</start_of_turn
Then draw your hand away with it, until the hair comes out with the knot in the eye with the natural hair.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the knot is drawn out and the hair does not come out with it: draw out the knot downwards, with the thread which you made in it, until the knot comes out through the upper hole, and without causing any damage to the eye: then you draw out the knot and the thread, and close the eye: and keep it closed for two days, or three, until the hair has grown back in its place and has sprouted on the surface of the flesh.</start_of_turn
If the hair is short, either associate it with a long hair from natural hair, and elevate it with it: or let it go, until it has grown out, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called the Leporina.
This condition is either natural or accidental
Accidental, therefore, is due to the consolidation of a wound, or a section, or a cauterization, and the like
The method of treatment for this is to find the consolidation and to separate its lips, and to place between them a layer of linen, and to bind them until it is healed
And do not use in the treatment of this that which will irritate and harden it: for if you do, the Alxatrata will become worse than before: rather use those things which soften it, such as barley straw: and mix with water, in which is soaked wheat, seed of flax: and unguent of oil, which is liquefied with some oil: and apply with it the bandage.
And your skill in treatment is, that you prepare everything with ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate, according to the form which was in the beginning
And this operation which we mentioned is not except for some rectification of the Alxatrata, so that it does not return to its original form
Of the care of the Alxatrata which happens in the lower eyelid, and is rustling or contraction upwards to the right and left
Chapter 123.
This lower part which is called the Alxatrati is truly named after the Alxatrati. And it is natural, and is accidental.
And it is accidental from a wound, or a fracture, or a burn, or things like these
And the way of operation in this is that you take hold of the point where there is a double thread, and you pass the loop through the flesh from the left lachrymal to the right lachrymal, until the thread passes through both extremities of the flesh
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle, and cut the vein with a broad scalpel If the edge of the eyelid returns to its normal position as it should be, that is good.
And if not, grasp the radix and place it in the wound, and secure it with it: and find two holes in the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two holes go from two angles of the incision, until they meet and make an angle: until when they gather together make the figure of this letter "L".
Then remove the flesh by the amount which is the width of its obtuse lower angle, from that which follows the eyelid. Then unite the separated parts: sew them with a thread.
Then care for them as we have said, of soothing medicines and compresses, until they are healed.
And if the Alxatrati comes from a fracture, and a suture, or a burn: then it is necessary to find a flat wound under the eyelashes, even as before Then separate between two lips with a sliver, as we have said.
Then perform the operation according to the treatment of Alxatra, when it is above or below, that is, as is prepared from the form of Alxatra.
For there are many varieties in the form: and the prudent artist prepares the skill in whatever way is possible for him, until he brings the figure to a natural shape, or almost so, and the patient himself, according as it suits him from the operation and the instruments in many arrangements
Chapter 15.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
When this adhesion happens to many people, it is like the consolidation of the upper eyelid with the white of the eye, and it hinders its natural operations.
Therefore one must introduce the tip of the radius under the eyelid, and raise it up: or extend it with a hook: then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which should not be as sharp as the cutting edge of the scalpel, but rather blunt and low: so that it does not irritate the patient during the operation, and the tissue returns to its natural shape, and the adhesion is completely healed.
Then pour salt-water into the eye, when you have washed it out: or instill it from a vial containing ground pearls dissolved in water.
Then separate between the lip and the eye with a sliver of linen: and put on the eye a fleece soaked in alum or wool: and on the third day use a sponge, and solid dressings, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh for tears.
On the incision of the nail and the prominence of flesh for tears.
You know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is fleshy: and it is like soft earth, fine. Or it is not nervous, like frozen white moisture: which when it touches iron, or when you attempt to grasp it with a nail, it breaks and does not remain in it.
Neither of these two kinds begins, except from greater tears, until it has gradually gone round, until it covers the useful thing, and blocks light, and the movement of the eye
And the manner of working in its incision is: that you place your sickly head in your hand Then open its eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand. Then gather the nail with a nail of few doublings, and stretch it upwards. Then take the needle, and introduce it through the hair of the horse, and hair, or thread: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and ligate the nail with the thread, and stretch it upwards: and remove the surrounding hair around the pupil, as if you were shaving it until the last of it
Then make the rest of the incision at the root of the tear with a fine scalpel, or with small scissors: and let go of the natural flesh of the tear, so that it does not flow excessively from the incision.
And when the nail is extended with a nail alone: or with thread, as we said Then it is to be scraped out with a blunt spatula of gentle curvature, the form of which is this.
Take care not to tear the delicate membrane of the bladder, and insert the spatula until a perforation is made through the pupil
After the incision, pour in some powdered salt or mix from barley and release it until tomorrow. Then keep it clean and dry until it heals
If the nail is insensitive and not liable to irritate the membrane, neither does it bulge out in it, then it is to be treated with multiple medicines, and will heal as I have said before
If you wish to make an incision in it, then open the wound of the patient, and grasp the bladder cautiously with a fine and gentle spatula, of the kind whose shape is this And remove the nail above the root with dexterity and skill If it is to be applied for a long time and becomes softened and broken, and leaves a mark in the membrane, then pour from this hour until tomorrow from barley or from red pepper or salt, and bathe the eye until tomorrow
Then repeat the operation until all of its parts are restored to their proper places Unless there remains in the eye a soft swelling: then indeed release it and care for the swelling until it heals
Then repeat the operation again with greater reason until it heals
However, if the prominence of the tear duct causes great discomfort in the eye, it is to be sutured with a fine needle, and cut from it a part of it: do not make the last incision, lest the flow of tears be obstructed
Then remain still in the tearful eye until it becomes red, or until it is healed.
Since the incision of the Alguardenic [iris], and the native flesh in the eye.
Chapter 17.
Sometimes in the eyes of men, red flesh is composed or superposed, covering the pupil, approaching or tightening over the eyelashes, and sometimes turning the eyelashes outwards: and it is like a rose petal.
And the operation in this is also like placing the diseased head in your lap Then open his eyes, and collect all the flesh with the hooks that are suitable for this: and hold it with one forceps, or with the hand
Then cut the flesh at first, until the whole of it is finished with the knife And burn away from the eye, so that you do not damage it during the operation: and make your incision as we said in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the fat is collected, as it will appear after this head
When your incision is complete, and you have moved away all the Alguardenic, then put the eye out of salt and vinegar: or distill into it a coarse powder of red, and similar things from the physicians who have corroded: and put over the eye a bandage of wool or lint: so as to secure it from the heat of the afterburn
And if anything remains of the Alguardenic, and blood becomes hot, and the afterburn is strong: then let go of the eye, and care for it until the afterburn has ceased
Then return over it with the operation, until it is healed
And similarly do as when meat is added which occurs in the eye from this kind.
And truly it is necessary that other care for the whole eye be excluded from both natural causes and accidental causes, working with iron: and do not introduce your hand into any of these operations until you have ascertained that the limb can tolerate that operation.
Concerning the collection of fat from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Fat is a red marrow which covers the eye, and prevents the moisture from doing its work: and it weakens the eye with the length of days.
It is therefore necessary that you first consider whether the eye in which there is fat is strong and not affected by any other ailment apart from the fat: then collect the fat from it
And it is necessary to keep the head still in your hand
Then suspend those veins with one needle or two according to your prudence: and let the needle be thin twice the diameter, according to this form, or two needles are placed into the body together, according to this form.
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with caution, and drain the blood every hour until you have removed the veins from the eye and they have dissolved: and take care not to damage the eye with the tips of the forceps
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your work: lest you burn anything except the veins
And when you are finished, then instill in the eye a little oil, or red: so that its sharpness may dissolve what remains of the fat.
If it is not possible to collect the whole of it in this hour, then plaster the eye with this, which will soothe the eye pain: and leave it for a few days until the pain has subsided: and keep it warm from the after-effect; then repeat over it in the same manner until it is healed.
This is the form of the scissors.
On the reduction of the swelling of the nose
Chapter XIX
Physicians call the swelling of the nose a Fistula, which they cure with cautery or with acute medicine containing burning substances, as they have mentioned previously concerning it
And if it does not heal, then there is no wisdom in it: except that you find an abscess on the swelling at its origin, and extract the entire moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed
When the bone is thus exposed, and the matter is corrupted, or blackened, then cauterize it with an instrument of this shape
This is called the cautery of the head
Make it from iron without any hole, and let its head be round like an egg, which is pierced with the point of a lime or with a needle and a fine puncture: and place it over the corrupted place of the bone
Then draw it out between your fingers, and press your hand lightly nearby, until you know that the corruption has gone away: and do it again.
Then restore the place with external astringents
If thus the place is solidified, and there is formed in it flesh, and the swelling subsides: and there remains no redness, no swelling, and no pain in it: then you know that it is healed
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion. If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion
If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion If not, then it is not in this faculty [of surgery], except to reduce the swelling to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion
The manner of handling the testicles is as follows: take many soft and numerous bulges, and double each bulge from four: make many from these: then place one upon another, according to the quantity required for the eye: then bind them together with a strong bandage.
Repeat the process with the closed wounds without causing any cuts.
Then remove the swellings, and keep the eye tightly closed day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, it is necessary to bind it tightly: then remove the ligament after a day and night, as we have said
If, therefore, the eye has again bled from the veins, that is good: and if not, repeat the dressing, the bulges, the bandage, and the binding until the eye is healed.
Of the incision of the vein of the tunica.
Chapter XXI.
When a disruption occurs in the vein of the tunica, then it will protrude and proceed outside the eyelids like a grain of the vein, and will be damaged in the form of a man by this: and it is necessary to make an incision in this: then the operation in this is as we have said, and it is that you introduce the needle into the root of the vein from the lower part to the upper part
Then introduce another needle in which the double thread is found, and make it penetrate: and remove the first needle according to its position.
Then make an incision at the place of the double thread, and bind the part of the vein around the needle with the thread: and bind the thread tightly
Then remove the needle, and place above the eye a wool soaked in alum: and leave it until the thread has come out with the vein.
Then care for the eyes while they are comfortable, until the wound has healed.
When the wound has been bound about with a circle of cloth from all sides, until the eye regains its natural elevation.
Then make an incision with a fine needle, which will reach the depth of the eye, and apply moisture of albumin, and the eye will sink down, and insert at once: then bind it up until it heals.
On the care of the cornea.
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
This ailment which is called Alcomnati, is not anything other than health which has gathered in the eye, similar to water which descends and is not itself.</start_of_turn>
And the way to deal with it is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of his head with your hands from both sides, and move it until you feel the health coming down to the lower parts of your eyes.</start_of_turn Then remain still, and do not descend, and open your eyes: and the patient will see as well as before: and if it does not descend downwards, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
If however the descent of the health is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands.</start_of_turn Then take a fine needle and find with it above the corneal membrane a part of the conjunctiva close to the cornea in a circle, until the health comes out.</start_of_turn
When it has come out, then instill in the eye lukewarm water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have ground barley and honey: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of water which descends into the eye, or a cataract.
Concerning the care of water which descends into the eye, or a cataract.
We have already spoken of the various kinds of water which descend into the eye, and which cause the symptom of perforation which the declarer and explainer have mentioned. Take this into consideration accordingly for the sake of health.
Therefore it is necessary that you should make the sick man sit with his back to the light, close to the lamp: and bind his healthy eye firmly, and stretch out the other eye: if the eye which has the water in it is the left eye, then take the right hand; or if the eye which has the water in it is the right eye, then take the left hand
Then take your right hand with the thumb, if the left eye is the one which has the water in it: or take your left hand if the right eye is the one which has the water in it
Then place the tip of your thumb close to the rim of the eyeball at the level of the apparent lower lacrimal gland: then push the thumb with force: and you will see that the thumb has gone right through the membrane of the eye: and you will feel that the thumb has passed through to the bottom of the eye.
And it is necessary that the measure of the distance of the thumb from the pupil to the end of the black circle: is the circumference of the eye You will see this in the pupil of the eye by the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the thumb until it reaches the place where the water is Then press the lower eyelid downwards one after the other.
If thus water descends immediately, then the patient will immediately close that which he has opened, and the thumb in his eye
Then rest a little while. If water flows down, then place the sponge second, before it flows out through the opening.
When it is finished and does not rise: then draw out the sponge easily: and you will gradually move your hand back
Then dissolve in water some of the clear salt crystals: and wash with it until the eye is clean Then put over the eye the whole bandage, or wool soaked in rosewater, and alum: and bind with it the healthy eye
But we who are of this time put on the eye a plaster of pounded gypsum with alum.
If it does not obey the sponge at the entrance of the eye on account of its hardness, because it is from a man whose eye is hard and cold: then you must take a sponge which is called Alberid, which has this shape.
Wash with it as well as with the hand, together: and do not put your hand into the hole: and do not do anything except make the sponge reach the bottom of the eye.
Then put in the sponge, as we have said
And in addition to that, prepare for the patient a soft bed, made in the center of the room, in which he may lie on his back in a dark room: and prevent all movements, and from coughing: and give him to eat something which will soften his nature: and do not move his head to the right or the left at all
And let the dressing remain in place according to its position until the third day
Then take it out of that dark room, and make an examination of his eye: and make him drink something Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
Then do not make it in the hour of treatment, nor immediately after incision: rather, it is necessary that something else should hold it in place: for otherwise water ascends quickly through the gaping wound.
If, however, there is a soft swelling: then it is necessary that you wash the eye before the seventh day: and straighten it when it is settled with that which rests it: then when it is settled, hold it in place with the mouth above it as much as is necessary for a few days, while it exists in that dark chamber
Then go out of the house gradually, and settle in their own cases.
Know that in the bath a student should not be without sight for a long time: then indeed he will hear about the operation.
And indeed it has happened to us some from the Alayrach people, who said that a perforation had been made in the magdan of Alayrach, through which water flows
But indeed we have not seen anyone in our land who has done this: nor have we read of it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that this is something new
And these are the forms of spirits of the magda, as they rest upon it who knows them not.
Be of air itself: and their extremities are like those of a triangle, and their peak is acute
Chapter XXIII.
On the care of the newborn flesh in the nose
When the Carnes flesh is born in the nose, various things are added to it from which something is assimilated like the claws of many feet: and from this there is a cancerous tumor, a stone, of a dusky color: and from this there is what is soft flesh, not of a dusky color.
If there is anything fleshy in these meats which is soft, not fraudulent, neither cancerous, you must cause the sick person to sit between your hands facing the sun, and open his nostrils, and expel the wind from those meats: then draw them outwards, and cut whatever you have apprehended from them with a fine and sharp knife from one side, until you know that the whole flesh has been excised.
If anything remains of that from whose excision is impossible: then cut that with a fine instrument until nothing remains of it. If, however, blood dominates it, or a thick pus arises: then oppose to it that which is expedient: either from malignant pus, then cauterize it until the blood is separated, and remove all the flesh.
Then expel through the nose after the incision of the flesh, and water, or liquid. If, however, the nostrils open, and there proceeds from it moisture up to the palate, then you know that he is already healed.
If indeed the moisture does not penetrate, according to what is expedient, then you know that the flesh has remained in the upper bones of the nose, which did not come out with the incision of the instrument.
Then therefore it is expedient to insert a thread of fine silk which has some thickness, and to tie in it many knots: and place between every knot as much as a digit, or less: and the patient will vomit, so that he sends out one extremity of the thread through the nose with a sound, until it has passed through to the epiglottis, and has gone out through his throat
And many do the like of this like Attomus the boy in school: and it is an easy thing for him who wishes it to be.
Then place two extremities of the finger, one which goes out over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then bind the flesh around the knots which are in the finger Do this until you know that the flesh is now bound around the knots of the finger.
Then draw out the thread: and put it in the nose after bleeding has ceased. Give it three days, or more, until the unguent has eaten away everything that remains of the flesh
Then put in the end of the matter in the nose a lead cannula for a few days, until it is healed.
If, however, more treatment is required, use this.
For the head-purging, when oil and other medicines are distilled in the nose, do this from silver or brass: which is like a small lamp, open like a conch shell: and the space of its meatus is like that of barley
And if you wish to make a closed cannula, like a tube.
And the cannula for the head-purging should be full, closed: which has a handle at its end, with which you will hold it, when you heat it in oil, or what you wish from succus, and the contents that flow out.
Chapter XXV.
Many swellings of the Thelul of the nose are born in the extremity of the nose, and they grow and increase with the days, until the aspect of the wound is changed
And therefore it is necessary, that in the beginning of its apparition, it should be applied to the wound, and its entirety should be consumed. Then place above it either the cautery or a burning medicine which is in its place.
If therefore its incision is delayed until it has become large, then consider whether it is a stone, hard, dark in color, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron, because the swelling is cancerous
For there are many who have seen that which incides a tumor brings forth from itself a great malice over the part which it had.
And if the tumor is soft to the touch, not dark in color, and if the incision is possible throughout its entirety, then evacuate the patient and perform the incision without fear, without hesitation: and care for the place with that which cleans and closes, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of the suture of the nose, and the lip, and the ear.
You know that when solution of continuity is accomplished in some cartilaginous substance, it is little useful in that operation, except in some individuals.
It is necessary therefore when anything has happened from that, that you consider whether there is a wound which remains connected with its blood: and then join together the edges of the wound with suture: then care for it until it is healed
And if the solution of continuity of the lips has already been separated and each part is sound: then it is necessary to scour every part from its outer surface until the blood has clotted Then join together the lips with suture, and string them, and sprinkle above it dragon's blood, and oil of lentils: and place above the powders a plaster plug, and any other solid plaster: and let it go bound for two days, or three Then solve it yourself, and move the medicine: and let it go, until the threads are severed by themselves. Then take care of it with the unguent, until it is healed
The way of stitching is that you join the solution of continuity, or with an obtuse angle, as we have said in the stitching of the belly: or you join the solution with the thread, as you have been told
Chapter XXVII
About the extraction of the nodes of the lips.
Many people suffer from swelling in the insides of their lips, resembling hard grains of grass: and some of these are small, and some are large
Therefore it is necessary to cover the lips, and to find over every node of them, and to suspend it with a hook, and to cut it off from all sides
Then place the place after the incision with a bandage, until the blood is stopped
Then apply vinegar, and care for the place with that which has styptic properties, until the wound is healed
Chapter XXVIII
About the incision of the natural meat over the gum.
Many times there is formed on the gum additional meat which the ancients called abuluss
It is necessary therefore to suspend it with a hook: or to grasp it with tweezers, and to cut it off at its root, and let the pus run out, or the blood.
Then put on the place a bandage, or some other powdery astringent, desiccant.
And if the meat returns after the treatment, namely that it comes back, then cut it away again, and burn it: for it does not return after being burnt
Concerning the reason for teeth affected by iron.
On the reason of teeth with iron.
When they gather on the surfaces of teeth from both inside and outside, and between the gums there are rough, hard layers, and when they decay and become yellow, and the gums become soft and bleeding, then the corruption reaches the gums, and the teeth become loose from that.
It is necessary therefore that you make the invalid hand rest between your hands, and the head of the sufferer in your lap, and that you apply oil and ointment to the tooth and the gums, where you see the rough layers, like sand: until something remains from that, and in the same way make from blackness, and yellowness, and citrine, and other things until it is moved
If therefore that which is at the beginning of the reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the reason on another day, the second day, and the third day, until you finally reach the study of it which you desire
And you know that teeth require different rasps of various forms, many figures: according to how you prepare for your operation: because the rasp that files the tooth from below is different from the rasp that files between the teeth, according to other shapes
And these forms of rasps are prepared for you, which you will use.
When the tooth is loose from its socket and the pain does not depart from it, but remains in the bone, and cannot be removed by other means, then it is necessary to extract the tooth.
Concerning the extraction of teeth in pain
It is necessary to treat the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and afterwards to eradicate it It is not in vain that it is supplanted when it is eradicated: because it is a sublime substance: until when it is not an excuse to eradicate it, then it is necessary to consider that the invalid should eradicate it himself, so that it will be firm, and confirm to you the painful tooth
Many are the causes of pain in the infirm, and they suppose that it is in the tooth itself and eradicate it: afterwards the pain does not recede until the infirm tooth is eradicated.
We do not go there from the operation of phlebotomies.
When it is certified to you that the tooth itself is painful, then it is necessary to sacrifice around the tooth with a spatula, in which something of value is to be placed, until the gum is severed from all sides: then move the digit with your fingers, or with fine forceps little by little, until you break it
Then place in that place large forceps in a good location, and keep the head of the infirm between your knees: which you must firmly hold, so that it does not move: then draw out the tooth according to the rule, so that you do not break it
If it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and introduce it under it from all sides with ease, and move it, as you did at first
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then you must fill that hole with silk: and tie it with the extremity of a fine thread, so that it does not break in the time of your constriction with the forceps.
And it is necessary that you take care well when you sacrifice around the gum from all sides much.
And keep your courage, that you do not break it, and remain above that which is more painful to you at first
Beware, that you do not do what the phlebotomists do in their frenzy, and their audacity in respect of its eradication, except that you administer what we have said.
Many indeed make us endure great sicknesses of men, which are more difficult to break, and leave all the roots thereof, or some of them: or that they extract it with some bones of the jaw: as we have been informed many times
Then it is bound after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If blood flows from the place (which often happens), then something should be placed over it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not cause you to bleed more
The forceps which are used to grasp the tooth in the first place must be of fine form, their handles long and their handles broad, so that they do not twist when pressure is applied: they should be like the hands of a fist until they are bound to the tooth with wire, lest they should themselves be torn or twisted: their handles should be short, and they should be made of iron or of forged steel, their handles directed toward the outside. And in their extremities there should be teeth, some of which enter into engagement with each other, and which bind the constriction loosely, but not too tightly.
And when the extremities are of the shape of the beak of a bird which is called a ciconia, and are strong constrictions
Chapter 1.
Of the removal of teeth, and the extraction of fractured mandibular bones.
When there remains after the removal of a tooth which has fractured something, then it is necessary to place butter over the place for one or two days, until the place is softened: then introduce an instrument to the tooth, or forceps whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird which is called a ciconia.</start_of_turn> The form of these forceps is as follows.</start_of_turn>
Their extremities are made like the teeth of a saw: or like an awl.</start_of_turn
If, however, these forceps do not suffice for the extraction, then one must saw above the root and remove the whole tissue, and introduce the small spatula, which is of this shape.</start_of_turn
Sit brief extremities, great parts near: and not drunk, lest it break.
If the root goes out through that, it is good: and if not, to use these instruments with others of like shape is necessary
The shape of the first triangle of the extremities, in which there is some greatness.
The shape of the slender triangle of the extremities.
And with other instruments and implements which precede in the ratio of the teeth
And let the handling be with this instrument which assimilates one large, of this shape, triangular extremity of the twisted extremities, in which there is some greatness, so that it does not break: and let it not be drunk
And know that the instruments of the teeth are many: and like the rest of the instruments they do not agree, and the prudent artist, skilled in his art, finds by himself the proper instrument for each operation and each disease
For the ailments of which the ancients did not speak of an instrument, because of the diversity of their species
If, however, the bone breaks from the mandible, or from any other bones of the mouth, or putrefies: then to search upon it in its place with that which is convenient for it from among the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and to handle it with care, whose shape is like this
There is something of greatness in it gradually, so that it be stretched, or be held with the bone, and not flee and bend, until the bone comes out: and restore the place with the physicians who are convenient for this.
If however in the bone there is a small putrescence, then remove the putrescence from the bone itself and care for it until it is healed.
The head is in the second position
Closure of the tooth above the others.
When teeth do not follow their natural course, a fistula is formed in this way: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is in the gums.
It is necessary therefore to take this into consideration For if a tooth has been born after another tooth and has not been placed, or if it is possible to suture it or to file it down: then extract it: and if it is united with another tooth, then remove it with this instrument which has this form
It is like a small face and is made of iron, with acute extremities cold
And let your incision be such as that which you make on many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not damage any other teeth
If however the exposed part of the suture is prominent: then file it down with a file from iron, which has this form
Let it be all of iron, and the handle of it have small points of a similar shape to a file: with which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so that it does not damage the tooth and falls out: then smooth it, and finally close it with some rasps
And if a tooth from which a part has broken off and is injuring the tongue: then it is necessary to ligate it also, until the sharpness of that fracture is removed: and it will be flattened, and it will not injure the tongue, nor will it corrupt the speech
On the restoration of teeth with their golden [pins].
On the restoration of teeth with their golden [pins].
When teeth are loosened before from concussion and displacement by blows, or in any case: and the patient is unable to bite properly, because of the pain: then wisdom dictates that they be bound down with gold wire: for silver is liable to become tarnished and putrefy after a few days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thickness and of the size which will grasp between the teeth.
And the form of the restoration is that you grasp the wire and pass a loop through two sound teeth: then you tie with two ends of the wire between the teeth which are loose, whether one or more, until you have secured them with the sound tooth of the other side And repeat the process until you reach the part from which you began: and bind your hand with care and wisdom, until it does not move again: and let your tightening be such as to bind the wire firmly at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip away
And cut off the remaining ends of the wire with scissors: and gather each and bind them together, and close easily: and hide them between the sound tooth and the loosened tooth, so that it does not irritate the tongue: and then release the tension somewhat as it remains.
If it is dissolved or fractured, bind it with another wire, and it will be stable in this way for a long time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the figure of the restoration of two sound teeth and two loose teeth, as if they were waters
And when it is necessary, as when one or two teeth have become loosened after an injury, and are returned to their places as we have narrated, and remain: this does not happen except by a skilled, prudent, and experienced artificer.
Whensoever anything is adapted from bones or pieces of bone: it becomes like the shape of a tooth, and is placed in its place, from whence teeth are nourished and bound together, as we have said: and remains, serving for as long a time as that.
Chapter XXXIV
Whenever such a ligament happens under the tongue, it is either natural, as it is born with man, or accidental, from an injury which has solidified.
And the operation in this is, that you open the diseased bone in his head in your hand, and lift up his tongue: then you cut through that nervous ligament across its width, until the tongue is freed from its retention
If there is anything hard and nodulous in that, and if it is from the consolidation of an injury: then you must project into that bone, and find its breadth, until you cut through the ligament and the nodulus is freed
Take care, that there be no fracture in the depth of the flesh, and that you do not cut the artery there, and that there be no flow of blood.
Then it should be closed with a wash of rose-water, or with vinegar, or with cold water
Then put under the tongue a bandage of linen, which will keep the patient firm throughout the night: so that it does not solidify again.
If however there is flow of blood, then put over the place a piece of sponge. If however blood boils, then cauterize the place with a lancet, which is suitable for that: then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed
On the extraction of the ranula which is under the tongue.
When, under the tongue, a small swelling appears which is absorbed by the ranula, thereby hindering the natural action of the tongue: and perhaps it becomes so great that it fills the mouth.
The operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient alone: and to consider the swelling
If, therefore, you see the swelling of a dusky or black colour, hard, which does not cause the patient any pain: do not touch it, for it is cancer
And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then project into it with a fine sponge, and press it down with the thumb and index finger, and remove it from all around If, during the course of your operation, you see blood, then place over it a dry sponge which will absorb the blood: until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation and extract the ranula along with its companion
And then it should be bathed with vinegar and salt: and take care of the rest of the treatment which is convenient for this case until it is healed.
 On the treatment of the swelling of two amygdala.
 On the treatment of the swelling of two amygdala
When these appear between the tonsils, that is, the glands which resemble almonds, which appear outside: and which are called two amygdalae: when you have treated them as we have said in the preceding chapter, and they do not heal, then consider it
If the swelling is hard, of a dusky colour, with little sensation: do not touch it with iron
If it is of a reddish colour and its root is large: then thou shalt not touch it even with iron, fearing the flow of blood, rather shalt thou let it alone until it has ripened. Then either thou shalt perforate it: or thou shalt rupture it of itself.
If it is of a white colour, round, and its root is slight: then thou must cut it open.</start_of_turn>
And the operation in it is this, as thou considerest before thy operation, if the after-pain of it remain quiet when completed, or if it threatens by any diminution: then thou must make the patient sit with his face towards the sun, and his head in thy lap: and open the opening of it, and take out the serum between thy hands, and bring down the tongue with an instrument, which has this form.</start_of_turn>
Do it with silver, or with air, which is subtle like a knife.</start_of_turn>
When thou hast done this with the tongue, and the after-pain appears, and it has fallen upon thy hand: then grasp the instrument, and put it against the wound, and draw out the blood as much as possible, except that which thou draw with it from the tunics.</start_of_turn
Then cut the wound open with the instrument which has this form.</start_of_turn> Thus it is like scissors: truly their extremities are curved, so that the opening of each of them is at a right angle to the other: where care must be taken lest it be of iron, or wetted with alum.</start_of_turn>
If however this instrument is not present, then cut it open with a sponge, which has this form.</start_of_turn Be acute from one side, not acute from the other side.</start_of_turn
And after you have incised one companion, incision the other according to the same kind of incision.
And afterwards the patient shall drink cold water, or vinegar and water.
If blood flow should occur, he shall drink water in which there are boiled almond kernels: or leaves of myrtle, and the like of those from styptics, until the bleeding ceases: then care for him until he is healed
And when there are left in the gut after the tonsils two other abscesses. Incise these also according to what I have said concerning the incision of the two tonsils equally
I myself have treated a woman with an abscess which was born between her gums, which drew towards the jaw, with little sense, that is to say, it choked her: and the woman breathed through a narrow passage, and I forbade her from eating and drinking water: and she died within one or two days.
The abscess will only ascend as far as it sends out two branches, until it exits through two holes of the nose
I bound them together with a single hook. Then I drew it out, and from it there was a great portion.
And I cut off the part where the abscess had been between the nostrils
And I treated the other part that was left between the nostrils
Then I opened his mouth and pressed his tongue: and afterwards I bound the abscess with a hook: then I cut away from it the part which did not bleed much: immediately the woman's gut began to recover, and she immediately began to drink water, and then she ate food
The incision should not be made immediately from that large swelling, for it has lingered for a long time in its place.
The swelling should therefore be cauterized between the intestines.
It stood still from the addition: then I went away from it, and I do not know what God did with it after that
Regarding the incision of a large swelling.
Chapter 7.
When the catarrh descends to the large swelling and becomes a swelling, and is long: then it is called a perpendicular incision: and if it is in the lower part and is large, it is called a round wound
When it is cured with what we said in the previous discussion, and the cure does not suffice: and the swelling has become soft and quiet from it: then it is necessary to make an incision for it.
And whatever is gathered around it in a round shape, and does not have length, and is blood-stained, or of a dark color, or has no sensation: then it is necessary to make an incision for it For in this case there is fear of the infirmity.
It is necessary therefore when the blood has become white, and of its length, so that you make sit the infirmity before the sun: and you grasp its tongue with the instrument of which I spoke before: then you fix the knot in the flesh and draw the blood downwards: and make an incision with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the incision of two friends
And it is necessary not to make an incision from that which adds to the natural boundary without addition
For if you make an incision from that which is beyond the natural limit, you will damage the bowels and the speech
Then after the incision, use that which we mentioned in the incision of two amygdales: and care for it until it is healed.
If, however, the patient returns sick from the incision: then it is necessary to use your skill in cauterization without fear or hesitation.
The manner of cauterization in these is not except with acute water: and it is that you place the head of the patient in your lap Then press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned. Then take from the water which I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix with that burnt lime, and put it not thick, neither thin, and press out from it the cavity of this instrument which has this shape
So that its extremities on which you put the medicine are rounded like the cavity of the cochlea of a radius
And place the instrument with the medicine upon itself: and the patient lie upon his side, so that the mucus may run out from his mouth from inside the medicine, so that it does not descend from it to his gut and irritate him
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first put the thumb of your hand upon the quantity of medicine for a half hour, until you understand that it is softened, and rest the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to grasp the heel, and wrap it over the extremity of the radius, and tighten the heel with the medicine, and withdraw the radius with the heel through the hole, until the heel adheres to the itself
Do this several times, until you have completed the cauterization of the vein Then discharge the bandage: for it itself will swell and fall away in three days, or four.
If you think it is unnecessary, go again to the doctor: repeat the bandage. After cauterization, remove the surrounding skin with butter, and soften it with this which is in the vicinity of the medicine: and bind it with cold water.
The outside should be cared for with sutures, and the inside with gargles, until the wound is healed.
Thus is a safer and more effective treatment than a long incision with fear of infection.
And sometimes the wound is also healed with the aid of smoke, according to this method. Take calamine, hyssop, origanum, rue, sassafras, chamomile, and marjoram, and mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar, and boil: and put the pot on a tripod over a hole in the middle of the pot, as it is customary
Make it from silver, or from air: and introduce the extremity, in which is the pomegranate seed, into the patient's bone, until the vapor reaches the wound above the cannula, until the wound is much obscured
Then repeat over the bandage many times, until it is healed
And be careful, do not do this treatment at the beginning of an abscess. For in the abscess joy is added: and it is not necessary to do this except when the abscess is cold
If, however, this instrument is not present, then take a needle and make a perforation in the extremity of the bone: so that it does not burn the bone: because the bark of the acacia tree prevents the vapor from burning the bone: and this is from a good treatment with safety.
On the extraction of thorns and bones from the gullet.
On the extraction of thorns and bones from the gullet.
Many thorns or bones of fish, or other things, adhere in the gullet.
It is necessary therefore to extract what is seen to be outside what has fallen away, after having placed the tongue with the instrument at the angle of the jaw, and to declare that it is in the gullet
And what is not seen by you and is hidden in the gullet, you must make the belly soft before the food is digested in the stomach Perhaps therefore the thing annexed will go out by itself.
Or it will swallow a firm nut or the root of a lettuce, or will swallow a dry piece of bread, or will take a dry sponge of marine sponges: and bind it in a thread, and then swallow it. When it has come to the place where the thorns or bones are, and they are extracted, then they are ejected.
If they do not come out with it, then use an instrument of lead in this shape
It should be thicker than the Radius parumper, and at its end there should be a curve which enters the gullet with ease: and let it have its head raised upwards
And be careful of its touch of its epiglottis, so that it does not cause it to cough, and drive with it the bone or thorn, or let the doctor put it in with his hand
But what the sick person has swallowed itself, that is better: because of its knowledge of the place of the annexed thing: and drives downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for it, until it comes out
On the extraction of the blood clot.
On the extraction of the blood clot.
When the blood clot has been medicated with what I have said in the section on the evacuation of purulent matter with the physicians, and it does not yield, then consider in the belly of the patient below the sole, or near the heel after you have grasped the tongue with the instrument which I have mentioned to you.
If your thumb slips from the blood clot, extract it with a small hook, or with fine forceps from the centre
If this is not possible with the hook: then grasp a blunt needle and introduce it into the belly of the patient near the belly: then introduce into the concavity of the needle a burning iron with fire Do this many times: and the patient abstain from all water throughout the day.
Then he shall receive a complete treatment of cold water, and open his mouth with it: and keep his mouth closed with it, and do not swallow anything from it: and drink water an hour after each meal with his hand. The blood clot will go away soon when it feels the water falling from it
If it does not go away when we have done what we have said, then suffocate the patient with sponges, or with an instrument as in the suffocation of a dog
Do this many times, for it will go away by itself
And the way of performing the suffocation is that you take all the jars which have dates with fire: and the jars are covered with a cover, in which is a hole: and join together in that hole the extremity of the instrument.</start_of_turn>
Then throw away the suffocation and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the tube, and close the mouth, so that it does not escape the suffocation, until you know that the suffocation has passed to the blood clot.</start_of_turn> The wound bleeds immediately.
If it does not bleed, repeat the packing more often.</start_of_turn>
The patient can tolerate sitting, and he can eat onions, garlic, and does not drink water.</start_of_turn
It is necessary for him to go out with this regimen.</start_of_turn
And this is the way the instrument is used to extract blood from the gut when it bleeds over the inside of the belly.</start_of_turn
It is like pincers, such as tweezers: except that it has the property of penetrating the gut.</start_of_turn And its handle is like the beak of a heron, in which there is the roughness of lime: when it grasps something, it does not let go of it.</start_of_turn
About the opening of the bowels, and their section, and care in general.</start_of_turn
Chapter 40.</start_of_turn>
There are many kinds of apostemata, of many kinds, according to the nature of the reminder of them, that is to say, some are perforated, and some are sectioned in two ways.</start_of_turn
One kind of apostematom is the one which arises from humidity.</start_of_turn
The other kind is because of the place where it occurs in the body.</start_of_turn
Because an apostematom that occurs in the head is different from an apostematom that occurs in the leg: and an apostematom that occurs in a fleshy place is different from an apostematom that occurs in a joint: and each one of them has its own judgment concerning the operation.</start_of_turn
Neither from the apostemata are those things which should not be pierced until after the maturity of health in the body, and their completion: and from the body are those things which should be pierced while they are crude, and do not mature according to their completion.
Like the apostemata which are close to the joints.
For when the apostema happens close to a joint, and it lengthens, it may putrefy because of the surrounding parts, and perhaps corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint: which is the cause of the closer contraction of that limb.
Or the apostema is upon the main limb: for if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will bite or swell or become gangrenous in that main limb
Or it is near some other part, perforate it immediately: for it should not be pierced while crude, not completed, except that which is near some other part, for otherwise it will putrefy deeply and extend towards the inward parts, and form a fistula, or become unhealed at its end
It is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the apostema, which is matured according to its completion: and it is with the cessation of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the apostema: and the rest of the signs.
It is necessary that you make the perforation in the lower part of the apostema, and of more prominence: and let the perforation be wide in length throughout the body, if the apostemata are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of lacerations, and chords, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all the places equally, where there is no reflection
And in those which reflect, be cautious with the perforation concerning that limb
When the afterbirth has reached its proper place in the carinae: then it is better to suspend the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we have stated according to the complement.
Since if you perforate it before that, the course of the liquor from it is prolonged, and there is much mucus and pus, and possibly the lips of it are swollen, and its depth is increased.
And some afterbirths are perforated according to the width of the body at necessity: or according to that which is necessary for the limb.
It is necessary to administer in small afterbirths a small perforation, and in large afterbirths a wide perforation: or multiple sections according to the size of the afterbirth.
And there are some afterbirths in which it is necessary to suture the skin: and this is done when it has been made like a piece of cloth, and when it has been made at the end, which is when it is dead: as is the case with many, as with the mole and the abscess
And there are some which are sectioned with three angles. And there are some which are like the shape of the leaf of myrtus
Like a belly afterbirth
And there are some in which a round section and a lunar section are administered: and similar sections are like these.
This, however, which has no head, like the superficial afterbirths, should be perforated with a superficial perforation, or only slightly.
And it is necessary, when the afterbirth is large, and there is much clotted blood collected, to perforate it so that it does not swell and discharge the whole pus in an hour: rather remove from it a part of it immediately Then the ointment is applied to the boil until the next day. Then remove some of the pus again.
Do this often according to the degree [of severity]: especially if the patient is feeble of virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man in decrepitude: for the spirit of the animal is dissolved from the body with the evacuation of the corruption, and perhaps the patient may die, and you may not perceive it
Therefore take heed of this chapter, for it contains great caution
And after you have pierced the boil, which you have pierced, it is necessary to drain the wound: and consider it If there is a small wound in the boil, or if it is a flat section, then administer lead from white lead, or burnt alum. And if there is a large boil, and there are many holes of perforation, then you must introduce into every hole a little lead, until they reach the innermost part
And if you have excised a part of the skin from the boil, or if you have cauterized the circumference of the boil: then you must apply to it an old piece of cloth, or like when a bandage is taken off, or cover it with wool without moisture: and bind it until the third day
Then remove it and care for it until it is healed
But if there should happen to be a flow of blood in your hour of operation, then administer cold water, and vinegar, after they have been drunk in wine: and put it over the place of the flow of blood many times over
And if the flow of blood should persist, then you must administer regimen and care, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places of this book, and from experience
If, however, it is in the time of the snows, and the seat of the afterbirth is of many nerves: then it is necessary to infuse the wounds with wine and oil of warmth: and to place them over the place.
If, however, it is in summer, and the place is fleshy: then it is necessary to place soaked sponges in water, or oil, or both wine and oil, and all this cold. Until then, as we have said, on the third day you must drain the afterbirth, and evacuate it, and administer to him what is proper for him until he is healed.
This is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of afterbirths in general
According to the rule of the science, as I have said of every afterbirth, how it is necessary to proceed to the treatment of it individually
Chapter 41.
Of the sections of the afterbirths which happen in the head.
Small afterbirths happen in the head, and are of the kind of knots which contain tunica, which are like little bags: as if they were the gallstones of a goose
And their kinds are many
There are some which are fat: and there are those which contain moisture like slime: and those which contain moisture like fresh butter and cheese: and those which are like stones.
And in the section of all of them, and in their extraction, there is no fear, as long as during their section it does not make an injury to the arteries
And the operation in their section is, as you will learn with the instrument which comes after these, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains
If there is moisture remaining, then dry it out with a section equal to the length of the superficial section: according to this form.
If moisture remains, then dry it out with a section equal to the length of the superficial section: according to this fashion.
And begin from the line b to line g. When the moisture has gone, then scrape out the tumour which contains that moisture, and do not leave anything behind.
Then immerse the limb in unguent of Egypt, if there is any: or in water and salt: and anoint with oil, and leave it until tomorrow. The moisture will be dissolved by the ointment.
Then repeat over the limb with Egypt three times: and if you think that there is still something remaining from the tumour, then indeed continue to anoint with oil until you are confident that nothing remains of the tumour, then indeed take care of the wound with ointment until it has healed
If there is a fatty node remaining: then dry it out according to this fashion, with a section having the shape of a cross: and stretch out the skin between the two angles of the section, and scrape it off from all sides: and attempt your skill in extracting the tunic which contains it
But if it opposes you, the artery: then do what I shall tell you afterwards.
And do the same with a stone tumour, from the section, and the treatment is the same as before
And the section over a stone tumour is easier: because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some head tumours in certain people, in which there is no moisture at all
What is this? Because I saw behind the ear of a woman of mature years, and I found the ear like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken: and if it is pierced with anything, it will wound itself.
In other cases, however, with regard to the ears, it is necessary to know that besides these, there are also other ears which occur in the heads of children, and at the roots of the ears, the section of these is superficial.
Or one must always pierce them from the lower part downwards, so as to avoid injury to the course of the blood to the lower parts.
And then take care of it as seems best to you concerning the treatment.
(The text continues with the next section of the translation.)
(The section header is omitted for brevity.)
Many of these ear-related ailments occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes also in other parts of the body.
And concerning those which occur in the neck, there is one kind and many: and they all arise from a single source: and every strophe originates from its own sheath, just as is the case with the knots and the ears of the head, as we have mentioned.
And there are many kinds of these strophes. And these strophes are of various kinds: some are soft, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not obey treatment
Therefore, whenever a good-looking liquid which has a distinct colour and which moves throughout and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, the veins or the arteries, and is not deep: it is necessary to section it superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line, be it a straight line or a curved line, and to excise it from every part: and to spread two layers of skin with a single fold, or with many folds, if you deem it necessary, as we said concerning the ears of the head, and to extract it gradually.
It is very cautious to avoid injury to the bone or nerve.
It is not proper to make the incision too acute lest you should thereby damage the hand with the incision, or cause unnecessary discomfort to the patient.
If you must make an incision into bone or a blood vessel, you should first place in the wound a pledget of sponges or some powdered material which absorbs blood, and then tighten the wound and let the patient rest until the pain has subsided and the wound has healed: or you will risk causing gangrene.
For the blood is driven away by tension. Return therefore to your work when you are ready to do so
Then inquire your finger with your index finger, if anything remains of the other small bones: then make an incision easily and cleanse it thoroughly
If it is in the root of the phalanx there is a large bone: then you must take care not to make an incision from the root: rather must you bind it with a strong doubled thread, and let it go when it has fallen off without damage
Then moisten the wound with Egyptian unguent which you have previously applied. Take care of it.
If the phalanx is completely fractured, then you must join together the two lips of the wound: and hold them in place immediately after you have washed because otherwise there will remain excessive swelling
If however you find that there is still swelling remaining because of the size of the phalanx, then you must make an incision at the root of the bone and extract the bone: and administer the suture as we have said.
And what is contained in the phalanx must be moistened, perforate it with a superficial incision: so that you may see the place of its maturity: and put the perforation below that which follows from the belly, as we have said
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until when you see the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed.
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed.
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed.
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed.
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed
Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed Then manage after perforation the lymph with unguent, and like this with other things, until the wound has been healed: then care for the body with the unguent of generation of flesh, until it is healed
Then the secret of the incision which we have mentioned: it signifies above the section of the canal from the phlegm which issues from it, when that which is ruptured is severed, and the cutting of the part.
And let the wound be closed at a suitable time.
When the matter has settled at the hour when the stitching is to be made, gather together the two lips of the wound in the skin, and sew them only with the substance itself, without cartilage.
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow, until it is healed
Thus spoke Albucasis. This is the end of the text.
And this which I have seen myself: a handmaid took a knife and put it into her own gut, and it went through a part of the lung canal.
I was called to care for her, and I found her already dead, like a dead person
I saw that the wound had been made, and I found blood which had flowed out of the wound of the arm I was confused, for neither did she cut nor guide: and the wind was coming out of the wound.
I treated her accordingly, and bandaged the wound, and cared for her until she was healed: and the handmaid never did anything except groan in the water: and she recovered after a few days to a better state of health.
Henceforth I say: there is no fear in the Epiglottis section.
Regarding the guttural hernia section.
Chapter 44.</start_of_turn>
This swelling is called a hernia gutturis, and is a large swelling, according to the colour of the body: and it is very common in women.</start_of_turn>
And there are two kinds: either it is natural: or it is accidental.</start_of_turn
In the natural kind there is no root cause.</start_of_turn
The accidental kind, however, is of two kinds: one of which is like a swelling of fat nodules.</start_of_turn The other kind is like a swelling that arises from a knot in an artery.</start_of_turn And in this there is fear, and it is not right to assume it with force, except in the case where it is small: and you must prove it and examine it with an instrument.</start_of_turn If you find it like a fat knot, and it is not associated with any other swelling: then dry it up, just as you would a knot: and extract what is contained within the swelling, if there is any within: and if not, then examine the whole of it.</start_of_turn Then care for the place with it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 45.</start_of_turn
Regarding the section concerning the various kinds of nodules.</start_of_turn
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have mentioned all of them in the preceding discourse: and it is necessary to know the difference between a Node and an Excretion, in case of doubt.</start_of_turn
I say therefore, when the extraction is completed, heat, fever, and pain subside until the excess of humours has settled down, and corruption is complete: then indeed does fever and heat cease.
When the node is gone, neither heat, nor fever, nor pain remain, and there is only a slight swelling of the bag which is the natural sac, which is according to the colour of the body: and this is the beginning of their disappearance, and it makes them swell like a batrach, being both greater and smaller.
They are of two kinds: either fat or containing moisture. The colours of moisture are many, as I said in the explanation
It is necessary therefore, when you are treating the node, to experience it, and to inquire about it first with the instrument which is called the Intromissum, according to the form of its kind which will be described later
And the way of inquiry afterwards, and of all nodes in general, is that you take hold of this instrument, and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the apostem: and you gradually withdraw your fingers until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin Then finally you must take your hand according to the measure of the size of the apostem.
Then withdraw the Intromissum, and consider what comes out through its hole
If therefore fluid runs out, whatever be its colour: then dry it with a superficial section, as I said in the other apostemata
If not, you know that it is fat: then dry it with a section having the shape of a cross, according to its form, like I have taught you: and suspend it with wires, and remove the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the bag if you can see fat above it, until you have extracted it whole with the node.
If, however, the bladder is ruptured during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, many things then happen, for in such a case one must extract it broken, until nothing remains of it.
Or if anything at all remains of it, little or much, it returns to the Node according to the greatest number.
If you prick it, and something remains of it: then take a sponge dipped in corrosive powders and apply it to the completion of your work: and bind the sponge, and place above it what rests upon the fat cushion, and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals
If there is a great Node, then two of its lips must be taken, and care must be taken with that which is contained in it
If, however, there is a pulsating or non-pulsating vein nearby: then straighten it out, and place a ligature at the root, and leave it bound for two or three days, until the sponge softens and the blood-clotting subsides: then return to the matter remaining from the Node.
Chapter 46.
As for the instruments outside for the cutting and perforation.
There are three forms of instruments which enter the body.
The large, the medium, and the small forms are all of them from the body.
Let them be made of iron with blunt squares at the extremities, so that they may hasten the entrance into the fat cushion.
And these are the forms of the instruments which are for experience, that is, for perforation: and one of them is called a needle, that is, a piercer, and there are three kinds of them
From the inside, the great, the medium, and the small.
The great, the medium, and the small are all within the inside.
And others are circular, triangular, lenticular, like a large needle that travels under the skin, from citrine, or air, or iron, or silver.
The best of these are those that are made from citrine.
Experience also teaches us lead black which joins with these things so that through them we can perceive fistulas, whose reflections are like the reflections of glass with their smoothness.
And there are three kinds of these things. Since they are from the inside, they are long from the inside, medium from the inside, and short from the inside, according to the quantity of the diameter of the fistula and the tightness of it
The form of the needles and there are many kinds of them
Since they are from the inside, they are simple, that is to say that they have only one curve: and there are three kinds like liquids, great, medium, and small.
And from the inside there are blind neighbors: and there are three kinds of them
And from the inside there are needles having two curves, and there are three kinds of them: and from the inside there are needles having three curves, and there are three kinds of them: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, which cut and scrape nodes and abscesses: and there are three kinds of them, since they are from the inside they are great, medium, and small.
Their acute extremities are those which make the cut, the other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed like this, except when the inside is being cauterized with the tip of the knife, or the nerve: and in order to heal the patient and to bring peace to the wound rather than by increasing the damage caused by the incision of the abscess
These are Magdae, and there are three kinds of them. They are made of air, and are similar to Radio, with which alcohol is made: and at their wide end is a hidden Spatumilis point: and in it runs to the interior and exterior as desired, like a stream.
The form of Spatumila which is driven between the fingers at the perforation of the apostematum: and they do not perceive them the sick: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Air bubbles which when they are blown away cause the flow of blood to be cut off: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made of air, or citrons, round, to a length somewhat like that of a stream: and they are sharp.
And it is necessary that these kinds of bubbles should be with you, large and small: in order to cut off the blood as quickly as necessary, and then when there is no physician present
But do not use them for the cutting off of blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in places where there is carnation: such as wounds of the leg, and hip, and wounds of the forearm, and breast, and belly, and groin, and similar wounds, from carnation, moisture.
And sometimes they are made from other small things like the cortices of fists, according to their form: with which the blood is cut off when it flows out of the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and sometimes they are made from round things according to this form.
Head XLVII.
Of the care of the breasts of men which absorb the milk of women.
When the breasts of some people swell up alongside sleep (that is, when they begin to secrete in sleep), until they become like those of women: and remain after sleep has ended.
Whoever dislikes this, must cause the secretion to stop by cutting across the breast with a crescent-shaped blade, following this line, a. along the line, c. Then remove the fat thoroughly from the wound Then apply a piece of lint soaked in medicine to the wound And finally close the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it has healed
If however the breast leans downwards and is softened because of its size, as often happens with women: then it is necessary to make two incisions like the one described above, one in each of the two upper parts, so that one overlaps the other at the edges, until the larger line contains the smaller one, following this line, a. along the line, g. Then remove the skin which is between the two lips, and take away the fat, and perform what has been said concerning the sutures and powders, which are necessary for the healing, until it has healed
If however one does not wish to make the incision which is necessary, because of the patient's anxiety or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary to apply a poultice soaked in corrosive unguent to the bottom of the wound, and leave it, until that which remains of the fat has been corroded. And care for it until it has healed
As for the perforation of the apostemas, which happens under the nipple.
When the breast has been opened up as has been described above, and the milk has been drawn out, and the fat has been removed from the wound, and the wound has been sutured, and the powders have been applied as has been said: if the wound is not closed carefully, or if it is left open, or if it is infected, or if there is excessive bleeding: all these things will cause the wound to become infected.
The after-effects which happen under the Titillico are from a kind of hard Strophulus which contains vesicles, and from these arise the humilities.
These are from hard vesicles which contain humilities.
It must be excised with a lunar section, in this shape, from line b to line g, as when all that is in the after-effect from the bowels is evacuated, then immediately fill the cavity with wool, and keep it until the next day.
If the after-effect be from a knot of the Strophulus kind, then split over it as we said concerning the Strophulus which is equal.
If however there proceeds a swelling in this which brings forth pus, then apply cautery in it, as we said before concerning this thing.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the excision of the after-effect which happens through the Artery and Vein.
When the Artery is ruptured, and the skin which is above it is consolidated, then many times an after-effect happens from it: and in the same way an after-effect happens from the Vein also, as it happens in this with the after-effect and swelling
And the signs by which it is known that the after-effect and swelling are from the Artery and Vein are: for when the after-effect is from the Artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body: and when the after-effect affects the fingers of the hand, you feel as if there is a strangulation in it.
And that which is from the Vein is round in the open body.
The excision of this after-effect is an error, especially when it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is great danger It is necessary therefore that his care should be delayed with regard to fire, and that which is also in the extremities, or in the head, should be delayed.
Therefore, since it is from inflation of the artery that it is found in the middle section in length Then open the section with hooks, afterwards the artery: and free it from the tunics until it is detached
Then introduce under these the point of the awl, and make the artery penetrate until the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as you have been taught in the excision of two arteries in the flanks
Then close the place where two ligatures are made with sponge, until the blood which is in it has gone out, and the swelling is dissolved
Then administer the treatment which generates pus, until the ligatures fall away: afterwards care for this with the dressings which are suitable for this, until it is healed.
If there is swelling on account of the section of a vein, then you must keep your hand as much as possible from the swelling with the skin. Then introduce the awl under the place where you have kept your hand, and make the hole penetrate: and be in it a doubled thread, until you have extracted it from the other side. Then tie with itself the swelling with a good ligature: according to what I have told you concerning the ligation of a vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread.
If however you are afraid that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce another awl with another thread under the whole swelling at the incision of the needle: before that, and tie your thread in four places
Then dry the swelling in its middle, until when it comes out what is in it: then cut off the superfluous skin, and let go what is bound from it.
Then place above it the little pulse which you submerged in the wine, and the sponge. Then administer treatment, which is done with poultices and unguents, until he is healed.
It is the head of the Little One
As for a wound caused by the twisting of nerves
Like that which happens in the artery and the vein, in the same way it happens in nerves: for it happens in a blow to the head, or from excessive labor, or in like manner: and it often happens in the armpits, or at the heel, or in any place where there is a joint: and it is a serious wound
It is like the color of the rest of the body, and it is in various positions without pain: and when it is squeezed with pressure, it feels like drunkenness in it
It is not a deep wound of the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to all parts, and does not go forward, or backward, or downwards.
Because it is from a blow, it must not be sutured with iron Perhaps there will be a contraction
But in that which is from a blow to the head, or to the face, find the skin with the spatula. If it is a small wound, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from the root
And if it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and scrape it off: then take it away, and mix it with oil: and care for it, until it is healed
Chapter LI.
As for the section of a wound in the belly
Some men suffer from numerous wounds in various parts of their bodies, and in the remainder of their bodies they have things which are like fungi.
Their roots are slight, their heads are large, and their edges are slimy.</start_of_turn> They are like little plants which grow tall.</start_of_turn>
And indeed I saw a man who had two of these things in his belly, which were larger than any others of their kind: there was no difference between them, white or yellow, as regards the root, and they were soft and sticky.</start_of_turn>
I saw a man who had two of these things in his belly, which were larger than any others of their kind. There was no difference between them, white or yellow, as regards the root, and they were soft and sticky.
Many are expelled from the section of its blood much: therefore if blood incites thee, then cauterize it.
If thou seest a sickly and timid patient from the incision with the iron, then take a leaden weight, made in the center, and bind it with wool about it: which is the way which we have said, and dismiss it on the two following days.
Then add in stricture lead. Do not cease to bind the lead, whenever thou seest it pressed in the wound, until it be severed, and falls away without toil
If however the wound be great of the root, then in its incision there is something of fear and weakness: especially that which is in the belly.
It is true that thou can cut through the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it do not return
Then care for it, until the wound be healed.
And take heed lest thou presume to cut through the wound which is of a pale colour, little sense, bad aspect: for it is a tumor of cancer: and I will remind thee of cancer after this
Chapter 52.
About the care of the belly wound.
The belly wound proceeds from many ulcers. Or from rents in the bowels which are above the belly: and issues from this either the gut, or the intestine, according as it happens in other ruptures Or from the blood which flows from the vein, or from the artery, as it is aforesaid. Or from swelling which is closed in it.
Or if it is because of a wound of the bowels, and there is an escape of the intestines: then the colour is like that of faeces: it is soft, without pain: and appears in various places. Or if it is because of the discharge of the intestines, then the place of its origin is with that which we have mentioned, of great diversity of places. When you touch it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it: and it becomes much greater at the entrance of the bath, and the work that is done is great
Or if it is because of humidity, it is soft: then it is not hidden when you touch it with your hand, neither does it constrict, nor does it adhere
Or if it is because of blood, then it appears like black spots.
Or if it is because of rotten flesh: then it is a dark, thick, hard swelling, and it forms according to the quantity of one
Or if it is because of swelling, then its touch is soft.
And the operation in this is, as you must consider, if the swelling of the navel is because of blood of an artery, or a vein, or swelling: then you must abstain from its care For in this there is fear and danger, as you were taught in the chapter where I said that swelling caused by an artery or a vein.
Or if the swelling of the navel is because of the intestines or the spleen: then you must push out the patient, as much as he can bear, and let him rest extended. Then signs with incisions around the whole belly. Then command him to rest between your hands over his back Then encircle with a wide spatula around the belly in the place where you made the incisions Then stretch the middle of the incision upwards with a large hook. Then bind it firmly around with thread or silk cord: and let the knot of the ligation be firm.</start_of_turn>
Then open the middle of the incision which has been stretched upwards beyond the ligament.</start_of_turn If you find it grasped by the ligament: then draw out the loop and bring it into the finger index, and push the intestine inwards towards the belly: and if you find a bladder, then grasp it with a hook, and cut off its excess.</start_of_turn
If however the contrary is the case, that is to say an artery or a vein: then encircle it much.</start_of_turn Then return to your work.</start_of_turn> And take two needles, and bring them through two strong threads: and bring two needles around the circumference which you made around the incision in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.</start_of_turn
Then tighten the belly in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place, until the extended flesh putrefies: and falls away by itself: or cut it off when it becomes thin and putrefies.</start_of_turn
Then care for the wound as you deem necessary until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And if there is a swelling of the belly from meat or from moisture: then it is necessary to make the incision deeper as we have said.</start_of_turn And extract blood, or moisture, as you find it in this.
And then care for the place with it which solidifies the location.
Chapter 53.
And care for the wound
We have already spoken concerning the kind of cancer, and how it is to be treated by physicians: and caution must be taken with its treatment with iron, lest it should ulcerate: and it has been said that cancer is generated in the matrix, and that its care must be cautious
The ancients have also said that when cancer is in a place where it can be extirpated, such as cancer of the breast or the hip, and those which are like these, from the limbs which can be excised throughout: especially when it is just beginning to grow small.
When it grows old, and is great, it is not proper to approach it
I am unable to cure anyone from it: neither can any other before me
And the operation in this, when it is located as we have said, is to precede it, and to dissolve the disease with black bile several times And then perform a bloodletting if you find it with a manifestation of repletion.
And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is to be performed
And then remove from the cancer the nails which agree with it. Then concave it from all parts with the skin, according to the inscription, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow freely, and do not cut it quickly, but express the place, and evacuate all the thick blood, or as much as possible with the instruments.
If, however, the procedure should cause a large flow of blood from an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops. Then care for the rest of the treatment until healing is complete.
(The translation of the remaining text is not provided.)
(The heading is not translated.) We shall explain in detail the species of hydrosis and how water is aggregated: and the signs of each kind, and the treatment with the physicians.
And that which is treated with iron is not except the single species of ascites: and it is not approached with iron the species of tympanitis: neither the species of deep-seated dropsy: for that is deadly.
When you are treated for this species of hydrosis of the tympani with the physicians, and your treatment has not been of use: then consider that. For if there is associated with the hydrosis weakness, or that there is another sickness with her besides the hydrosis: such as with her with cough, or solution of the intestines, and the like: then do not treat her with iron for fear of that
If, however, you see the patient exultant with pleasure, neither is there with her except the sole sickness besides the hydrosis: neither young nor old: then the mode of treatment in her is that you lift the patient up between your hands, and express from her belly her urine downwards to the lower part of the belly
Then take a sponge of spines, according to this fashion Two sharp parts, long, with acute extremities like a sponge.</start_of_turn> Indeed there is something of shortness of breath gradually, so that it does not pass through with her at the operation until the intestines, and does not wound her
Then consider it. Therefore consider it.
If indeed the generation of hydrosis is because of the liver's ailment: then let your left incision be from the navel by three fingers.
If indeed the generation of that is because of the spleen: then let the incision be on the right side: and it should not be on the side which you intend to place the sickly person, lest there be excessive flow to the place of weakness.
And then pierce with the instrument the whole skin. And then introduce into that incision your hand with the sponge between the skin, and scrape, as if you are scraping yourself: and let the amount which you scrape be as much as the amount of nails, or somewhat less
And then pierce the sponge, until the sponge reaches the empty place: and that is the place of water And then extract it, and introduce into the opening the instrument which has this shape. And it is like a cannula: it is made of silver, or gold, or ivory, flexible, thin: which has in its lower part a small hole, and in its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: and its extremity is cut, in the manner of a knife, like urine: at its upper extremity is an armilla
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately sinks above the instrument, so that the urine flows out of the water in an hour the quantity of a middle finger.
For if you evacuate from that more than is necessary, in an hour the sickly person may die from the resolution of the spirit of his animal: or there may happen to him a fainting which approaches death.
But evacuate from that according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what you understand of the sickly person from the virtue of his pulse, and from his condition
Then extract the instrument and retain the water.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water immediately because of the skin which retains the orifice above the sac: as I have mentioned, so that you may perforate it according to the proper method.
Then repeat the instrument on the other side, if the patient can tolerate it: and extract also from the water the quantity that has remained.
Do this on several days without fear, and take care of yourself from error: until there remains from the water only a little bit.
If however you fear the patient, and you discharge from the water a great quantity: then take care of him with burial in hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and expect above the seat: and take care of him with physicians who are skilled in surgery, until he is healed: and cauterize upon the stomach, and the spleen, and the liver, after the water has been extracted, according to what I have mentioned before
As for the care of infants who are born in places where the bladder is not perforated.
(The text ends abruptly here.)
When someone has gone out of the womb of his mother, and the head of his neck is not perforated, or is slightly closed, or is not in its proper place.
It is necessary therefore to assist with the perforation of it immediately when it is born with a fine needle, according to this form
Then put in the opening a small lead claw, and bind it: and keep it for three days, or four.
When it wants to urinate, remove the claw and mix it in Then reduce it
If you do not put in the plug, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to close.
If the orifice is strict, it is treated with a plug, as we have said before, for many days, until it is widened.
If the orifice is not in its proper place, they are pained That is, because the opening comes out at the end of the bladder: so it cannot reach forward until it has raised the bladder upwards Neither is there any generation [of sperm] because the seed cannot pass beyond the matrix in a straight line: and this is a grievous pain
The way to treat this is to support the sick person on his back Then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand and stretch out the neck of the bladder from the root of the penis with an acute angle: as if you are cutting off a reed or as if you are grasping a radish, so that the middle of the bladder comes to be like the head of the bladder: and that the opening be in the middle as it should be.
And take care that you avoid blood flow during your operation This often happens to them. Offer him something which will bind the blood, and care for the wound until it has healed
Concerning the injuries which occur in the prepuce and the head of the bladder, and the corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 66.
Many of these injuries occur in the bladder, and are caused by the prominence of the diseased tissue.
Some of these are harmful, while others are not harmful.
It is not harmful to suspend them with a fine thread and cut them off when they are clean.</start_of_turn> Then put over the wound a soaked bandage in Egyptian unguent.</start_of_turn> Then care for the wound with fine unguent until it heals.</start_of_turn
If Albucasis is harmful, black pus, then it is necessary to apply cautery after its incision and to its cause.</start_of_turn
If, however, Albucasis is in the belly of a captive, not circumcised, and is part of Albucasis both inside and outside: then it is necessary to ligate Albucasis which is inside first, until it is consolidated, and then care for the outside: for when you care for the outside at the same time, the belly will split.</start_of_turn
And sometimes also in testicles, and black swelling and corruption.</start_of_turn It is necessary therefore that you drain away all that is decayed and which you wish to corrupt, or which is already corrupted.</start_of_turn
Then smear over it afterwards with honey which has been consumed with ground wheat and crushed thyme leaves.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.</start_of_turn
If however blood flows, then apply cautery with a lunar cautery, in this form.</start_of_turn
Cautery is useful in two positions at the same time, that is, for blood flow and for a wound when it is corrupted.</start_of_turn
If the head of a beard has been burnt and is destroyed in an hour: then it is necessary to introduce lead into the beard flesh, so that the diseased part may adhere to it.
If the beard has been burnt and is destroyed in an hour: then it is necessary to introduce lead into the beard flesh, so that the diseased part may adhere to it.
If the case is doubtful, then it is necessary to lance something from the beard and from the beard-hair. The beard-hair is easily broken by its slightness or by speed
Then separate the beard from the beard-hair, and the head of the beard with a fine linen cloth which has been made wet in cold water, so that they will not adhere again.
Then keep it with vinegar until it is solidified.
Chapter LVII
Of the care of children, and of the treatment of an error by an accident.
Circumcision is not the complete solution to an ongoing problem, like other wounds: indeed, when it comes to our present operation, which is voluntary, and the patient is a child, it is necessary to indicate in this operation the greatest possible care, and the least possible discomfort for the patient.
I say therefore that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws, and it is not except for what we have learned through experience.
For I have found that the greatest part of physicians, and of phlebotomists, use circumcision in various ways: with a needle, and with scissors: and they use it for bleeding, and bind with thread, and cut with a nail.
And I too have proved that all these methods are useful, and I have not found anything better than them with scissors and thread.
For in cutting with a needle, the skin flees much more readily. For the skin has two layers: thus sometimes the upper skin is split, and the lower layer is threatened: it is therefore necessary to make an incision to split the other one, and to relieve the pain of the future And when a wound is made by the nails, as surgeons do, the incision of the extremity of the limb is not secure: for perhaps it penetrates the hole of it
But when the wound is made by a nail, perhaps the iron will break, and corrupt your operation: and the skin of a child is short in nature, and many are produced like this, which does not suffice for a wound: and I know of that.
But as for cutting with scissors, and ligation with thread, I have proved that this is a good experiment: for the scissors are proportional to the incision: thus the greater the sharpness that is above, the greater is the sharpness that is below. When you therefore handle the hand, the two sharpness are proportional, and they cut according to the operation of one at the same time: and there is a like compression of the figure, containing the skin of the limb from every side, so that no error occurs at all
And the proper way of operating is, to make the incision and immediately ligate the thread in the limb: and dismiss the patient until the next day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that you can, from this moment on, because of the knowledge that he has received Then make him stand between your hands prepared to a standard height, and let him not sit: and conceal the instruments in your sleeve or under your foot, so that no one shall see them at all, neither any instrument.
Then put your hand into the patient's body, and blow into the skin, and draw it up until the head of the patient is expelled Then wipe away that which is gathered in that cavity.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Then bind below with a piece of ligament as much as the ligament above Then take hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament with good retention, and cut between the two ligaments. Then raise the skin up quickly and extract the head of the patient Then let the blood flow out slowly (for it is better thus) and put down powder: and put on a bandage above the powder on which the expanding testicle or decocted testicles in rose-water are broken with fresh rose-water: and leave it on until another day: and take care of the rest of the treatment until the patient is healed.
The form of the instrument for these incisions is as follows
There are two handles at both ends, and there are two blades: do not let the nails escape from the claw: and let the length of the two be equal to the length of two thumbs together
The mistake often happens in incisions: for perhaps the skin covering the whole inside escapes at the incision, or a part of it.
Therefore it is necessary that you extend your hand with your finger before making the incision at the place: and make the incision according to the equality
If you are unable to keep the limb with your thumb, then extract it with the index finger and cut it off.
If it remains swollen under the nail for three days, and the swelling does not subside, amputation: then dismiss that, until the swelling becomes soft, and remove it easily, and cut it off as is usual for you: and be cautious from the head of the nail. It will not be painful for him.
Handle it with that which consolidates the nail, as we have mentioned in the treatise on nails: and if it escapes from the skin above the measure, and goes upwards, it does not harm him even so
Handle it with that which we have mentioned, until it is healed.
Chapter 58.</start_of_turn>
On the extraction of a retained nail in the flesh.
The retention of urine in the bladder arises from a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, or similar things which we have mentioned in the section on treatment.
And if the urine does not become loose, and the retention is because of a stone which is in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary to make him lie with his knee bent over his knee Then compose his feet over his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of his back, and tighten his windpipe as much as possible for him He considers thus when the neck of the bladder is towards the expulsion of the stone backwards: then the urine is expelled
And if it does not become loose as we have mentioned, and the thing is serious: then it is necessary to administer the extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which is made of silver, is subtle, flexible, curved like a feather quill in the thickness of a palm of the hand, with a fine tube at the head of it.
And the way out of the vein is through itself, so that you grasp a doubled thread and bind it at its extremity to a lan or cot, a good ligation: and introduce the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the Syringae: and cut with scissors if anything remains from the lan, truly introduce it into the cannula with certainty, as is done for an alzer.
Then immerse the Syringae with oil, or butter, and alum, and make the patient sit on a seat, and embalm the wound, and cover the wound with moist oils, and oil of olive, and warm water.
Then introduce the Syringae into the wound with ease, until it reaches the root of the wound.
Then double the above from the part of the navel.
Then push the Syringae inside itself, until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has gone to the bottom: and do not do this except according to this order, except in the case where the wound, in which it goes, is tortuous
Then extend the thread with lan slowly. The vein follows the lan.
Then draw out the thread, and make the vein run through the urine: and repeat the Syringae, and do not cease doing this until the wound is evacuated and the patient feels relief
Regarding the quality of the urine with Clepshydra.
Chapter 59.
When it happens in the bladder that there is a wound, or the blood is frozen in it, or is coarsened in it by pus, and the urine is distilled into water and medicines: then make use of an instrument called Clepshydra, and this is its form
The ear is deaf, that is, closed. There are three holes in it, two from one side and one from the other, like veins.
The cavity where that which drives it is situated should be according to the quantity of what is useful for it without addition, until when it is pulled with something else, something is drawn from the moistures: and when it is driven out, when it is expelled at length: according to what makes the clap of urine, which is projected from pitch, that is, Greek fire in the marshes of Mars.
When thus one wishes to project the moistures into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clap of urine into the moisture, and draw with it that which drives it to the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clap of urine
Then introduce its extremity into the bladder, as we said concerning the syringe. Then drive out the moisture with that which drives it and indeed the moisture immediately follows the bladder, as it feels the sick person
Thus makes a soft enema which is instilled into the bladder.</start_of_turn>
It is made from silver or gold: whose head is higher like a small bowl, and under it there is a space between which the ligament passes.</start_of_turn>
Then grasp the bladder of a sheep, and put in it the moisture which one wishes to instill in the bladder.</start_of_turn Then bind the two spaces together with a strong ligature with a double thread: and heat up the moisture slightly over fire.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the extremity of the enema into the bladder, afterwards draw your hand over the bladder with the moisture firmly bound down, until the sick person feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.</start_of_turn
If, however, the bladder is not present, then take a piece of gut and form a circle from it, and perforate it from all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread firmly into these holes, as they curve around Then gather the circle, as is done with alum. When you have placed in it what you wish of moisture, and oil, and water.
Then bind it in an instrument: and make with it as with the bladder when expressing with your hand, until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.</start_of_turn>
(The text continues with instructions on extracting a stone from the bladder.)
We have already spoken in the discourse concerning the species of stones, and their treatment by physicians: and we have spoken of the difference between a stone generated in the bowels and the bladder, and the signs of the former: and we have spoken of the stone in which the operation is performed with the hand and incision: and this is a stone generated in the bladder itself: and that which appears in the urine: and I will narrate this with manifest exposition and abbreviation.
I say therefore, that the stone generated in the bladder, most frequently happens to children.
And from its signs it is known that the urine comes out of the bladder like water in its consistency: and there appears in it white sand, and it irritates the soft parts of the urine, and causes them to swell, and often hangs up Then it rises up, and comes out with the anus in many of them.
And it is easy to heal the children of this, up until the age of fourteen years It is difficult in old age. But in youth it is middle-aged, in that which it is between these two: and its lapis is greater, its cure is easier: and if it is slight, it is more sparing of that care.
When we come to the treatment, it is necessary in the first place to evacuate the patient with a purgative, which draws out all the stool that is in the intestines: for this indeed often hinders the discovery of the lapis at the inquiry.
Then the patient is taken with his feet, and is shaken, and moved downwards: so that the lapis may go down to the bottom of the bladder, or go out from its high place in some other way.
Then make him sit between your two hands prepared, and your hands are under his buttocks, so that the bladder may be completely emptied downwards
Then ask him and touch him externally.
If you feel the lapis in the place, then act immediately with a section above it
If it does not come under your touch at all, then you must remove the index finger with the left hand if the patient is a child: or the middle finger if he is an adult: and introduce it into his rectum, and ask about the lapis, until it is under your finger: and bring it slowly to the neck of the bladder
Then press above it with your finger, and push it outwards against the place where the incision is to be made: and command the minister who is on the right to grasp the bladder with his hand, and command another minister to stretch out the testicles with his left hand: and the third hand to move the skin which is under the testicles in the part where the incision is to be made
Then insert the sponge carefully into the cavity, which is of this shape. Then insert the sponge carefully into the cavity, which is of this shape. Find what is between the testicles and the navel, and not in the middle, to the left of the navel: and let the incision be above the highest stone, and your finger on the anus: make a transverse incision, so that the external incision is wide and the internal incision is narrow, according to the quantity which will allow the stone to pass from it without greater difficulty.
Perhaps the finger that is in the anus will grasp the stone at the incision and it will come out without difficulty.
And you know that the stone has angles and edges, which makes its exit difficult on account of these
And it is soft like a gland and round: and it makes its exit easy.
Therefore let there be angles and edges added to the incision
If it does not come out like this, then you must know that you must bring the thumb over the top: or grasp it with your hand which is hanging loosely, whose tip is like the moon which grasps the stone and does not slip from it: or that you insert under it an instrument which is slightly curved at its tip
If you are unable to do these things, then widen the opening a little more If blood escapes from the wound, cut it off with a saw
If there are more than one stone, then push out the large one first towards the opening of the bladder Then cut over the stone Then push out the small one afterwards: and do the same if there are more than two of them.
If the wound is large, then ignorance is equal to cutting above it with a great section. For a sick man, one of two things must happen: either he will die, or his urine will be retained with excessive frequency: because, in neither case is the whole area solidified
But one must cause its evacuation, until it escapes: or prepare a fracture of it with scissors, until you have extracted it uselessly
When you have finished your operation, then apply a wound cover, aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place over it a soaked bandage of oil and wine, or rose oil and cold water: so that the swelling will subside
Then rest the sick man on his side, and do not tighten the ligaments, until the third day. When you have finished healing it, embroider the place with water, and much oil.
Then care for it with unguents of alum and ointment of basil, until it is healed
But if in the wound there is added a thick swelling, and corruption, and similar things: as when blood is clotted in the bladder and is withheld from it: this is known from the evacuation of blood with urine. Introduce your finger into the wound, and extract the clotted blood. For if it remains, it causes corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and apply every kind of remedy that suits the cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the course of the treatment of all these things, to bind up two joints, and to massage, because of the medicines which are placed over the place.
If the stone is small and lies in the urine-passage, and is fixed in it, and hinders the discharge of urine: then care for it with that which I mentioned before until you reach the section. You are not to evacuate from the section for this treatment, for I have proved it to be useful in many cases.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to take a hook of iron, which is shaped like a triangle with acute extremities, fixed in wood.</start_of_turn>
Then take thread and bind with it the urine-passage under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.</start_of_turn
Then insert the perforating hook into the urine-passage with ease, until the hook reaches the stone: and withdraw the hook gradually from the stone: and prepare a perforation in it from the other side.
The urine will immediately cease.</start_of_turn>
Then press your hand over that which remains of the stone from the outside of the urine-passage.</start_of_turn It will break and go out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.</start_of_turn
If, however, you do not prepare this treatment, because of something which hinders it: then bind thread under the stone and thread above the stone.</start_of_turn And dry over the stone in the urine between the two ligatures.</start_of_turn Then extract it.</start_of_turn> Then dissolve the ligament and bandage the frozen blood which is in the wound.</start_of_turn
And it is not necessary to bind the thread under the stone, except that it does not return to the bladder: and bind the other thread above, except when you have dissolved the thread after the passage of the stone, so that the skin returns to its place and closes the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to bind the upper thread when you elevate the skin to the top, so that the skin returns to its proper place and closes the wound as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Chapter LX. On the extraction of the stone from women.
On the extraction of the stone from women.
The stone is rarely generated in women.
If, however, it should happen to any of them that they have a stone, then its cure is difficult, and is forbidden by many methods.
One of them is: perhaps the woman is a virgin.
And the second is, because you will not find a woman who will confess to a physician that she has a stone when she is a virgin, or is still living with her husband
The third is, because you will not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially the operation with the hand
And the fourth is the distance of the stone from the place where it is: because it requires a deep section, and there is fear in that
If necessity compels you to do that, then you must take a female physician who is well-versed: and it is rarely found.</start_of_turn>
If you do wish to take precedence of these, then seek a chaste physician, discreet, and present to her a skilled female obstetrician who is well-versed in women's matters, or a woman who has learned a part of the art: make her do everything that she is questioned about concerning the stone.</start_of_turn
Firstly, that she may look to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to insert her finger into her body, and seek the stone.</start_of_turn>
If she finds it, she should grasp it under her finger, and then command the obstetrician to insert her finger into the lower belly, and inquire about the stone, after she has placed her left hand over the navel, and pressed it firmly.</start_of_turn>
If therefore the stone is found, it is necessary that it be gradually moved from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with the sum of one's strength, until it reaches the root of the hip.
Then shut over it above the middle of the bladder towards the root of the hip from whichever side is suitable for it, and feel the stone in that part: and do not move your finger from the stone, keeping it confined under it: and make a small incision at first Then insert the radium through that incision.
Then insert the radium through that incision. If therefore you feel the stone, then add to the incision according to the quantity that the stone protrudes from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. Of these there are some small and some large, some soft and some hard, some long and some round having a branch.
You know therefore the kind of these, so that you may understand by this what is above it
If therefore blood boils, then add in the place of the incision a plaster of gut, and keep it for an hour, until the blood is clotted.
Then return to your operation, until the stone comes out: and make ready with me the instruments which I mentioned in the extraction of the stone from the bladder, so that you may help me in your operation.
If therefore blood flows, and you know that the flow of blood is from the artery that has been cut: then put powder on the place and bind it with thread like nails: and do not move it: and let go of the stone, and do not take it out Perhaps the woman is weak. Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after a few days and the place has become putrid, then return to your operation until the tissue has healed
Chapter 12
Of the cutting of an aquous hernia.
A swelling is not aquous unless there is an accumulation of moisture in a white bag, which is under the testicles and contains seed: and it is called a hernia
And when it is in the own testicles, which the nature has prepared for it in part or all, until it is burst: that is, there is another seed, and it is the skin of the testicles between the white bag which we have mentioned: and it does not happen except rarely
And the generation of these swellings is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: and it flows out from them towards these matters And when it happens from a blow upon the testicles
And this moisture has many colors. Or it is of a yellow-orange color, or it is a reddish-brown, or greenish, black, or it is pure white: and this is better
And the signs by which you know that there is an accumulation of moisture are these: For if it is in the white bag which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round like a seed of the same size: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from all sides
And if it is in the own testicles, then the swelling is round with a part of the testicles, and because of this the man knows that there is another seed.
And if humidity is between the skin of the testicles and the sack, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore one wishes to recognize the colour of humidity, then to experience the colour of humidity in the afterimage with the inner square which precedes it.</start_of_turn> According to that which proceeds from the inner square, judge concerning that which is between it.</start_of_turn>
When therefore we come to the treatment with the iron, then it is necessary to strip off the principal ailments from the patient, as far as possible, and to let blood from him if it is possible.
Then it is placed upon his back above the high thing slightly, and put under it many towels.</start_of_turn
Then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right side, who extends his hand to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part which is near the navel.</start_of_turn
Then take a broad spatula, and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, until almost to the navel: and make an incision following a straight line equidistant from the line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white sack which includes it: and scrape it out and observe, or cut it out altogether: and do so with such care as to cause as little damage as possible. And gently scrape away the surrounding area with the scraping, as much as you are able.</start_of_turn
Then perforate the full sack with water by means of a wide opening, and extract all the water.</start_of_turn
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the sack upwards, and do not touch the skin of the testicles which is included: and cut the sack in any way that is possible for you, or entirely, or partly, especially its large size beneath the surface.</start_of_turn If you are not meticulous in your examination, there is no security in the incision, for the water will return.
If, however, anything proceeds exteriorly from its cavity in the hour of your operation: then when you have completed the section of the gut, reduce it. Then join together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it like the rest of the wounds, until it is healed
If you find anything corrupted from black bile elsewhere, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels which are the source of the flux of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension, and extract the contents: afterwards care for it as we have said before
If indeed water has collected in two parts, then you know that there are two veins: dry therefore the other part equally
And if you make them equal, so that the operation be one, then do so: then drain the blood. And introduce into the sections the soaked lanen in oil, or in rose oil: and put outside the lanen another which you submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over two testicles, and see the belly: and put over it doubled layers of cloth, and they are sponges: and bind them up above with a ligament which has six fingers according to this shape
And draw out two cloths, and wash, and apply the fragrant unguent, according to this likeness: and let the extremities which are sent forth from the hip, or wet wool: and gather them together with the tightening in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity shall take over the top until the shoulder, and the second shall take over at the part of the hip: and the two extremities upon two thighs below, and the two extremities above two buttocks, and gather the whole tightening in the lumbar region of the arms.
And when it is necessary to treat these matters artificially, with the cautery in the place of incision with the iron: take the cautery in the form of a pointed knife and cut through the skin of the testicles. This is ignited, as we have mentioned previously, until the white fat containing water is detected. Then take the cautery once more, in this fashion.
When it is necessary to treat these things artificially, with the cautery in place of incision with the iron, take the cautery in the shape of a pointed knife and cut through the skin of the testicles. This is ignited until the white fat containing water is detected. Then take the cautery once more in this way.
Then pierce with it through this fat and it is ignited until all the moisture has escaped.
Then stretch out the fat with hooks and remove it with the cautery, which is ignited finely, and cut through it as much as possible, until you have excised all of it
And burn from outside, so that it does not touch the fire.
You know that this operation is safer and more lasting than incision, and better than the operation with cutting
If indeed there is opposition to the operation in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cautery after the swelling has subsided, or blood flow, or something else: then it is necessary to cure the opposition that exists from that with the treatment that is appropriate for it, as has been said
But if the patient is timid and does not expect such an operation because of its horror: then I give the perforation as I have mentioned above: and this is it.
When it is confirmed to you that this is the case, that the testicle is aqueous: then you must make the patient sit on a raised seat
Then pierce the swelling at the lower part of it with a wide spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and keep the opening wide open until all the fluid has drained out
Then place over the seat of the patient, and bind it, and let go of it so that it may run off the rest of the water: then care for it until the wound is healed.
If, however, there be resistance to the outflow of water in the hour when you perforate it: and this is not except for the reason that a white plug hinders the exit of the water at the opening of the wound: then you must introduce a bougie in the wound, or an instrument with which the water of the hydrops is extracted, whose form has preceded: or add in the operation of the wound a little of the like.
And know that the water returns and gathers after six months, or thereabouts. When it has gathered again, then it will return according to the same manner, and pass over the patient's bad days
Chapter LXIII.</start_of_turn>
Of the care of the flesh of the limb.
Know that in the section above this limb, there is fear of producing infection in various positions Therefore its salt must be taken away from it.
And I recall the operation in it, and the kind of pus
I say, therefore, that many abscesses happen in the bodies, from which testicles are made: and this is from many wounds, namely
Or from acute or sharp excess, which flows to the testicles Or from percussion
And the colour of the pus is according to the colour of the body, and it is not found to be painful: and it is a grave abscess.
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose colour is dark brown, and which has no sensation.
And sometimes it arises from an aneurism of the arteries, and swelling of the veins: thus is its remembrance recalled in this case: or from the swelling of the veins.
That which is from an aneurysm of the arteries, is recognized by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers.</start_of_turn> And it does not behove that you touch it directly.</start_of_turn>
That which arises from the swelling of the veins, does not vanish from this by pressing with the fingers.</start_of_turn
And it is possible that in this case an incision should be made, and over the rest of the body: and it is as though one should cut through the skin of the testicles.</start_of_turn> And then extend the hand upwards, and extract it with a white cloth: and remove the clot from the veins, and ligate the veins: and cut through the clot when you have freed it from all parts of the limb.</start_of_turn
If indeed the limb is consolidated with those natural parts of the body, then it is necessary that you draw out the limb, and cut it through.</start_of_turn
And if there is an adhesion between some of the bones, or in that which is between the veins: then it is necessary that you free the entire adhesion, and make a circular incision.</start_of_turn
And if there is a natural protrusion of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary that you cut through all of it, and extract the limb, as we have said.</start_of_turn
When you have completed your operation, then put a bandage soaked in warm oil and wine on the wound, and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it has healed.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of the Ramus, which is with Vite.
On the care of the Ramus, which is with Vite.
The swelling is a hardened swelling of the quadra that involves the testicles, resembling a bag filled with sand: and it makes difficult the movement and exercise of the patient, and walking.
And in the care of this swelling is fear, because of which there is a recollection of it
It is true that we must say that an operation must be performed in it according to what the first people did
I say therefore that one must make the patient sit on a raised seat Then drive the suspension of the testicles downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the nails towards the veins: and let another person hold them, and extend them gently
Then cut with a sharp knife in a transverse direction across the vein, until the vessels are found.
Then remove from all around, as we said concerning the arteries in their times
Then fix in place with a loop of thread where there is a double thread, and bind it in the first place where the Vite are: and bind it again at the last of them. Then dry them in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and remove what is gathered from the humours that are corrupted.
Then care for the wound with the care of the other wounds, in which is the generation of health, so that the vessels that nourish one testicle fall away It is not bad for this reason
If, however, the veins become affected throughout, then it is necessary to extract the testicles with the veins: so that neither the testicles nor the veins are deprived of nourishment through an incision, and that neither of them should become gangrenous or suffer damage from the incision.
Chapter 15
Regarding the care of the intestines.
The cause of this disorder is a section [i.e., hernia] which occurs in the large intestine above the belly in the groin from the navel of the intestine.
Why do the intestines descend from this rupture to one testicle? This rupture is either from a hernia or from its extension
These two kinds of rupture result from various causes: from a blow, from a jump, from a cry, from elevation of a heavy object, and similar things
The sign is when there is an extrusion of the intestines through the hernia. This happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen immediately: and it is equal in size to the depth of the hernia: because the hernia compresses the intestine
The sign is when there is a section of the hernia, because it makes the pain acute from the beginning: and it is a different swelling, which appears under the skin nearby: and this is because the intestine comes out through the hernia, and its course is towards the exterior of the hernia
When the intestines come out with a mass: and this is called intestinal hernia, or strangulation: and when it is accompanied by vomiting
When there is stool in the intestine, and it is retained there: and this is with great pain: because it causes severe pain, especially when it is expelled
And in the treatment of these diseases of the body with iron, fear exists: therefore it is necessary that the case be cautiously handled in this matter.
The mode of action is that the physician should apply pressure to the principal parts of the patient, so as to reduce the intestines to their proper place within the concavity of the body, if he obeys the return of the bowels.</start_of_turn> Then rest the patient upon his heel between your hands: and elevate his limbs.</start_of_turn>
Then stretch out the skin following the skin to the upper parts, and dry the whole of the scrotum thoroughly.</start_of_turn Then fix in two jaws the section of the gut which is to be opened, according as it is necessary to open the section with the iron: and the section should be made according to the quantity which is possible, so that it may be easily ejected from it.</start_of_turn
Then scrape the omentum and that which is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white omentum is detected, hard from all sides: then introduce your finger indicating in that which is following the testicle, which is between the white omentum and the omentum itself, and between the omentum and the substance which adheres to the posterior part of the testicle.</start_of_turn
Then move with the right hand the hand towards the interior of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white omentum upwards, with the left hand: and elevate the testicles with the omentum to the part of the section: and command the minister to extend the testicles upwards: and you will solve the adhesion which is at the back of the complete solution.</start_of_turn
And inquire with your fingers that there be nothing left inside the white omentum or hard.</start_of_turn If however you find anything in it: then drive it downwards.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of the knot, in which the thick thread is situated: make a loop from ten threads: and insert it through the last opening, that is, the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles following the section: then cut off the ends which protrude from the thread until there are four threads left. Then make a figure-of-four knot: and tie with two throws, as we have said, because it is under the skin of the testicles that the ligament should be tied, until it can no longer support any weight, which would cause the testicles to swell excessively And pass the ligament again outside the first ligament, a distance less than two fingers wide. And cut away the remaining whole according to the roundness, and take out the whole thing from there.
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles at the section from which blood runs, and heal: as we have said before.
Then apply wet wool under the fat and put in a bandage: and manage the ligament which we mentioned before. And when the white sack which we mentioned has been cauterized after the incision, fearing the flow of blood. Many times this has happened to us. Cut the ligament until it falls away by itself.
If, however, the case is delayed, then it will be embroidered with warm water: and put upon that which we mentioned before, until it falls away
Then care for the bandage with the rest of the care of wounds, until it heals.
From a swollen root.
From a swollen root.
From a swollen root, let no one presume to attempt its treatment with iron.
And first of all, they say that it is like that which we have mentioned in the Ramus which is concerning the Vite. Like that which is mentioned concerning the Vite in the Ramus, regarding which, after section, one should facilitate the lower part: then dry in the middle, and afterwards care for that which opens it until the bristles fall out: and care for the wound, as we have said, until it is healed
Concerning the disruption which occurs in the testicles
Concerning the disruption which occurs in the testicles
When a rupture occurs in the testicles, as we have said, and the place escapes and does not go down to the testicles from the intestines: and if it does go down, it is little and returns in every hour: truly if it is prolonged with that time, a tear is added in the spleen, until the intestines go down into the spleen
And that occurs from the extension of the spleen, which is in the testicles, as we have said That is, because the spleen extends: then it becomes softened and the place escapes, and the place escapes.
And its care is with cautery, as it has been mentioned previously.
And when it is being cared for with iron, in this manner: and the patient lies upon his back between your hands Then dry the place of the rupture after it has escaped and is escaping, by cutting across the breadth, according to the quantity of three fingers wide
Then draw the string until it reaches the white patch [subcute], which follows the black patch [subcute].
Then grasp the loop [radium] and place it over the prominent part [loci eminentis] of the gut, and press it deeply into the belly
Then take two prominent parts at the extremity of the loop from the gut, and suture them together with one suture: then draw out the extremity of the loop.
And do not cut the gut at all, neither stretch nor tear anything, like I have told you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then take care of the wound. When you have finished cutting the thread, moisten that [the wound] and restore the [tissue], until it is consolidated
Do not tighten too tightly [the suture], and do not add prominence to the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to the bowels
Chapter LXVIII.</start_of_turn>
About the mollification of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because the meats which are between them are softened, and the aspect of it is spoiled.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is treating him to make him vomit what is above his back, and to cut away the whole softened skin above the natural skin
Then join together two lips with a suture: and if you wish, do so with the superfluous skin of the softened skin by means of three or four sutures, and strengthen the suture.
Then insert between the sutures.
Then care for the remaining wounds until they are healed, and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX
Of Castration
You know that castration is forbidden in our law: and for that reason I am not permitted to speak of it in this book: and it is not necessary to speak of it, except for two cases.
Of which one is when it is asked about in the science of medicine: and to know its treatment when it happens
And the other is that we often need castration for some animals, because of the stench which proceeds from them, such as asses, hinnies, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Or by cutting off. Or by incision, and cutting through
In the former, however, which is done by cutting off, the operation is as follows: we make the animal sit in warm water, until the testicles soften and relax, and hang down: then we cut off the testicles with your hand, until they are dissolved and do not appear to the touch
In castration by incision and cutting through, it is necessary to hold the animal, and grasp the skin of the testicles with your left hand
Then tie the suspension, and dry over every wound a single layer of ligature: until when two holes appear: then cut through them after you have excised each one, and do not leave anything outside except for a slight scab, which is over the hair
And thus is the best method of castration by attrition: for the attrition may perhaps leave something behind from the testicles, which the animal desires for coitus.
Then care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 70.</start_of_turn
There are two methods for the care of hermaphrodites.</start_of_turn>
A hermaphrodite is from the urine according to two methods.</start_of_turn One of them is that it appears in the space following the testicles, or in the middle of the testicles, like a female vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes the urine runs out from that which is in the middle of the testicles.</start_of_turn
But in women there is one kind, which is a female vulva above the navel like a small penis of a man, protruding outwards: one of them is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles.</start_of_turn
And the care for the three kinds, of two from the urine and one from the women, is: because it is necessary to cut away the added flesh until the impression of them is gone.</start_of_turn Then care for the rest of the wounds.</start_of_turn
As for the second kind of hermaphrodites, from which urine comes out, which is in the middle of the testicles, there is no operation, neither is there any care for it.</start_of_turn
Chapter 71.</start_of_turn
Of the incision of the Tenticle, and the excision of the flesh that projects outwards in the women's ulcers.</start_of_turn
The limb may perhaps be added above the natural part until it becomes swollen and unsightly: and sometimes it swells in certain women to such an extent that it spreads out like in the womb, and persists until it reaches the navel.
It is necessary therefore to ligate the supernumerary part of the limb, either with a ligature or with a clamp: and do not delay in making the incision, especially at the root: in order that there be no outflow of blood.
Then care for the healing of the wound until it is healed
The flesh which is born from the birth-opening of the womb, until it has filled itself out: and sometimes it emerges outwards like the tail: and because of this some call it tail-disease. It is necessary therefore to make an incision like that which is made of the limb, and to care for it, until it is healed
As for the care of the areola, which is the unpierced hole of the woman.
Chapter LXXII.
The areola is, when it is the unpierced hole of a woman, or when it is a small hole. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from the wound which preceded it: and sometimes it is caused by the addition of flesh or by fine fat, or by pus: and it may be either in the womb itself, or in the flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it prevents coitus and conception, and delivery, and perhaps it prevents menstruation also
And the knowledge of it is by the appearance of the midwife, if the opening is close to the navel.
If it is not apparent, then inquire with your fingers or by X-ray.
If, however, the swelling is from a thin ulcer and is close to the bones of the limb: then it must be scraped away, and the ulcer must be broken open.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to place over two lips two little cushions.</start_of_turn>
Then place your two fingers of both hands together, and the woman should sit with her back against her thighs spread wide.</start_of_turn Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the thin ulcer is broken open and the swelling is burst.</start_of_turn
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it on the place: and the woman should keep it pressed there every day, so that it does not harden in another place.</start_of_turn
If, however, the swelling is large and tough: then it is necessary to cut it out with a knife like the edge of a leaf of myrrh.</start_of_turn
If, however, the swelling is from natural tissue: then suspend the bleeding with hooks, and cut through it: and there should be with you medicines which stop bleeding without causing a bruise, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and such like alum.</start_of_turn
Then administer a lead balloon wide, so that it does not harden too quickly, keep it for a few days: and administer a decoction of dried poppy seed, then care for the rest, until he is healed.</start_of_turn
And when there is birth in the matrix of other tissues: it is necessary to cut accordingly in this way: while there is no cancerous abscess, do not make resistance with iron in any way.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red ones in the veins of women.
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red ones in the veins of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed excoriations of the orifices of veins, until such time as there is a great discharge of blood from them.
When they have been thus diminished, hemorrhoids become small: and as I have said in the enumeration of their kinds, and their signs: here I will speak of what things receive treatment for them, and what things do not
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the matrix orifice, and are not apparent to sense: then there is no treatment for them with iron.
Those which, however, are in the matrix orifice above which sense falls, are those which are cured.
It is necessary therefore that you put the woman in a cold house Then extend Athehelil with forceps, or with rough linen, and cut away the roots of them
Then powder over the veins above the flow of blood from one incision without causing damage: thus as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and the like things.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour Then put her away in cold water
If the bleeding should persist: then make her sit in a decoction of marjoram, and oatmeal, and caraway, and the like things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back
If blood is thereby separated, it is good: and if not, cause the swollen parts to adhere to each other and to the mammil, without incision.
Then take wool, and dip in pitch, or in aloe juice, or in vinegar of almonds, that is, aloes, wine of potio, and cause to adhere the parts together
When the swelling subsides, then care for the place with unguents until it heals.
But indeed it is red like blood vessels, and has a rough appearance.
It is necessary therefore that you cut away what appears from it, as I have said before: and care for it, until it heals.
Chapter LXXIV.
Concerning the perforation of the Exitura which occurs in the matrix.
There are many kinds of swellings which occur in the matrix, such as cancer, and stone abscess, and ulcer, and tumours, and swellings caused by worms, and herpes, and haemorrhoids, and carbuncles, and abscesses, and gangrene.
And I will say also that I will speak of the swelling which occurs in the matrix, when it is caused by the collection of blood, and how it is opened with an iron
You must consider this carefully When in its beginning the pain of the swelling is acute with percussion, and with inflammation and fever: and you see it turn red: do not dare to perforate it: care for it until the acute symptoms subside
Then it is necessary that you make her sit upon a seat which beats two seats, and that she recline or be supported upon her back, and gather her feet to the lower part of her belly: and let her knees be spread wide, and place her arms under her knees, and bind each ligament conveniently to that.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side, and manage the instrument with which the opening of the birth passage is made.
And it is necessary when you manage this instrument that the liver be together with the Radio of the deep part of the woman's belly: so that it is not that which enters from the instrument more than the depth of the belly, and causes pain to the lower part.
If however the instrument be thicker than the depth, then you must put sponges upon the covering of the deep part of the belly: so as to prevent the entrance of the whole instrument into the depth of the belly: and you must put a sponge, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and you must hold the instrument, and must twist the minister of the sponge until the depth of the belly is opened
When therefore the Exitura appears, and the hand grasps it, and it is gentle and soft: then it is necessary that you cut it off at the head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the urine is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a cloth soaked in saffron oil: or in olive oil, in which there is some stickiness: and put on the cloth, and withdraw the section from the depth of the belly
And put externally upon the belly, and upon the navel a wet cloth of wool covered in water, in which there are bad bulges.
Then it should be cared for for two days with an unguent which is suitable for it, until it is healed.
When the matrix and the vulnus have been washed, it should be cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled. Then return to the unguent.
If the vulnus is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to prohibit its care with iron, and take care of it in the way we mentioned in the instruction
Chapter LX.
Concerning the treatment of the embryos of women, how to medicate them, according to an unnatural figure of egress.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to know at first the figure of natural delivery
When women are pressed downwards by their waters and they desire to smell the air, and they feel a sensation above what is below concerning the birth, and they hasten the exit of the embryo: then you know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and that the head comes out first, and the second with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress the belly, so that the embryo descends more quickly.
For when it descends upon the head, the second descends with it, and they go out from these superabundances with a good expulsion
Whoever is outside of this part is unnatural and dangerous.
For when the fetus comes out upon its feet, and its body comes out before its head, and its feet and hands together, or one foot alone: or its head and hands, or its belly: or perhaps it turns upon its neck, and similar things from the unnatural figures
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to be prudent, cautious in all these matters, and to fear both error and neglect: for I shall disclose every figure and how skillful it is in this, and it is signified by this, and it stands above all else.
When the fetus comes out upon its head during natural delivery, and its head is thrust upon the woman, and delivery becomes difficult for her, and its force is diminished: then let her sit down, or let the women hold her up: and let steam rise up from the vinegar with bay leaves and with oily substances.
Then the Obstetrician inserts his small finger between the toes of the patient, and finds the second one, and cuts it with his nail, until it runs its course in it from the moisture: and he presses upon the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer an enema to the woman with vinegar of bay leaves, with oilseed.
Then command her to sit after the enema, and let her strain: and hold her hand and her nose for an hour together. The fetus will immediately come out.
If two hands of the fetus come out first, it is necessary to reduce them gradually with ease If it does not obey in the delivery, then place the woman down and lift up her feet: then push down the seat upon the earth: and the woman shall be held, so that she does not fall from the shock
If, however, the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut open the belly, and extract the fetus: and tie up its hand with a cloth, and extract it with evenness: for it will come out itself.
The fetus has emerged above its feet. As the fetus emerges above its feet, it should be pushed upwards: then gradually restrain the fetus: afterwards it will be level with it.
Then grasp one foot and gradually extend it
When they emerge up to the thighs, then command it to lie down, so that it is compressed, and cause it to strain: it will go out if God wills it.
And if it does not come out as we have described, then gradually reduce the fetus until you place it according to its natural shape For it will come out on its own when its time comes.
If it is obstructed as we have described: then grasp from the upper mud of the belly, and with sponges and salt: and pierce all through with a good blow: then join with the blood of the woman and the lower part of her belly. Then make it sit in warm water until the afterbirth follows
When the lower parts are softened by the heat, then make a scar of myrrh: and put it to rest When an hour has passed since the incision, then make it sit on a seat Then make it strain: and bind its jaw and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with ease For the fetus will come out immediately.
The fetus has emerged above the knees and hands When it emerges in this form, then gradually draw in its hands Then the woman lies upon her hip, and her feet hang down towards her ankles: she lies upon the bed and puts her hands to work. Then she gradually puts her hand above her belly Then she pulls out what is under her feet from the shoes until it is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then grasp her feet and move them with the utmost care Then gradually put your hand above the navel until the fetus ascends to the upper parts Then insert your hands and gradually steady the fetus: and command the woman to bear down, until the fetus comes out
The fetus comes out hanging sideways from the hands. Attention should be given to the reduction of her hands. If, however, it is not possible to reduce them, then lift the woman up and make her walk.
If she is still unable to walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her thighs with great care
Then administer the unguents which you have prepared from mucilages.
If she bears down, then make her sit on a stool Then study the reduction of the hands, and steady the fetus according to its natural shape: and command the woman to bear down, and tell her to compress herself, until the fetus comes out
The fetus comes out on her hip, with her hands spread out, and her face is turned towards the mother's back The obstetrix must hold the hand of the fetus firmly, then gradually release it and equalize it with ease.
When it is equalized, then place above the navel what we mentioned from wax and mucus
Then command it to move gradually. When you have done this, then make it sit on its seat, and command it to lean to the right side. Then command it to close: and make it breathe with the nose closed
The fetus is ready to be born on the right side. When it has descended through the birth opening in this way with the second finger, then split the second with your nail until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If it is suspended over the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut the cord from the navel: so that it is not retained and does not die.
Then urge the fetus inwards, until you place it according to what is required: and command the woman to compress herself a little: for it will itself go out through the easy birth opening.
The birth of twins, or of many fetuses. You know that twins are often born together: and sometimes three or four are born together. However, this is an unusual thing, and is rarely found.
Five things indeed are outside of nature, and do not live together: and they contain those, even though they multiply, together: and they are separated by the navel cord of each one of them
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus through a natural birth opening, easily: and they come out through an unnatural birth opening, as we have narrated.
If any of them are difficult in their parts, and arrive at that which we mentioned from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: let the leech be slight, and let it do what it does with ease and tardiness, and adapt itself to every figure as it is prepared for it from the guiding spirit of safety.
Remember that which is formed in the matrix from embryos, and aborts.
When one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more are formed in the matrix: and I have seen that a woman has aborted seven, and another fifteen, all of them being formed
As is done by the measure of the glorious sage
Therefore all this is necessary in the science of Midwifery Perhaps also it will reach like that: oppose to it what is necessary for it
Chapter LXXVI
Of the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with the thing which I mentioned in the discourse of medicine, and it does not go out, and you must do it by operation with a hand, then you must consider
If a woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the things from which she is afraid that she will lose the child: then it must be that the woman rest over the bed, over her back, and let her head be inclined downwards, and her legs be elevated: and the minister should hold the abdomen from two parts, or bind it to the bed, so that the body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the os matrix with oily things with high mucilage, and chaff of aloes, and linseed seeds.
Then let the Obstetrix apply his hand with these oils and mucilages: then he shall insert it into the matrix with ease. Then he shall seek the place where the ribs rest from the fetus, and the convenient place for it
Consider now, if the fetus is prepared to descend over his head: then fix the ribs in his eyes, or in his neck, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or under his collarbone, or in nearby places of the ribs, and under the hypochondria
If however the descent is over his feet, then in the loin and the middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hand with the right hand: and put the curvature of his hand in that which is between the little finger and the ring finger: and insert it with the hand with ease, and fix the hand in some one of those places which we mentioned, until it reaches the ultimate goal.
Then fix the other hand, or the third, if necessary: so that there is an equal contraction, and it does not incline to one side
Then extend with an equal extension, and it is not to be extended only according to the rule of the straight line, but rather move to all parts, so as to relieve the emergence of it: as it is done with a tooth at the extraction of it.
And it is necessary at that which is between these, to soften the extension. That if it is retained from this part, then let the Obstetrix grasp any finger with oil, and insert it from the side, so that it may recoil with what is retained
If therefore the limb of the fetus comes out, then exchange the nails to another place which is higher: do this until the fetus comes out whole
If, therefore, the hand goes forth before the others, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its constriction: then it is necessary that it be suspended above the palm. If, therefore, the hand goes forth before the others, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its constriction: then it is necessary that it be suspended above the palm
If the head of the fetus is large, or if there is constriction in its egress, or if there is water accumulated in its head: then it is necessary that it be introduced between the fingers of Spatumile spinosum, and that it be held together with it, and that the water be extracted: or that it be ruptured with an instrument which is called Almisdac, whose form is like that of the other instruments in this chapter.
Likewise do as if the fetus has a large head: then it is necessary that the membrane be separated: or that it be extracted with the hook, as we have said. Then grasp the bones with forceps.
When the head comes out, and is grasped at the collar: then it is found, until the humidity which is in the chest is drained out
If, however, it does not become complicated, and is not obedient to its egress: then cut the head off as best you can, according as is possible to you.
If the lower belly is apostematized, or if there is hydropsis in it: then it is necessary that it be pierced, until the humidity comes out from it
If, however, the fetus is above its feet: then its traction is easy, and its direction to the maternal bones is gentle
If, however, it is constricted at the belly, or the chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with the cloth which you have enveloped over your hand: and find the belly, or the chest, until the pain is gone.
If, however, the remaining limbs are raised up and the head returns: then the Obstetrix inserts his left hand inside. If the matrix opening is wide open, then he inserts his hand deep into the matrix and grasps the head, and pulls it with the fingers until it reaches the matrix bone: then he inserts one or two fingers into it and pulls with those.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the matrix bone is closed, because of a thick clot which has formed on it: then it is not necessary to toil above it, but rather it is necessary to administer an effusion of humors, fats: and administer plasters: and sit in water which softens and moistens.</start_of_turn>
If the fetus is over wide, then it is possible to equalize it: then the following is administered to the fetus as before.</start_of_turn>
If it is not possible to do this, then it is cut off and drawn out.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that you do not let anything escape from the second part entirely.</start_of_turn>
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said in the clots which arise in the matrix.</start_of_turn
If blood flow has occurred, then descend into the styptic waters, and administer the remaining treatment.</start_of_turn
And I myself have seen a woman in whose womb a fetus had died: then another fetus was impregnated over it afterwards, and afterwards the other fetus also died.</start_of_turn> This happened to her after a long time that a clot formed in her navel, and it became inflated, until it opened: and pus began to flow from it.</start_of_turn
I have been called to his care and have treated him for a long time: and the wound has not consolidated.
I place above it some strong adhesive plaster: and it has come out of its place.</start_of_turn> Then some days passed, and the bone came out again.</start_of_turn> I am anxious about it, for there is no bone in the wound.</start_of_turn>
I think that there were dead bones in the fetus.</start_of_turn
I questioned the wound, and I extracted many bones, the woman being in better conditions: and I left it thus for a long time, and there came out a little pus from the place.</start_of_turn
And I did not fix this foreign body, except that in it is knowledge, and an assistant for that which the artful doctor administers with his hand in treatment.</start_of_turn
Chapter 77.</start_of_turn>
On the forms of the necessary instruments for the extraction of the fetus.</start_of_turn
Two such Vertigines are formed which open up the matrix when they are revolved
Here below is the form of the Strictor, with which books are equalised, to which are equal two strings at the extremities of two sticks.</start_of_turn Truly this Vertigo should be finer than the Strictor: and that it may be made either of ivory or of seasoned wood.</start_of_turn
And the breadth of every stick is like two fingers: and the margin of each of them is like one finger, and the length of each of them is palm and a half: and in the middle of the two sticks are two projections of the same kind of stick, which are fixed in both, of whose length is half a palm and a little, and the breadth of each of them is like two fingers, or less.</start_of_turn
And these two adjuncts are introduced into the bone of the matrix, so that it will open when you revolve two Vertigines.
The other form is like that described before, but it is subtler and smoother
It is made from a splinter of ebony, or from ivory, according to the resemblance of pincers There are two adjuncts at its extremity, as mentioned above: and the length of each adjunct is like a palm, and the breadth of each is like two fingers.
When you wish to open up the matrix with this, then make the woman sit on a lectum, with her feet hanging down, and open that which is between her buttocks Then introduce these two adjuncts together into the matrix: and you hold the lower extremity of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, like making pincers, equally according to the quantity of the opening of the mouth of the matrix, until the Obstetrix wishes to stop
The other form of the Vertigines is like that described by the ancients: the form of the Impeller which drives out the fetus.
The form of the Almisdac, which counteracts the large head: and it is assimilated like pincers which have teeth at the extremity, like these above
And when it is bent, like pincers in this form, like these above, which have teeth like sharp teeth, with which it incides and counteracts
The neighbour's house has one spin.
The neighbour's house has two spins.
The shape of the spatula has two extremities to cut off the head
The shape of two spatulas also of the handles
All these instruments are used, and the more numerous the kinds of them are, and the more they are prepared by the artificer, the faster is the operation and the greater is the benefit to the patients, because of their quantity
Do not despise the appearance of the instrument, because it is prepared for you The necessity of these things is obvious
Head number 78
About the extraction of the second one
When the second one is retained at the birth, then it is necessary to grasp the lower part, so that it retains its breath. Then make it grasp with the thumb and index finger: and grasp the hand over his bone, and the breath of the same. If it comes out through this, it is good
If not: then grasp all of them, and pierce in the uterus through the navel: and put in it fragrant herbs, like calamus, rue, marjoram, chamomile, hyssop, and saffron: grasp all of these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them in water, and put them over fire.
Then put a bundle of reeds over the navel-cord of the vessel, and the other extremity in the bone of the uterus: and hold it until the steam comes out to the cavity of the uterus
Then make the incision as we have said. It will come out easily by itself.
If, however, it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then command the Physician to immerse his hand in warm lard, or in high slime. Then introduce the instrument into the wound, and search with it the Second [anatomical structure]. When you have found it, then grasp it and gradually expand it
If it is an appendix that is deeply embedded in the belly: then introduce the hand again as we have said, until you have found the Second [anatomical structure], and then gradually pull it out following a straight line, so that the belly does not tear at the point of traction: indeed it should be turned with ease to the right and left sides: and then add some traction to it It will obey you then, and will be evacuated, and will depart from the adhesion.
If the belly-wall is hard, as we have said: care for the wound with incision, and give it medicinal herbs from the jar.</start_of_turn>
If it does not come out with all that we have said: then be careful not to tire yourself out in the process of extracting it.</start_of_turn>
Truly it must come out to the belly-wall from the Second [anatomical structure] to the groin of the woman.</start_of_turn> Then close the wound with four-leaved bandages.</start_of_turn This will putrefy the wound after a few days, and will dissolve, and will depart.</start_of_turn
Truly when it has putrefied, it will emit a foul odor from the stomach and head, and will cause pain which will make the patient weak.</start_of_turn It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered for that.
Some of the ancients are experts in fumigation with naphtha and drying figs
The manner in which a woman is fumigated for retention of the second and monthly courses.
Let it be like a bath from behind, or from the heel: and put on the outside over the fire: and let the fumigation be placed over the loins: keep it there until that fumigation has been consumed: and do it again for another one
Chapter LXXIX.
Concerning the treatment of an unpierced animal.
Many boys are born with their heads whole, and the animals of them whom I have seen, I have oiled with soft fat It is necessary therefore that the midwife pierce that fat with her finger: and if not, pierce it with a pointed spatula: and beware of tears, lest it touch it.
Then put on it fat-soaked wool in wine and oil Then care for it with nails until it heals
If however it is oiled, then put in the ear a leaden cannula for many days, and take it out when the boy wants to spit.
And sometimes the oiling of an animal also takes place from the consolidation of a wound, or from the swelling. It is necessary therefore that that consolidation be dried up, and then care for it as we have said before concerning the treatment and lead
Chapter LXXX
Concerning the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part
The fistulas which happen in the lower parts are Nodatio and Grossitudo, which happen close to a deforis: or in the space of one part. And there is one fistula, or more.
When the Nodatio has become old, it opens and moisture like white water, or subtle pus, flows from it
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating Therefore they are recognized by what comes out with the evacuation, and by the swelling, when the patient evacuates: and perhaps it comes out with worms
And there are fistulas when they are penetrating from the space until the rectum, and until the meat of the abscess. And they are penetrating until the joint of the hip, and until the node of the buttocks.
From this it is known that a penetrating fistula until the deforis, even if not penetrating, is like that which you introduce your finger to the deforis: and you introduce something subtle into the fistula from the air, or from the iron, when there is no twisting
When there is twisting in this, then introduce into the abscess something like lead or a hair from a horse's tail, until you feel the abscess, or until the hair comes out in your finger.
If you do not feel the abscess itself, neither does anything come out with the evacuation, neither swelling, neither worms as I said: then you know that it is not penetrating: go therefore for treatment
And when the fistula is penetrating until the rectum, or until the meat of the bladder: then the meaning of it is the evacuation of the urine from it, and the prohibition of this from happening again so that the place may be solidified with the doctors.
If the wound extends up to the hip joint or the hip bone: then its sign is that the tentacles reach up to it, if not twisted up to the bone. And there is pain around the part, and discharge of pus from it always. And it does not yield to treatment, neither is it consolidated with ointment.
In all these penetrating wounds there is no complete cure: the cure for them is toil and perseverance from the stupid doctors who cause them.</start_of_turn>
But in those which are not penetrating or old, healing is hoped for with rest: as I have said before, and as I have proved: let the sick man lie between your hands on his back; elevate his legs up to above his hips, and let his thighs rest against his belly.</start_of_turn> Then introduce lead or air into the wound, if there is a twisting of the wound, until you know where the tentacles reach.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the sick man feels around the part a sensation of heat, then it is necessary to insert your finger as an index into the part.</start_of_turn>
If you feel the tentacles of the wound grasping your finger itself, as well as between your finger and the flesh, or the bone: then you know certainly that it is penetrating. Do not toil in it, for its cure is not to be found in this way, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
They say that in some men the wound heals by itself, and by the application of medicines which are expected to cause it to swell: thus one must apply gentle cautery according to the size of the wound, and introduce the flame into the wound, until it reaches around the part.</start_of_turn Then repeat that twice or thrice until you know that all the added flesh has become soft like the feathers of a bird.
Then care for it with butter-soaked dressings until they emerge from the flesh, which has become soft: then care for it with unguents generating flesh and solidifying it.
If it heals well, that is good.</start_of_turn>
And if not, it will not heal with any other treatment.</start_of_turn>
And if it comes out, and does not stop until it reaches your thumb, which is in the year, and is between the thumb and the great toe, and there is a thick piece of flesh or fat there: then make a fistula there following the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry with the thumb which is in the fistula until the drying reaches the end of the thumb, and the thumb is freed and falls off.</start_of_turn>
Then soften those soft tissues which have become like the feathers of a bird, so that nothing remains of them.</start_of_turn>
If however blood boils between you and the operation, and dissolves between you and the operation so that you must cut away those tissues: then it is better to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine.</start_of_turn
For the cauterization with fire brings together good habits, addition of the added flesh, and cutting away blood, and drying out moisture.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with butter-soaked dressings or poultices until the place emits pus, and the soft tissues emerge in pus.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with strong unguents containing solidifiers, generating flesh firmly: these are medicines which have styptic properties and drying qualities.</start_of_turn
When restoration has taken place, then healing follows: and not by repetition.
When, however, a fistula persists even to the depth of the rectum, and is prolonged by the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the rectum and inquire concerning this.
If, therefore, you feel resistance, and between you and the other there is something like swelling of fat or flesh, and it is close to the penetration: then there is no operation in that, except according to the degree of trust and hope
For indeed, one must administer in this case three modes: either that you cauterize the same (as we have said); or that you dissect it, until you have accomplished the subsidence of its swelling, so that it is possible for you to insert ligatures and effect a cure from the next time. And do not proceed too much with the dissection, lest you cut through the membrane containing the rectum, and thereby bring about a more grievous discharge of evacuation without your will. Then care for this as we have said
Perhaps indeed healing will take place: or you will stretch out that swelling and cleanse it after you have dried it up near the rectum, as we have said, or with your finger, or with some other acute instrument. Then cleanse the surrounding flesh which is in the dissection, until where fat adheres to the scraping.
Then attempt to restore the entire wound with the dissection, and the upper orifice where consolidation has taken place: and the fistula will remain open in the inner part of the rectum, and will be less painful
And when the fistula has been sutured in this manner: that is, when you insert your finger into the fistula: and it is at the side of the rectum around the surface of the body with the skin and the margin of the rectum: then grasp the perforation at the extremity, which is like a nail, that is, like a harpoon prepared for skin, in this form. Enter into the belly the swollen thread from five threads, and circle it around. Then enter the needle with the thread through the fistula, until the cavity is filled.
If it is penetrating in the inner margin of the anus near the base, then withdraw the thread from that hole: so that you may insert your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and bind both of them, and send it away one or two days: and the more the thread has entered the flesh, bind it well, until those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the thread have fallen away: then care for the wound until it has healed, and is cured.</start_of_turn>
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in whatever way you prepare it, except if it is too deep.</start_of_turn> You must not make it penetrate by force, so as not to damage it.</start_of_turn
Then do as we have said, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Form a sponge of spicery which is found in the fistula, whose curvature is acute above and blunt below, so that the other part is not acute, so as not to damage that which is not necessary, like urine.</start_of_turn
Chapter 81.</start_of_turn>
About the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from the incision of them: and the care of the incisions.</start_of_turn>
There are hemorrhoids of two kinds.</start_of_turn Or they are within the anus, like the seeds of charcoal, or of plums: or they are like little grains of wheat.</start_of_turn There are both small and large wounds: and blood always flows from wounds, and it is one, and there are many. There are both internal and external wounds, and in their extremities
Truly, those which are external to the belly are for the most part small wounds of moisture, from which flows clear urine or a little blood with slow flow: and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the treatment of the wound which is inside the belly is that you must apply pressure to the wound: and squeeze out the blood, until the anus comes out, and the wound is seen to be clean again. Therefore, hold the wound shut with fingers: or keep it closed with your thumb. Then cut around the roots of the wound
If however they do not remain in the wound because of the moisture of the wound and its softening: then cover the wound with rough cloth, or with a piece of felt wool, and pull out the wound with your fingers Then cut through, and powder over the wound after cutting whatever powders are warm, so that they remain in the place of the burn Or burn the wound according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for the wound with the remaining treatment, until it heals
When the anus does not come out, then apply a poultice to the patient in the place where there is a little pain, so that it will be eased as soon as the patient has discharged himself, when he presses it
When the wound is outside the anus, then the matter is light, easy: and it is as if you were to grasp the wound with your thumb, or grasp it with a finger, and cut the wound Then care for them until they are healed.
Whoever shuns incision with the sword, must now manage to administer suture in this fashion. Take a looped thread, and pass it through the point. Then draw out the splinter to the higher parts, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the opposite side: and loop two extremities of the thread, under the point of the needle in the lower part, and make them lateral: and tighten the splinter securely.</start_of_turn> Then knot the thread, and draw out the needle.</start_of_turn>
Do this with all the splinters, and let go of them from one: neither their own blood nor that of others must contaminate them.</start_of_turn
Then place over them a wet compress of infused linen in rosewater, or alum, and put it over them: and command the patient to rest.</start_of_turn Then leave it until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
When the splinters have fallen out, care for them with unguents, and leave the rest of the treatment until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
(End of excerpt)</start_of_turn> Many times these occur from the excessive evacuation of the bowels, and the constriction of the natural parts.</start_of_turn>
When these are thus diminished, and do not yield to medical treatment: then it is necessary to rub with the point of the sponge, or with your finger, until they become soft, and the outer layer which hinders the adhesion is removed.</start_of_turn Then care for the wound until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.</start_of_turn
If they are not consolidated: then repeat the procedure with greater reason than before, until much blood has flowed out, and then they are cleansed with care, until they are healed.
Concerning the treatment of wounds and non-wounds: and of blisters and ants.
Chapter 82.</start_of_turn>
You know that Almirmar is not except a round node according to the colour of the body, like a key-head: and it exists throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and the digits: and it arises from inflammation caused by pain in walking.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you drain what is around the key-head, and hold it with forceps or with a hook, and extirpate it from its root.</start_of_turn
Then care for it: and if you wish, cauterize it according to what was said in its chapter.</start_of_turn
As for blisters, one is a small, rough, filtered, round elevation above the surface of the body.</start_of_turn And they often happen in the hands of young boys.</start_of_turn
And the treatment for it is to extend the blister and cut it open: or to tie it up with a silken thread: or with hair, until it falls off.</start_of_turn And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said with fire, or with acute medicine: and thus the inward blisters are eradicated, and not the outward ones with the instrument which I shall tell you of.</start_of_turn
As for ants, these are also small, filtered elevations, large, above the surface of the body, which are biting downwards in depth: and when they bite, it feels like a bite of an ant in them, and it happens throughout the body: and most of them happen in the hands.</start_of_turn
And its treatment is that you take a needle from the belly of a frog, or a strong needle of wool: and you place that needle above the wound, until the circle of the needle contains the parts of the wound. Then you withdraw your hand with the needle until it severs what is around the wound: and you place it in the depth of the flesh, and you extract the wound from its root.
And if you wish, do it with an air needle, or a needle of iron, according to this form.
Let the upper part of the needle reach the tip of the thumb that is grasped, so that it may be stretched and easily withdrawn.
And if you wish, cauterize the wound according to what is stated in the chapter on cautery of Athelius
Chapter 83.
About the forms of the instruments which are used for Clisteria in ailments of the veins of animals, and about the solution of the belly and the collicum
When a Clistere is made from silver, or from gold, or from blown glass, or hammered out.
And when they are made from these instruments, great and small, according to those in which they are used
Thus what is administered in the treatment of young children with soft lungs, be it small: and of those animals which are weak or suffering, thus also Clistera of them
A large Clistere
The needle of it, that is, the upper part of it on which the uterus is tied, is wide according to this fashion: and there must be a distinction so that the uterus is tied like water, and the lower part which goes into the belly is deaf, that is, not open, soft, yielding, stretching to thinness: and on one of its sides there are two holes, and on the other side one hole
The width of the opening should be according to the length of the rays, and more widely the less, and there should be a space in which the medical instruments are placed from the belly of the beast: or from parchment of a bird, which is according to the form of a small ass: of whose root is a single palm.
The hole is pierced through with many holes as it turns, and there is space between every hole as wide as the breadth of a finger Then insert into the holes a strong thread from raw thread, which is from ten threads, or thereabouts, and gather it up with it like an ass's hoof When it is thus placed in the belly, it is sutured at the head of the intestines between two distinguishing constrictions of strength. And then close with it.
This is the form of the circle of these here parts, and of the holes.
The quality of the closing with it is: that you should measure the belly or the belly from the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance: and take care that it is neither too hot nor too cold, nor too warm nor too cold.
Then the patient is laid down on his back, and lifts his legs up towards the shoulders: and put under it a cushion, that is, skin over which people lie, or linen
Then bind the extremities of the intestines with wax, or with white chalk, or with barley mucilage, or something similar. Then insert it into the belly with ease. Then take hold of the belly with both hands and press it out until it ejects everything that is in the intestines of the Clister
Then extract the Clistere, and elevate the patient's limbs towards the side.
If the physician considers him fit for discharge, then retain him as long as possible. And if he sleeps through the whole night, that is the greatest benefit of all
If, however, you put him in the bath of the solution of the belly, and he shows signs of recovery: then repeat the Clistere until he is cured
If there are piles in the year, or painful fistula, then let the Clistere be soft and gentle, from the Clisteres which are given to children
And this is the form of the gentle Clistere which is over that which is strict of the skin
Head wound number 84
I have said in the discussion of the treatment of wounds that it agrees with the book, and I will tell you here the treatment of them with the hand and with the physicians according to their custom
I say therefore, that wounds are varied according to the thing from which they arise, and according to the place where the wound falls.
So also those wounds which arise from many causes are like the wound of a stone: or the cutting of a sword or knife: or the percussion with a lance, or wood, or arrow: and like these from many things.
And the wounds which arise from the place of the body are like the wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the thigh: and like these from many parts of the body.
And I am saying concerning the treatment of wounds, that I shall set out the reasoning and rule concerning the rest of the wounds.
I shall begin with simple head wounds: for the memory of compound wounds will arise at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When a simple head wound occurs, and there is no fracture of bone: consider then, if it is from a piece of stone, or like that: and if the skin only is fractured: it is a great wound, and the time of healing is greater than that of a burn: then proceed cautiously, and perform a cephalic bleed immediately: do not delay this: and extract from him from the blood according to the quantity of his virtue: if there be nothing to prevent it by any other thing, especially if there be little blood issuing from the wound. And let the bleed be from the opposite side of the wound
And let the bleed be from the opposite side of the wound And let the infirm person be guarded from repletion, and wine, and coarse food.
If, however, something prohibits reduction, then they will be made to abstain from food, and not approach meat or drink.</start_of_turn>
And place over the wound if it happens to him a soft dressing of fat or lint soaked in rose oil, or with wine in which there is a clotting agent.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you are secure from the soft dressing, then place over the wound, if it is still red with blood, and has not changed its colour, the plaster which I will tell you of later: and if it has changed its colour, then place over it some unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If, however, the wound is great, or is from a wound with a knife, and similar: and the edges do not adhere by stitches, then join them together with a suture, according to what I shall say concerning the sutures of the inside wounds.</start_of_turn
If, however, a limb is detected as hanging loose from its bone and is not to be retained, except in a very small suspension: then cut it off. Care for the limb with the physicians, and restore in it solid flesh in place of the skin, and command the patient to feed on nourishing foods such as heads and cooked wheat until the pulse: and such things are similar.
If you find in the flesh putrefaction and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the whole putrefied part and cast it away: then care for the rest
If, however, in his limb there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not severed by the physicians, then inquire concerning the artery. If therefore you find it not severed, then cut it off with sponges or ligate it. If necessity compels you when it does not conform to what we have said, then burn it, until it is severed
If, however, these wounds are small and simple, then the matter is easy and light: so that they may be powdered over this powder: because they consolidate these before they change them by air.
The manner of the powdered meat.</start_of_turn> Recipe: take part one of olive oil, part two of dragon's blood, and part three of unburned lime: mix them all together thoroughly, and sprinkle them: and apply it to the limb, and bind it securely, until it adheres well to it and clots with the blood.
Then string it up with sponges, and let it go, and do not keep it until it is dissolved, because it may putrefy it No wound is banished by medicine until it is healed.
When alone it does not suffice for a wound, when neither ointment nor dragon's blood is present, even these great operations are of little benefit in many large wounds, for when they are united and bound over, the recent wounds with their own blood do as much.
When it has been altered by air, especially in hot weather, the object of this dusting is not in this case: care for it as before, that is to say, put upon it some digestible unguents: or make pultes of barley flour, made with water and honey, until pus comes forth.</start_of_turn> Then care for the rest until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If indeed there is a fracture of a bone which is small, extract it with forceps: and I shall speak of the cure of head fractures in this which the future is.</start_of_turn>
Of wounds of the head.</start_of_turn
If indeed a wound occurs in the head, then there is no difference between it and a wound of the head when it is simple.</start_of_turn
If however the neck has been cut through, or an artery: then if it is a nerve, it is not in its place, except that you must take care of its cure with something which brings about hemostasis, such as sponge, and saffron, and is like these things.</start_of_turn For they are ignorant of nerves, and they drive them away.</start_of_turn
Do not put anything cold upon the wound whatsoever: for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the soul of the limbs: and it should be treated with gentle medicine, such as powdered gypsum with sweet water infused with some oil, or with rose oil, and turpentine, when it is also washed away with sweet water: and the rest of the mineral stones, in this manner, and moist unguents.</start_of_turn
If, however, the wound is large, then administer a suture: or bind up its lips with wool. Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, the wound is deep, or if it has occurred in a sinus in its lower part, in which pus is gathering, then perforate it in a depressed area in that place.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it has been cut through in the wound, and blood flows from it: then separate, or dry up the blood, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if need be.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it has penetrated the cartilage of the jaw, or the whole thing, and the teeth are loose: then gather together the lips of the skin with a suture over the jawbone, and do not touch the jaw, rather equalize it, and reduce it over its natural shape.</start_of_turn Then bind it tightly with a bandage, and release it in a few days.</start_of_turn> Then care for it with unguents in which there is a property of stypticity and drying, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the wound has made an imprint in the bone, then query it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, extract them all, or what can be extracted from it: and what cannot be prepared, leave it, until the wound has healed, and the fracture has been separated and consolidated.</start_of_turn
If the wound has been burnt, then powder over it the powder which I have mentioned.</start_of_turn If, however, bone is seen in the wound, and a fistula has occurred: then care for it with that which is mentioned in its chapter.</start_of_turn
Of an ulcer in Spatulis.
If there is percussion of the lance or the knife, and the blood of it runs deep, then consider it. If there comes from the ulcer swelling, when he sighs from that one, then you know that the ulcer is mortal
If it is not deep, and it is accompanied with blood, then do not put in it at the first hour powder, nor string it up, lest you retain the blood in its depth, and it die. But put in it a strong unguentum and solve it in two days.
If indeed there is no unguentum there, then put in the mouth of the ulcer a thick wool, so that it may absorb that which comes out of it from humilities: and make the patient sleep over the ulcer, so that it may heal what is aggregated in it
If indeed three days or more have passed since the ulcer and the patient has not had a spasm or a bad tremor of the heart, nor any stricture in swallowing, and the rest of its conditions are good, then you know that the ulcer is healed. Cure it diligently and with care, and with treatments, until it is healed.
If indeed it is excused that its healing has escaped, and it always opens, then you know that a fistula has been made Cure it from its head to its tail
And if the ulcer is from the incision of a lance or knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then cure it as if it were sutured, if it is great: or with powder if it is small
If, however, he has made an impression in the bone, and it comes loose from this: then inquire about the bone, and properly extract the fragment, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them alone, until the bone becomes putrefied, until then relief is found in extracting them.
As for the remaining wounds of the accident on the remaining limbs, the judgment in their treatment is the judgment of him who has spoken.
Of wounds of the belly, and the exit of the intestines, and the extraction of them.
The disruption which happens in the belly is great, medium, or small.
From the great, indeed when the intestine or the number of intestines come out
Because of that there is an introversion of them, and their suture is more difficult and painful
And the small disruption is also difficult in another way Therefore, it follows that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take proper care of the introversion of it to its place immediately: because it swells, opens, and thickens: because of that it is difficult to enter it
Therefore, the middle disruption is better: because with that there is not a difficult reduction of the intestine, as it is in the two former species
You know that the suture of the belly is done in four ways
Two sutures are common with regard to the suture of the belly, and with regard to the suture of the rest of the body: and two other sutures communicate properly with the rest of the wounds. True are the things which are proper to the bowels with suture of the belly: and I tell you one thing and another with explanation and declaration.
When a wound is small, and something escapes from the intestine through it, and it is difficult to reduce it: then that is by one of two methods. Either because of the smallness of the wound, as we said: or because of an inflation in the intestine caused by the cold of the air.
When it is thus, it is necessary to warm it, so as to soak the sponge or the cloth with warm water alone Or boil in water squinance, ginger, pepper, and embrocate with it the intestine, until the inflation is resolved
When it has made this liquid which has styptic power: it is better than water alone for resolving the inflation.
When the inflation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with the water in which it was boiled, or the decoction itself. For thereby it alleviates the entrance of it with a small thing.
If, however, it evacuates after this cure, then find in the wound a small opening, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cauterized.
The first cure is better when it is prepared, than the section: and it does not cause a bursting because of the defect of the instrument after necessity.
Let one part be acute and the other not acute, and the outer part not be with the smoothness of Spatumilis, but rather be somewhat obtuse: and that is what resembles a cheese, like urine.</start_of_turn>
When the wound is increased and the intestine enters, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its own place, if possible above it: because that is better.</start_of_turn>
When the rupture is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie upon his back, and raise his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly: then put his head low and his chest higher than his lower parts.
And in the same way if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly: then put your intention and consideration always in this, that the part which has the wound should be higher than the other part
And so it is necessary that you do this with great wounds and with medium wounds.
But with small wounds, put this in the way that is prepared for you
Then make sure that there is a holy hand present between your hands which maintains the whole rupture with his hand: and join his lips together. Then withdraw from it him who follows the suture something after something: and this is the common way of stitching one thing to another.
And it is necessary that you take an awl or the number of awls according to the quantity of the wound. Then let go from the extremity of the rupture the quantity of an index finger, that is, the physician: and fix the awl one beyond what you introduce into the skin in two extremities, when two extremities of fat which is under the skin from the inside have been made to penetrate from another side, and when you have gathered together the two extremities of the skin and the two extremities of fat: and there are four orders formed.
And then string with a double thread around the circumference of the awl several times from two parts simultaneously, until two lips of the wound are aggregated with a decent gathering.
Then let go of the breadth of the finger also, and fix in its place an acute angle: afterwards draw back the thread with the needle, as you did with the first needle. Do not cease to make this until you have completed the ligation of the whole wound
And let there be medium needles between the breadth and the thickness: because the fine needles easily slip through flesh: and the coarse are difficult to pass through the skin: therefore it is necessary that there be medium ones in the thickness, and the breadth.
And it is not fitting that the needle should be fixed at the two nearest ends of the skin: so that the flesh does not slip quickly, and that the wound does not open before its consolidation, and does not lengthen even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation
Then cut off the extremity of the needle, so that it does not wound the patient in his sleep: and put on cushions of wool from all around, which hold the extremities of the needle: and let go of them, until you know that the wound has consolidated
And this is how the suture is done with needles like these is more suitable for small wounds. For a suture of these needles suffices one, or two, or several of them.
The second suture is common, that it joins together four extremities: two of the skin, and two of fat in one wound, with a needle in which the thread is even in thickness and breadth.
Then when you have pierced with the needle through the four extremities, reduce the needle from the part from which you began, so that the thread which is drawn back falls from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture is like the suture of cloth which is done by drawing together cloth, and put between every suture as much of the thickness of the little finger as possible.
Men know this stitch.
When such a stitch has been made, men know that it has become like a wound which has occurred in the belly and which has been inflicted by a knife, and that there has been a rupture of the gut greater than a palm of the hand: and it has gone out from the intestines for about two palms from the middle intestine, and there has been a rupture in the middle of the belly.
And so it was reduced after it had been set outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
And it was consolidated in the space where it had been for about fifteen days: and it was cared for, and it healed: and it never happened again after that, as the man continued his life in his usual way.</start_of_turn>
The doctors declared that it would not heal.</start_of_turn>
And it happened by a miracle that it healed without ointment.</start_of_turn Because I was in a place where ointment was not to be found, and no doctor was there.</start_of_turn I put upon the wound a wool cushion twice a day, and I bathed it with warm water until it healed.</start_of_turn
And there are two kinds of stitches which are proper according to the narration of the sermon.</start_of_turn>
And it is like this: you begin with a sharp stitch: and you pass the needle from the outside inwards through the part.</start_of_turn
When the needle has thus pierced the skin, and has gone through the whole thickness of the body: you draw out the end of the thread in the side in which you introduced the needle, and you make it penetrate outwards at the opposite end.</start_of_turn
When you have finished making the opening incision, then make another incision beside it on the same side, from the outside to the inside: and withdraw the tissue which is on this side, which is on this latitude, and make an incision in the opposite extremity from the inside to the outside: and make an incision with your incision which you make in the tissue of the extremity which is beside this, until it penetrates the whole of it.
And also begin from this side, and withdraw the tissue which is in the siph of this side, which is on the other latitude, and extract the point from the skin where it has penetrated.</start_of_turn>
And reduce the skin to this side, and withdraw the tissue which is in the siph of this side with this extremity: and extract the point from the skin which is on this side, and make this one whole, and the other: and make this one whole after the other, until you have extracted the whole from this side according to this example.</start_of_turn>
And the sum of all these sutures is like the sutures of the skin which join the skin: so that you join the siph from one side of the extremity of the skin: and that you withdraw the other from the other side, until you have completed it.</start_of_turn>
The second kind of proper suture, as Gale has said.
This is the way it is said of these sutures, as some physicians do, that they are made like certain things, so that they bring together all the parts to a corresponding extent by nature: and apply the extremity of the siph to the other extremity, and the extremity of the bone to the other extremity.</start_of_turn And this is done as I have said.
It is necessary that you place the point in the extremity of the bone close to you from the outside, and make the incision towards the inside in this place only: and withdraw the two siph extremities.</start_of_turn Then draw out the point and cause it to penetrate from the outer side inwards through two extremities of the sponge, namely both of them.
Then draw out both [points] and cause both to penetrate from the inside outwards through two extremities of the sponge, which are on the opposite side
And this is the better way of stitching, and it is the stitching of which the memory remains.
This is as Galen himself has said.
And some have said that The suture is corrected inwards with two cubes. That is, put into each of the two cubes a single thread: and begin with the introduction of the needle from that which is towards you, and cause it to penetrate until it reaches the other side, following the suture which is between the skin.
And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the inside: then the suture of that is more difficult than the rest of the inside locations
The judgment of the true healing of a wound is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
That is, when you follow up the wound with its blood, before it changes itself: and reduce the belly, and take hold of itself, and fix it: then put over it the powder of burnt barley
For if the air has already changed the wound: then put over it some unguents which are in your presence, until they make pus: and the threads fall out, and consolidate the sponge, and dry it Then care for this as for the care of the rest of the wounds, until it is healed
If, however, there are no medicines present, then place above it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, a swelling: and change it twice a day until it heals.
For indeed you do not need other medicines in many situations when wounds are simple.
If, however, it threatens to communicate with the principal parts of the body in the lesion, then it is necessary to immerse fine wool in lukewarm oil or in rose oil: and place it around the area which is between the groin and the armpits
If it feels pain, or swelling, or putrefaction in its intestines (for this often happens in this case) then instill it with wine vinegar, black and warm: especially if putrefaction has already occurred in the intestine, and an opening has been made through it
Know that what is great from the intestine is easier to heal: and what is small from it is more difficult to heal.
The intestine which is called the jejunum does not recover from a wound that occurs in it in any way: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the greatness of their number, and because of the fineness of its body, and because of its proximity to its own nature.
If, however, that which proceeds from the wound is cartilage, and you follow it up, reduce it according to your reduction of the intestines which you equalise.
If indeed it has passed beyond that space, and has become dark, or black: then it is necessary to tie it up with a thread above the place which has been denigrated by it, so that the flow of blood does not occur For in cartilage there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging threads from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so as to counteract the traction of that, and the extraction of it concerning the case of the wound, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remember the wound that happened in the intestine.
When a disruption happens in the intestine, and it is slight: then it is possible that it will recover in some people: because I have seen that which was wounded in the belly with the lance and was on the right side of the stomach, and it was ancient: and there was made a fistula, and it went out from there egestion, and swelling
I put therefore the cure in place, until I am not hindered in the healing of it: neither will I stop cautiously until it is healed, and the place is consolidated
When I have seen that the place is consolidated, I fear over the sick man, that something bad may happen to him in his belly: and nothing of that happened to him from that bad thing. And it remained in better dispositions, eating and drinking, hopeful, and went into the bath, and exercised in his diet.
And some experimenters say, when a wound happens in the intestine, and it is slight: then it must be bound up in this way. And it is like taking large ants. Then gather two lips of the wound, and put an ant on one of those which have an open bone over two lips of the wound. When you have put that over them, and you have bound its bone, cut off its head, and it will adhere to it, and will not dissolve
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing that until the second ant has reached the amount of the wound throughout.
Then reduce the wound and its swelling. They remain fixed heads attached to the intestines until the intestines are fed, and are healed, and do not cause great discomfort to the patient
It is also possible to ligate the intestine even with a fine thread: which has been removed from the intestine of an animal, is attached to that which has been brought into the knot
And take hold of the extremity of that thread from the intestine, and draw out a great deal. Then ligate at its extremity that thread which has been wound around the linen thread. Then introduce that thread into the knot, and attach it to the intestine with it Then reduce it to disruption
And this method of stitching with ants and intestines, is not except according to the measure of trust and hope
You know, a wound that is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the large intestines: then there is no skill except subtiliation, and its healing is not at all
Of care for ulcers and fistulas.
You know, every wound, or swelling when it grows old and decays, and forms a ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and does not heal: then it is called universally in every part of the body a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.</start_of_turn>
And a fistula is indeed a second, verified nodation of a filtered and hardened white substance: concerning which there is no pain, which has the character of the feather of a bird: and on account of this they call it Risati, which is a feather.
And sometimes it is moist in certain hours, emitting pus. And sometimes the moisture breaks in certain hours. And sometimes the moisture is much, and is little: and is great, and is soft
And I say beforehand in my discourse that any wound which does not heal, neither is born in that flesh, is not except for one of these nine causes.
Of which one is either because of the scarcity of blood in the body: or because of the malice of its nature: or because it is between itself and the lips of the flesh is hard flesh, which hinders the birth of flesh: or because there is much pus and pus-like matter: or because the wound itself is putrid, and the matter which issues from it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inappropriate for the treatment of it: or because corruption which falls in the region is a kind of pestilence: or because of the property of the region, as it happens in Caesarea: in which there is great difficulty in digesting food and the healing of wounds is delayed by nature: or because in it is one bone, or a number of bones
And I will teach you all these causes and signs and the treatments with the physicians in my discourse: and it is fitting for you here to write the treatment of the fistula and the zuka, which is done by one operation with the hand.
You know therefore that a fistula can happen in all the members of the body. For from these things are fistulas which extend to great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder: or to the intestine, or the stomach, or to some of the ribs: or to some of the vertebrae, or to some of the compound joints: such as the hand, and the foot: and those which arise from these things which are close to the principal limb, and to similar things
That which proceeds from his fistules is, according to this method, from difficult diseases which do not receive treatment, and is accompanied by toil and ignorance.
If from any fistula whatever its depth does not reach these places which I have mentioned: and thou dost hope and trust in its treatment, and dost desire to reach its knowledge, then take hold of an attempt from air or iron, since the fistula extends according to its straightness, and inquire concerning it with itself.
If, however, there is a twisting in the fistula, then investigate concerning it with a subtle weight. Because lead with its softness alleviates the body of it, and it curves about the twisting
If the fistula has many orifices, it is not possible for thee to signify over them with a single attempt Gather therefore from each orifice from its orifices.
For the moisture which thou gatherest from each orifice goes upon the other orifices, and runs out of them.
Then inquire concerning it in what way is possible: that thou mayest know what is there, whether it be bone or nerve, and that the fistula is of great or little extent: or that the fistula is one which has many orifices, and lies over all that, with the sum of thy strength: with thy interrogation of the sick person, and the finding of pain upon compression with thy hand over the place, and similar signs and symptoms following.
When thou hast stood upon every one of these stations truly, then come to the treatment according to thy confidence: and it is that thou considerest then, if the fistula which appears is near or far from the juncture, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned to thee: then dry the fistula according to what is said above in the narration, and remove from it that which is in it from filtration, and from corrupt foods, which is born in its orifice from flesh, or pus, and the like: and care for it until it be healed
If the fistula is of great length and depth, and is according to the rule of rectitude: then it is necessary that it be cut away as deeply as possible. Then it is necessary to remove the whole of its corrupted flesh from it
Then apply sponges wetted with sharp medicines: and introduce these until you have reached the depth of the fistula which you comprehended with the iron: do this little by little, until the sharp medicine has eaten away everything that remains in the depth of the fistula from corruption
Then restore the part with unguents which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If however it does not heal by this, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.
If therefore the cause of the fistula is bone, and you suspect that: then inquire about it, and cut it away according to what I have narrated: if it does not prevent you anything from the bone, or nerve, or main limb, as we have said
If therefore it is found that there is bone in it, and that there is some corruption and blackness: then burn it away, until the corruption of it is entirely removed Then care for it with that which nourishes it, until it is healed.
Which if it does not heal, and emits pus like it was doing: then you know that you have not reached the whole eradication of the corruption
Therefore investigate further concerning it, and make a reason for it, and treat it with the utmost skill you possess.
Then restore it. If however it heals, it is good: and if not, then you know that that corruption is in a great depth of the body, which you have not been able to reach. No force is there in that limb, except that which is driven out by the nature itself.
If the bone of the limb is corrupted, and it is possible that the limb may be drawn out, draw it out with fine forceps that fit to that.
If there are many bones, then take great care in drawing them out, and do not let anything remain in the limb with your force
If indeed something causes resistance in the limb from humors, and there is no fear of incision, or an error: then incise those humors and tissues, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed the limb is not prepared for the extraction of the bone at that hour, then place upon it that which will cause it to decay: and draw it out when it has decayed from the surrounding bones of flesh and humors.
And keep the limb so that it does not become consolidated. And let the incision be as small as you made it in your operation And if you put on it, if necessary, a bandage soaked in sulfur with oil: or a bandage soaked in Egyptian unguent or any other unguents of your choice.
For when they have decayed indeed these humors, and are separated from the bones, the wound will be soothed, and the attraction of them will be removed
If indeed there is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and those like these, which are corrupted from it, is a great part: then take away that part in its last degree, until the black spot and the corruption are removed Then restore the limb.
If indeed that which is in it corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to cut through it and open it up to the depth where the corruption exists: then take care of it until it is consolidated
And I tell you this, that which has happened to me in my leg: that you may take it as an example and aid in your operation.
A youth of about thirty years of age had pain in his leg, because something had moved within his body towards the thigh, and as a result there was swelling: there was no external cause of the pain
It has been prolonged thus with the error of the physicians until the swelling opened, and many materials came out together with it And after that his cure was delayed until his leg was bandaged, and many holes were made in it: from which pus and moisture of the body were emitted
And they treated him for two years with various physicians, but there was no skill in their art, until I saw him and opened his leg, and the matters which were coming out of his holes in great quantity: even all the men in the place fainted, and his color was pale yellow
Then they attempted to open one of his holes, and they reached the bone.
And I saw that all his holes were communicating with each other throughout the whole thigh
I treated him accordingly, and I cauterized one of his holes until I saw a piece of bone: and I found it corrupted: for it was rotten, discoloured, putrefying, and perforated, until it had penetrated even to the marrow
I saw what had been detected by me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I thought that there was no other corruption in the bone except that which I had cut away, so I cauterized and excised it. I will eradicate it.
Then I shall institute the restoration of the wound together with the physicians in a spacious place for a long period. It is not consolidated yet
Then I tried, and I found upon the second examination: there is a continued corruption with the bone: and I saw that there was also corruption from that corruption itself.
I then attempted to restore it It is not restored yet
I found therefore upon it again, and I did not cease to cut the bone piecemeal, and to try to restore it: and it is not restored, until I cut from the bone about the space of one palm, and I extracted that with the marrow together
Then I restored it with the physicians, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and no further operation was necessary for this purpose, except for the disposition of the weakness of the patient, and his little tolerance, and my fear of death for him, because he was perishing in every hour from excessive vomiting of bad evacuations
He was healed completely: and was born in the place of the broken bone, and was made well the disposition of his body, and recovered his strength: and was discharged from his bed: and did not cause him any pain in walking ever afterwards
If, however, the prominent bone in the body is fractured: then it is necessary to bind it up as follows: take a ligament and bind the fractured bone at its extremity: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament of greater thickness than the first ligament. Then bind it over the flesh which is above the bone: and extend its extremity, so that you pull the meat downwards: and you will know that the meat is properly placed where you wish to cut it, so that it does not damage the meat
Place wood or a board under the lower bone in the center: for when you do this, it will not prevent the marrow from separating the corrupted flesh.
The incision should be made above the corrupted part without damaging the surrounding area of the bone.
If the bone is corrupted and does not protrude, the corrupted part must be continued with the sound portion: and the corruption is in the middle or the part itself: then remove the flesh from all sides entirely Then place wood below.
Afterwards, saw from the first part where the corruption is until the incision is continued from the other side: and let the incision be as far from the corruption as possible, as we have said before.
If the corruption is in the joint, saw through the corrupted joint and saw the bone where the incision continues from the other side
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no wisdom in it except abrasion.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the sole of the foot: then matters are difficult there It is necessary to inquire how the corruption appears to you. And scrape away the bone and clean it as much as possible according to any way that is possible for you: and with whatever ingenuity you can manage, so that it does not cause harm to the vein or nerve
You know that the saws and chisels for cutting this bone are many, according to the position of the bones, their preparation, their size, their shape, their weight, their fineness, and their rarity. Wherever necessary, one must prepare an instrument suitable for each kind of operation.
You also know that these operations are greater than the kind of instrument which is suitable for them, when you have long studies about them And the knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony of the modes of illness: for then you will find that everything which is suitable for one infirmity is not suitable for another
I am firm in the last of this chapter concerning the number of instruments, which I have placed as examples of those which you should take into consideration, and the trial which you will experience with others.
Form of the other Serra
Form of Rasassa of the united. Its head is like the head of the clavus stellatus: and its points are like the points of the elishate.
It is not suitable, except when it is rubbed with it, because of the fracture of the head, or because of the great swelling and size of the bone
Form of the greater Rasassa
Form of the narrow Rasassa
Form of the concaved Rasassa
The shape of the other incision is finer.
The shape of the other incision is curved at its extremities
The shape of the other incision is small and fine
This is like a radio and the extremities are like a saw: it appears in many places because of the reason for the bones.
The shape of the other incision is suitable for the reason for which it has been made through the bones
Its extremities are triangular, and the extremities are acute
It is like an Indian And it should be like this for all incisions, and for the sutures and the saws
As for the incision of the extremities, and the suture of the bones.
The extremities putrefy, either by an external cause, or an internal cause.
When you have treated the cause of this corruption with medical means, and the cure has not occurred: and if you do not cut away the corruption of the limb which does not recover: then you must cut away that limb until the corruption has ceased, so that the patient may be saved from death or from the greater defect of the limb.
And the sign of this is that the limb is blackened, until it is burned: or it becomes putrid after blackness: until that putridity is cut away from the limb itself, and from the whole body
Properly therefore when the incision has been made, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from a blow which has struck some of the veins: such as a scorpion of the sea, and vipers, and spiders, and things of that kind.
If therefore the corruption is at the extremity of the finger, then incise the finger and not leave space for the corruption, but proceed until the other hand is reached
And similarly if it happens in the palm, then incise from the root of the bone, and not leave space for the corruption, until it reaches the wrist bone
And if it comes to this, then incise the arm at the elbow in its joint.
If however the corruption has passed, and you see it surrounding the elbow: then in that is the cause of the malady. And to administer besides this from the treatment, is the quantity of the vomit.
And do the same with the foot, when the corruption comes to the finger, then incise it at one of the joints: and if it happens at the heel, then incise the whole foot If however it reaches the knee, then incise the leg at the knee joint
What if the corruption has gone beyond the knee? Then it is not in that it is incurable, except for amputation, and to leave the patient dead.
And the way to incisions the limb, or to save it, is as follows: to string the ligament in the lower part, which one you wish to cut: and to string the ligament above in the place of the other And extend one minister ligament downwards: and extend the other minister ligament upwards. And you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, with the edge of a spatula, until the whole flesh is torn away Then it may occur, or it may return.
Then it must be placed from all parts of the bandage around the limb, and must not touch the healthy area: and it must be added to the patient's pain, and the swelling must be cooled.
If, however, blood flows inwards during the operation, then cauterize the place quickly: or place above it some powder that will absorb the blood.</start_of_turn> Then return to your medicine, until it is complete.</start_of_turn>
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage that is suitable for it, and care for it, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And I say that this happened to me in my foot, this is what happened to me.</start_of_turn
That is, because in my foot there was a black spot, with a swelling which assimilated the heat of fire: and the corruption first happened in my finger, until it reached the whole foot.</start_of_turn
Therefore I removed the person from himself, after I had cut away the corruption from the limb with my shears, because of the pain, and the swelling: and I put it on the joint, and it healed.</start_of_turn
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption happened to him in the nail of his middle finger.</start_of_turn
He came to me, and I attempted to cure the swelling with the things which I put on his hand from the physicians after the purification of his body: and the swelling did not disappear, but it increased in another finger: until the corruption reached the hand.</start_of_turn
He called me to cut off his hand: and I did not do that, hoping for the return of the swelling: and I was also afraid of the death of his hand.</start_of_turn Wherever there was a wound on a man, it was above the case.
When I had left him, he returned to his land: and he came to me because he had been nearby, and he wounded his whole hand: and he was healed.</start_of_turn>
And I did not relate this story except in order to help with regard to that which falls from the nature of this ailment: and in order to show what is signified, and according to how it is done.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the care of bones, and the quality of blistering with the physicians.</start_of_turn
When there is swelling in some limb with carbuncle, and the swelling is prolonged until collection of pus has taken place: then it is broken open, or pierced, and the pus which is in it is driven out, and the cavity which remains is like a wound: and the skin which is over it is like a thin membrane which has been stripped off: and it does not reach its final corruption, neither does it reach the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it is called a sinus, and not a fistula, truly; but if the space of the former is prolonged until corruption affects some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula, or swelling.</start_of_turn>
And the care of it is that you cut away the whole skin as it turns black: and especially when it is thinned out, and made like a membrane: and trust that it will not stick to the place, because of its corruption.</start_of_turn
But if you hope that the skin will adhere, and that no corruption will result from this: and if there is thick blood in the skin, then treat it with blistering: and consider it as a sinus.</start_of_turn
If it be great, and the pus which proceeds from it is foetid of odor: then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and gum, equal parts, gathered in a vessel: and boil them over fire, until the medicine turns red: and then add honey to it.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clisterize it with wine: and tie up its orifice, and give the medicine in it to the quantity of two hours.
Then draw out its contents with pressure: do this every day, until the sinus is healed, and the stench is gone.
And when it is clistered with vinegar and water, when it is not present this medicine: then take charcoal of wood or charcoal of beech: and cast it on the water. Then keep the water still, and clisterize with it, until you are confident that the sinus is healed.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, neither vinegar and water: then clisterize it with water and honey, to which something of ground mastic has been added Or clisterize it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to heal and cleanse: and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of styptic and drying in it.
When you have done this often, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has departed: then clisterize it with something that makes meat grow in it.
And it is good to take from alum of diaphanicon: and dissolve it with rose oil and wine styptic: or clisterize it with some medicine, and anoint with others, of whose properties are written in the treatise on unguents.
If the opening of the sinus is strict, so that a cannula will not pass through it: then widen it with a needle; or place within it a pledget of lint in Egyptian unguent, or in basilicon unguent, until it is widened.
Similarly, if the opening is also large, then gather its lips together with sutures; and let out from it as much as enters the bladder without adding anything.
And similarly if pus comes from the opening, let it be raised upwards: then dry it in the lower part which is in it, so that it comes out from there downwards: for pus, when it is collected in the depth of the sinus, hinders the generation of flesh in it.
If it is not possible to dry the sinus round about downwards, then try to prepare the limb with the preparation which lets out pus with ease according to the way it is prepared for you Try that no pus remains in it at all: and take solidifying medicines which are placed over the sign, suitable for this purpose And extend ease over the edge of the wound. And let the size of the dressing be such as to communicate with the whole sinus. Then pierce with forceps directly at the opening of the sinus, widening the opening of the sinus with a needle. Then extend from the sponges above the other dressing, according to the quantity of the hole: and place it over itself in a long position away from the opening of the sinus, so as to relieve the discharge of pus from it: and do not put on a large dressing, except after a few days or until one has healed one
He who is over the opening of the sinus should move in every hour, so that what is gathered in it from the pus may go out: and you will know whether it is much or little, or digested or undigested
And thus again consider the location of the sinus itself, whether the master of the limb feels pain there, or whether there is no pain there, and whether there is swelling there, or whether there is no swelling there.
When you have thus advanced your remedy in this way, and you have dried the material which proceeds from the opening of the sinus, then you will know whether the sinus is firmly adhered, or approaches adherence: then you must remove it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you have removed the ulcer, then change the bandage, and renew the unguentum.
If, however, it proceeds from the sinus beyond a long space or a subtle ulcer, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing approaches, because there are men who are slow in the generation of flesh in their ulcers, and there are those who act contrariwise to this.
If, however, it proceeds from the sinus after many days with undigested pus, then you know that the sinus is not adhered
If thus the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add in the treatment of the physician, truly let the physicians do what they will, that there be moisture in their medications and dryness in their moisture: like gypsum, when added in excess produces abundance of moisture.
And from the last method of treatment, that is, take gypsum and dissolve it with rosewater, and apply it over the old liquid in its substance.
Then keep it together with this, and use it.
And it does the same thing to this action as when there is no gypsum present, honey, when you boil it, until it has thickened, and you use it with this Or take myrrh, aloes, and olibanum: mix them all together, and grind them over honey while it is still over the fire. Then line above the belly, and string the belly above the hip: and line with honey which you boiled, until it is thickened: and powder above the belly, and put above the belly the belly-bag, and string it.
And when it is administered in this belly-bag, long parsley, and roots of lily of the valley, and is lily: and barley of herbs, and centaury Use either singly or compounded, these, and the sponges themselves: and powder above the honey which I have told you of, and use it.
If, however, the matter of the sinus prolongs and does not heal with this treatment: then you know that in its depth there is a corruption: or that it makes an imprint in the bones, or in the other hard parts, or ligaments: then treat the fistula according to what has been said before
Of the treatment of panaritium and nail-drawn, and the addition of incision of the finger, and section.
Panaritium is a swelling which arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot: and perhaps arises in the rest of the fingers.
When it prolongs, and is neglected in its treatment, and becomes inflamed, the swelling becomes hot: or it is corrupted, and emits pus, until it corrupts the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole, and perhaps the corruption extends to the bone, until there is an offensive odor: and it makes the extremity of the finger wide, and makes its color dark.
When therefore you are treating it, with that which we said in the explanation, and the treatment does not confer cure: then it is necessary that you cut away with the knife the whole superfluity which remains from the nail Then cauterize the ulcer afterwards. The cautery is indeed useful for the ulcer above all.</start_of_turn>
If indeed the bone is sound, and the nail also is sound, and the addition of the nails overlaps the flesh inwards, and it begins to bite itself, and damages itself: then it is necessary to place a radium beneath the nail at the angle which bites the flesh, and push upwards: and cut away the flesh easily, and place over that which remains of the flesh from the burning and corrosive medicines until it is completely removed.</start_of_turn> Then care for it with unguents until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If however corruption has already occurred in the bone, then it is necessary to cut away the bone and extract it: for it will never heal while it remains corrupted in that bone.</start_of_turn
And if you see the corrosion and corruption advancing in the finger, then cut it off at one joint, as is appropriate in its remembrance.</start_of_turn Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If however there occurs to the nail attrition or percussion: and it is accompanied by severe pain, then it is necessary to perform phlebotomy in the first instance.</start_of_turn Then dry the nail with Spatumili cut in a transverse section from above downwards to the end.</start_of_turn>
And be careful, lest the cutting should reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will thereby cause additional pain and swelling.</start_of_turn
Then care for the place with that which rests the pain.</start_of_turn
A finger that is born with some man's hands is perhaps entirely fleshy; perhaps there are some bones in some of them; perhaps there is a nail in it. Some of them are born in the root of the joint, or their origin is in some node of the finger. He who is born in some node of the finger, is not moved: and he who is born near the joint of the finger, perhaps is moved.
He who is born of flesh, his section is easy. As when you cut through his root with a broad spatula.
His origin in the root of the joint is difficult to cure.</start_of_turn> Therefore abstain from cutting it.</start_of_turn>
In that case, where he is born at the end of the nodes of the finger, then it is necessary to cut through his flesh in a circular incision until you reach the bone.</start_of_turn Then grasp the bone with one of your knives which fits into this.</start_of_turn Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
Consolidation, however, which happens to fingers by means of pressure, happens frequently either from the nature of man himself, that is, because it is born with it, or from the consolidation of a wound, or from the burning of fire, and the like.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to remove this consolidation until the finger returns to its natural shape.</start_of_turn Then put between the bones some splints, or soaked rags in fat: so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate the bones: or put between the bones a thin sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated as it should be.</start_of_turn
And similarly, if consolidation occurs between some digits and the palm, then dry that consolidation, according to what is prepared and comes close to the figure of the limb.
And concerning the incision of veins.
There are veins which are involved, large and full of melancholic humors that happen in many parts of the body: and most of the time their occurrences are in the legs, especially in the legs of those who are on the move and working, and in the porters.
It is therefore necessary to administer an excision from the black bile somewhat forcefully alongside the evacuation.
Then let a bloodletting be made from the patient easily with a basilisk.
The treatment of these is in two ways with iron. One is to cut them off, and extract the black blood. The other is to elevate the vein, and extract all of it
The cutting of them is in this way Embolize the limb in the first place with warm water, until the thick blood has dissolved Then bind the limb of the patient from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a thread. Then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three wide sections
Then lift it up, that is to say, extract the blood from the lower part of the leg up to the top, and from the top let the phlebotomies be made of the patient in the first place Then dry the limb until the quantity of blood which you have evacuated is equal to that which remains in the limb, and as much as the patient can tolerate of the pain
After the ligature is done: and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are full, for that is harmful to the patient.
The elevation of the part is to be done in this manner The elevation of the limb is to be done when there are many hairs in it Then insert the instrument into the bath: or bind it to his limb with warm water, until it turns red, and swell the veins: or perform a strong exercise, if there is no bath for him, until the limb is warmed up
Then dry the skin along the line of the vein section: or at its end near the knee, or at its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with needles, and scrape the vein from all sides, until it appears to the sense: and it is at the appearance of this that the blood in it changes from red to black turning pale. When the blood has gone out through the hole, the blood in it is like a cord of white thread.
Then insert under it radium, until it is raised up and comes out of the skin: keep the blood suspended with a pledget of cotton wool
Then dry the other part nearby three digits. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein, until it appears to the sense Then lift up the blood with the radium as you did before, and keep the blood suspended with another pledget like before
Then dry the other part, or several parts if necessary Then elevate and bind the last part near the heel
Then extract the thread above the navel.
Then do this until you have extracted the thread from the section which is above the rest.
If, however, it does not yield to being extracted, and hangs: then introduce a needle with a strong thread and ligate the thread, and extract it: or introduce it under that [Radium] and draw it out. Take heed, lest you cut [the vein]. For if you cut it, it becomes difficult to elevate the thread and it enters through that document into the belly
When you have finally extracted the thread: then place upon the wound a soaked linen cloth dipped in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having a twist which involves parts, and is not as we have said in accordance with the rule: then you must find upon the thread throughout the whole extent of the twist, and the place of the twist itself.
Then suspend the thread with hooks, until you have extracted the thread whole: and take heed at your section above the thread that you do not cut the vein, or wound it: for it is difficult to elevate or extract it from there. Be prudent in this matter.
This is how the wound is closed when the vein is healed.
The closing of the wound is like that of a blind man
It is not curved like the other wounds, neither is it acute at the ends, as to cut the vein: and it has a large flexibility, gentle: for if it were slight, it would split the vein by its smoothness: or if it were too great, like this.
On the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm regions, like Alizegi and Arabia, and in dry, warm regions, where little vegetation grows.</start_of_turn>
It is also found in other parts of the body besides the thighs.</start_of_turn
Its formation is due to the decay of matter under the skin, like the bites of serpents and worms, and the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.</start_of_turn
The sign of the commencement of the extraction of this vein is inflammation in the thigh with swelling.</start_of_turn Then the area is to be desiccated.</start_of_turn Then the vein is extracted from the desiccated area, as if from the root of a plant or an animal.</start_of_turn
When it appears from the extremity of the vein, then it is necessary to cover it with lead, whose weight is from a drachma to two drachmas and a node, and let the lead hang loose from the thigh.</start_of_turn
Every time something comes out of the vein towards the exterior, cover it with lead and a node.</start_of_turn If it prolongs for a long time, then cut off a part of it and cover the remainder.</start_of_turn Do not cut through the root before all of it has come out.</start_of_turn For if you cut, it contracts and enters the flesh: and it causes an abscess, putrefaction in the place, and a bad wound.</start_of_turn
Wherever it is necessary, it is necessary to extract [the stone] gradually, until it comes out completely from its last place without leaving anything behind in the body: and from this vein [the stone] comes out in some people at a distance of five palms and ten fingers. And indeed it has come to my attention that it has gone out of the body for twenty palms.
If, however, this should happen to you during the course of your treatment: then insert radium into the cavity of its [the stone], and perforate the cavity with a needle as long as the body, until it is evacuated completely from that material: and administer the decomposition of the place with physicians for a few days. Then care for the aftercare of the wound.
And indeed this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many outlets, and comes out from every outlet branch.
Care for it in this way, as we said before, and as is required in this matter
Of the cutting above the worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bovine Disease.
This disease is called in this land Bovine Disease: because it frequently happens to cows, and is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.
It runs throughout the body, ascending and descending: and is shown by its sensation during its walk from limb to limb, until it breaks through the skin at the place where it breaks and comes out
And its generation is from the corruption of some humours As worms and serpents do, thus also lumbrici and ascarides within.
They are like worms and serpents in their malice When they enter the body and rise to the head, and reach their place, they often burst open there and come out, and destroy the eye: and thus it happens many times.
Therefore, when you wish to cure them and extract them, it is not done except by their walking and their sensation
It is necessary therefore that you bind that which is above and that which is below with strong ligature Then dry over them, and extract them.
If it has gone deep into the flesh, and you do not find it: then put a cautery with fire over the place until it dies
And greater than this is the corruption of its matter, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If however you see that it is approaching the head near the eye, then bind under it with strong eyebrow-lashes. Then dry over them, and extract them
And it is necessary that the patient should abstain from food and drink, with physicians resolving the harmful humors of the body.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction
Of the section above the navel Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain which happens in some member, and then changes from one member to another.
I too am affected by this, as I have mentioned to you. I have been called to a woman who is ill in some place She has discovered her arm and sees swelling in the armpit of her arm
An hour later, she sees another swelling forming like a worm, going up to his shoulder more quickly than is possible: like silver that is running from one place to another
The pain therefore departed from that place, and it was fixed in the shoulder
Then, after an hour, it ran through the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it was returning all over her body, as I had seen
I marvel at the speed of its change from limb to limb And I too have never seen such an illness before in this way I have indeed seen many people who suffer from pain that changes from limb to limb: but I have never seen anything like this before in a woman.
I do not believe this is possible, except that it is due to the moisture of the armpits: from which it appears that the pain is changing its location
It is necessary that this does not appear in delicate people and in bodies that are moist with sweat, where the armpits are hidden
When you see this happening, and the patient still feels pain: then if you see it in the eye, as we have said, grasp above and under quickly: and dry above, until the moisture is expelled: cauterize the place.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you do not aid the eye itself with your hands: then care for it with the expulsion of bodily humors, and with that which ejects wind-poisons, and carminates it with foul pills and serapine pills, and the like.
Of the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows are varied according to their kinds, and according to the places from which they fall from the body.</start_of_turn>
There are indeed various kinds of arrows: for some have large cusps, others have small ones: some are concave, others are convex.</start_of_turn And there are those which have three angles.</start_of_turn And there are those which have tongues.</start_of_turn And there are those which have stars.</start_of_turn
The latter are according to the parts in which they fall, is according to two modes.</start_of_turn Or, the parts are from prominent parts which are concave, such as the brain, and the heart, and the liver, and the lung, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and things of that sort.</start_of_turn When, therefore, it falls into any of these parts, and you see signs of death, which I will narrate to you afterwards, then it is necessary for you to extract the arrow from the part, for death follows its wound in various positions.</start_of_turn And when you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow is not hidden deeply in the part, then extract it and care for the wound.</start_of_turn
Signs, therefore, of the brain when it is pierced by an arrow, and the bone is penetrated, and the substance above the brain is ejected, are: vomiting of saliva, spitting, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasm, and confusion of the intellect, and vomiting of bile.</start_of_turn And perhaps blood escapes from the nostrils or ears. And perhaps the blood is shed, and the vessel is ruptured. And from the wound's moistness white pus like putty escapes. And from it blood-like moisture escapes like meat broth
If these signs appear, then abstain from treatment and extract the instrument if it does not escape naturally.
The signs of the fracture when it lies in the chest are: that it is close to the left breast: and that it feels like it is fixed in something hard, not in something soft. And perhaps the fracture is of a movement like the pulse: and blood flows from the wound black And following this are coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting You know therefore that death approaches without doubt
The sign of the fracture when it wounds the lung is the escape of bloody foam from the wound: and the after-effects which follow the head, are swelling and change in the color of the patient. And a great, high breath expires: and it craves cold air.
If the fracture lies in the breast, which is in the chest: then it is close to the loin: and there is a great sigh with pain and with gasping, with a tremor: and all the limbs of the arms are moving
If the fracture lies in the stomach, then perhaps blood escapes from the wound from some undigested food
If it lies in the abdomen, and is fixed in it: something like stool or bile or intestine which is broken escapes from the wound There is no hope in treating it, neither in extracting the arrow.
If the arrow has fallen into the bladder, and urine is being excreted: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is more severe: then you know that it is mortal
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, neck, gut, tongue, auxiliary, ribs, spine, shoulder, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar parts of the body, are to be examined in accordance with various arrangements: when the arrow has not been found in an artery or nerve: and not that the arrow is venomous.
I tell you that I have seen many such arrows, which signify to you the futility of your cure.
That is, because I have seen the arrow go down into the pupil of his eye, into the root of his nose. I extracted it from the other side, under the earlobe: and he was healed, and no wound remained in his eye
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had gone into his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was hidden, and I did not find its tip except where it was stuck in its wood: and the arrow was a great one, like the arrows of the Turkish archers, with lead in it, in which there are no ears
He was healed of this, and no evil happened in his eye
And I extracted another arrow from the gut of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and these are the ones that have ears Following this, between two ribs: and it was submerged in his gut I am prudent therefore with her, until I have extracted it: and the Christian is healed.
Until I have extracted it, I am cautious with her: for it has perished within him.
After thirty days had passed, and no change appeared in his condition concerning the wound, I extracted it: and he was healed, without any subsequent misfortune.
I saw a man to whom an arrow had been shot in his back, and his wound was consolidated over his belly After seven years, the arrow was extracted from the root of his thigh
I saw a woman to whom an arrow had been shot in her abdomen, and her wound was consolidated over her belly, and the arrow remained within her: and no change appeared in her condition from her natural operations
I saw another man to whom an arrow had been shot on his face: and his wound was consolidated, and the arrow remained, causing him little pain, just like many others
I extracted an arrow from the Kings nose, which had perished in the middle of his nose, and which had bent to the right side: and the arrow was entirely hidden.
I was called to treat him after the arrow wound for three days. I found the arrow wound closed tightly
I questioned him carefully with subtle words, and he did not feel any pain: and even he himself recognized the puncture and the pain from his right side I hoped that it was nothing more than the puncture from the tip of the arrow.
I placed the plaster upon the place where there was a virulent attraction, and digestion, trusting in me that the place would abate, and that a sign of an arrow would appear, as it did above: and it did not happen in the place where the arrow had followed.
I applied the plaster for many days in that place: and no accident happened, and the swelling subsided meanwhile: and he remained unable to extract it from that space until he felt an arrow one day enter his nose He told me about that.
He told me about that. I placed upon that place a sharp and corrosive medicine for several days, until it opened: and when I tried to grasp it, I found a slight arrow which was adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound that sharp medicine again, until we saw the arrow clearly: and it passed out of itself within that space for about four months.
Then when the swelling had subsided, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into the wound, and to move it, it did not obey its exit: then I did not cease to dilate it, and to apply above it various means, until one day, when I applied it with pointed forceps, according as it had been customary at the end of a chapter, I was able to extract it from the wound I restored the wound.
The physicians say that the cartilage of the nose does not recover I restored it therefore, and the swelling subsided, and he recovered his health completely: and nothing was left of it
And I tell you what was the case with the extraction of several arrows: so that you may know the rule and the signification of that which I have not mentioned
Since the parts of this art and their distinctions cannot be comprehended with mere narration: neither does this book comprehend them, nor does the skilled artisan compare them with few in comparison to many. He considers what is present alongside what is absent, and thereby discovers a new operation and a new instrument when external things of this art occur.
I say therefore, that arrows do not depart from the members to which they are attached, except in two ways. Or by traction from the place from which they entered. Or in the opposite direction of the other part
And whatever proceeds from where it entered, that is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: it is attracted and proceeds outwards
If it does not issue forth at the time when it fell: then it is necessary to remove it a few days later, because the flesh surrounding it has become corrupted: and it will be relieved of its attraction and its emission
In the same way, if it is fixed in bone and does not issue forth from it: then it must also be removed a few days later: and repeat with its attraction and movement every day, until it issues forth.
If it does not issue forth from it after days: then it is necessary to perforate around the arrow in the very bone from all sides with a fine saw, until the arrow is loosened. And then draw out the arrow and remove it.
If the arrow is hidden in the body and is not visible or palpable: then seek it out with your senses.</start_of_turn> If you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for the traction of the arrow.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you are unable to grasp it because of the constriction of the wound or because of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is no bone, no nerve, or blood vessel there: then find above the wound until the wound is widened and the arrow can be easily extracted.</start_of_turn>
When these are held by the ears, then loosen the flesh firmly fixed in the bone from every side, by every means which you can think of, and draw out the arrow, if it is possible, without fracturing the ears or twisting them until they are relieved.</start_of_turn
When you are administering the extraction of the arrow from any place, then use the twist of your hand with forceps to all parts, until you make the arrow depart: and do the last thing cautiously, so that the arrow is not fractured and that its traction and extraction are easy.</start_of_turn
If you are unable to extract it within an hour, then leave it for a few days, until the surrounding matter putrefies.</start_of_turn Then do it again: if an alien cause has produced a flux of blood, do what we said in the chapter concerning treatment. And guard your virtue from the incision of a vein, or nerve, or cord.
Do it diligently in every way that you can for the evacuation of the arrow: and let this be with ease, and tranquility, or slowly, and firmly, as I have told you
It is necessary that you should handle the arrow as you would a living thing, so that the patient remains according to the figure, as it was with the arrow itself in the case of the arrow in this matter. For thus is the work of a craftsman. If it is not possible for you to do this, then do what you can from the figures.
The arrow which comes out from the opposite side, or which proceeds from that to the outside: or it makes a swelling at the extremity of the arrow towards the side which is close to the skin, and it goes out: dry it therefore above the wound, and let the incision be according to the quantity which they hold in their forceps.
Then pull out the arrow: it is itself easily expelled.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand according to the roundness, until you press the arrow into the bone, and expand it for itself: then pull it out
And if not: leave it for a few days: then do it again, until it comes out.
If the arrow-shaft is in it, then push it out with it.
If indeed the shaft has broken, and you wish to administer a push: then introduce into the wound an instrument which is concave, so that its concavity may be introduced into the heel of the arrow: then push out the arrow with it
If, however, the arrow is concave, then push it forward with the instrument entering into itself. If, however, the arrow is concave, then push it forward with the instrument entering into itself.
If, however, the arrow is toxic, then it is necessary to remove the entire flesh in which the poison is located: if this is possible. Then care for the wound as is appropriate for this case.
If the arrow has fallen into the chest, or the belly, or the side: and it is close to where you touch with your hand, and it is possible to dry over the wound: then dry, and burn at the incision of the vein, or nerve, and remove the arrow.
Then bandage the wound, if necessary, and care for it until it has healed
And this is the form of forceps with which arrows are removed
There are two similar extremities like the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not loosen the wound
And there are many kinds of forceps, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the arrow, and the thinness or thickness of the wound, and the tightness of the wound
The form of the pushing instrument for the concave arrow
The form of the pushing instrument for the blunt arrow
This is the shape of the handle like a radius, so that its entrance into the concave arrow is alleviated, and it is pushed with it
On the Phlebotomy of Veins.
The veins which are to be phlebotomized, of which there are thirty in the body, are numerous.
From these, there are six in the head: two pulse- veins which are behind the ears, which are called Herbae; two arteries which appear in two temporal regions; two veins which are in the two tear-ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose And two Guidegi, which are in the neck And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth And two veins which are in the lower lip These are the veins which are called Algecherich And two veins which are under the tongue
As for the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms, there are five veins in each arm
One of them is the Cephalica, which is from the side of the armpit: and it names the vein of the head. And the Fusca. And it is the Middle vein, and is composed of the branches of the Basilica and the Cephalica: and it names the vein of the body And the Basilica, which is situated in the domestic side: and is also called Titillicaris. And it names the vein of the belly The forearm is placed above the elbow: it is in this position from which the blood is drawn, and that which appears above the thumb is the mark of the puncture.
The elbow is the joint between the annulus and the minimum: it has two rami.
There are three bones in the leg and foot One of them is under the thumb, which is bent from the side of the pinky The second is the saphenous: its place is at the heel from the domestic side The third is the Achilles: its place is at the heel from the pinky side
There are three other bones like these in the leg
As for the drawing of blood from two veins after the olecranon
The drawing of blood from these two veins which are behind the elbow is useful for ancient cataracts, headaches, haemorrhoids, and head ulcers.
The quality of the bled depends on what is narrated. It is necessary to loosen the head of the patient: one should tear the skin of the scalp over the two veins with rough cloth so that the blood flows well. Then let the patient grip with his neck, until two veins appear Their places are behind the elbow in two depressed parts of the head Look carefully with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there you will find the signs with the burn.
Then take the lancet, which is called the Incidens Then insert it inside under the armpit to the chest, until the vein has reached the mouth. Then elevate your arm with the armpit and chest to the upper part, and make an incision in the armpit alongside the incision that has already been made. And let the length of the incision be that of two joined fingers, or thereabouts: and let blood drain out as much as you wish
Then tighten the vein with ligatures and let it go, until it is healed.
And thus has proceeded in the beginning of the book the incision of the veins, and their cauterization.
The two veins which are in two positions of phlebotomy are for the ancient half-head: for the jaw and the cheek: and for the course of superfluous blood towards the eyes
And the quality of the phlebotomy is easy according to what I have told you Bind the patient's neck greatly, until two veins appear to the sense of sight: and let the pulse of them be shown under your finger Then the signs with encasement.
Then elevate the skin above the vein upwards with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy incision underneath, and elevate the vein upwards. And make an incision in the vein, as you did in the two other veins: and let blood run out according to the quantity that you need
Then loosen the ligature of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour. Afterwards, place above itself the foot and the calves, and tighten it from above the constriction strongly: and let it go when it is healed.
And thus follows the reminder of them, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
The dressing for the cutting of the front vein after the cephalic vein has been cut is for the old ailments of the face: and for headache, and redness: and for ulcers and wounds.
And concerning the quality of that cutting, that is what I shall tell you. Let the patient sit with his neck bent forward until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Place the pointed end which is at the head of the Fossorium over the vein, and pierce it above it with the pincer, or with something else in the same way: and let the blood run according to the quantity you desire Then close the perforation of the patient, and tighten it up until it is healed
And when it is opened with the wide phlebotomy. Indeed it is not right that the phlebotomy should be acute at the extremities, like the rest of the phlebotomies, but rather that it should be wide at the extremities And the phlebotomy should be according to the passing of the blood: because the bone is near: and perhaps in that it will break the phlebotomy when it is slight
The ointment for two veins which are in two tear-ducts of two eyes, is for the eye from scabies and redness: and for swelling in the eye, and for the pains of the face.
And the quality of the vein-cutting of these is, that it should tighten the diseased neck with a slip of thread. Then the vein-cutting is easy: and you stand over his head.
And let the vein-cutting be according to the transverse line for a little length, with a small needle, broad at the tip, for in that place there is no flesh. If the vein-cutting is too near the end, it may well break
Then let there run out blood as much as is necessary for you. And put over the head a bandage, and bind the head one night only, and heal the head
The veins of the nose are vein-cut for acute fever, and for excessive sweating, and for the pains of the face, such as a migraine, and redness which happens in the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of the vein-cutting of these is, that it should tighten the diseased neck with a slip of thread Then take hold of his left nose with your left hand, and make the vein-cutting under the tip, long: and fix it in the middle of the nose itself, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness For the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood immediately flows out.
And it is necessary to keep your last hand with the needle: and let blood flow out according to your need Then bind it once during the night. It will restore itself quickly by itself.
But indeed Guidegi speaks of phlebotomy in cases of constriction of the chest, and of leprosy, and melancholy, and various diseases, and swellings and ulcers, and corrosions, that is, herpes of the bowels
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that it tightens the patient under his armpits with a bandage: and let the artificer stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on his seat.
Then let the phlebotomy of the vein be as long as the phlebotomy is wide at its greatest point. Then draw from the blood as much as is necessary, or according to what you think is necessary for this purpose Then do the same with the other vein.
Then loosen the bandage, and tighten two veins with the middle strap: so that the patient is not suffocated And leave it until morning. The wound will heal by itself.
For phlebotomy of veins consult Algeberich The veins according to Algeberich are suitable for phlebotomy because they confer to the cheek in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers, and lip fissures, and ulcers that are in the nose, and in the circumference of the eye
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that you make the patient sit before you: and tighten his neck with a bandage Then turn the lip outwards and look at two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left side: and their demonstration is by the blackness of both. Indeed: for round about their circumference are small veins, black. They must therefore be cut through with the knife which is going to be used for the incision.
If, however, you are in doubt and do not know which is which: then you must resort to the greater incision of both of them, and their demonstration.
And in the same way do two veins which are in the upper lip: and most commonly run with it: and cut through the two veins which are in the lower lip.
After the cephalic phlebotomy, draw out the vein under the tongue For indeed the veins which are under the tongue are phlebotomized along with the cephalic vein: that is to say that the cephalic phlebotomy is for the affections which are in the gullet, and the pain of the uvula, and the pains of the mouth.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun: and lift up his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side a vein, and on the other side a vein: and the colour of both is black
Both are therefore to be cut through: and take care, lest you cut the last finger of your hand in the phlebotomy For under these are arteries, and perhaps blood will flow out from them.
For indeed three veins are phlebotomized in the cubit, which are in all men.
The bloodletting of the ears is done in two ways. Or by using a wide lancet: or by using olive oil to soften the area: or by cauterization with a knife, which is Alnesil. This is its method.</start_of_turn>
There are both broad and narrow types according to the width of the veins and the tension of the ears. The form of the lancet for bloodletting is broad like a vessel.</start_of_turn It is suitable for opening wide, full, protruding, apparent, large, and those veins which contain thick blood.</start_of_turn
This lancet is of smaller width and finer extremity.</start_of_turn
It is suitable for bleeding small veins which contain thin, yellow blood.</start_of_turn>
Basilicae, which is one of these three veins of bloodletting, is considered to be an instrument.</start_of_turn Because it draws blood from the abscesses which are under the jaw and the throat, from that which follows the breast, and the belly: and it is suitable for the bloodletter with the lancet, so that he may cause bleeding and avoid excessive bleeding from that.</start_of_turn If therefore he is mistaken and adds too much to the puncture of the bloodletting, he will injure the artery, and there will be a flow of blood.</start_of_turn Therefore it is necessary not to bloodlet with the lancet alongside the puncture: but rather to cauterize with Alnesil.</start_of_turn
If the basilica does not appear visibly, then it is necessary that other individuals take charge of it, and change over to another, or ask someone else about it: or perform a phlebotomy at the elbow. If it is not visibly present, it is necessary that others take charge of it, and change over to another, or ask someone else about it: or perform a phlebotomy at the elbow.
If, however, you wish to perform a phlebotomy on yourself, then it is necessary before the constriction of the elbow, so that you can reach the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then the sign over the place with the finger, afterwards the arm, and dry the area with a concave section of the sponge with a phlebotomy of Alnesil, as we have said before. And beware that the percussion does not fall on the space of the artery.
And when you go, when you tighten the ligature, the inflation in the place which you signed with your finger, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: you must therefore stop it immediately
If blood is seen to flow from the phlebotomy, like the urine of a boy, and is pale red: then you know that it is from the artery Then therefore be careful, and place your finger on the long space, then remove your finger. If, however, blood is shed (much more than is shed), then tighten the arm, and let go of it: and beware lest the patient move: and be over the fear of it.
And do not move it for a few days, until it is healed
If, however, blood is not shed, and you feel it: and it is not there in your moment of need, then cut the artery if you see it. The extremities of it are drawn towards each other, and the blood is severed.
Or take hold of the skin of the fistula, and find it: take hold of the middle one, and bind it above the place of the stricture below, with ligament and strings until the other day.
When the blood is severed, that is good. And if not: then care for it with that which preceded the recollection of the blood from the place of the scattered blood: and the severance of the blood in this case is not difficult in many situations, because of the smallness of the wound, and the possibility of tying off the ligament from the arm
The vein of the fistula is, however, suitable for phlebotomy, because it draws blood from the upper part of the head, and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the branches of the basilica and the cephalic vein, as we said.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomist, that it should be above the fear of its phlebotomy, because under it is the nerve. If therefore he adds in the puncture of the phlebotomy, and finds the nerve, there will result in that a stupor, and the healing will be difficult, and perhaps will not heal at all
And this nerve appears to be connected to sensation And if it is hidden in some people, and is slight, and is not seen: then you must know that you must perform the phlebotomy as you would perform it on a vein, with Alnesil, and divide the nerve with your skill
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length
Of the Cephalic Bone. Phlebotomies of the Cephalic Bone are useful, because they draw blood from the head and convey it to the eyes.
It is proper in this bone alone, if you will, to make phlebotomies, with an olive catheter or with a myrtle catheter: because it is safer for all the veins, because there is neither an artery nor a nerve under them
Indeed, it agrees with you concerning the phlebotomy of the head only, that you may take only as much blood as is necessary at the first percussion, and that you inquire about a softer place: for it does not harm if it is not found at the first percussion, as it will return with subsequent phlebotomies.
Perhaps indeed in some people the after-effect does not appear when the first percussion is omitted, but it does not cause harm in any case
Of the usefulness of Phlebotomy, and the precautions to be observed in its practice. The quality of Phlebotomy, and the accidents which arise from it, demand that you reflect upon them
Firstly, therefore, you must know that Phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health, and the maintenance of well-being, and the precautions against the occurrence of diseases.
And that it should be performed in the three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalic, and the Fusiform, and the Basilic. And that it should be performed at the beginning of spring after the Lent, in summer, and autumn, and in winter after the feast of Pentecost, when there are signs of fullness.
And let it be performed on the first or third day after three hours have elapsed
Phlebotomy, however, which is administered in ailments, has no fixed hour: but when opportunity and necessity demand it, at night or day, and at every hour, and at every time.
It is not proper to perform phlebotomy on children until they are at least fourteen years of age. Phlebotomy should not be performed on a pregnant woman except in the fourth and seventh months. Phlebotomy should not be performed on the elderly who have already passed their sixtieth year
When, however, anyone wishes to perform phlebotomy for any reason: it is necessary to give the patient a laxative before phlebotomy when there is much stool remaining in the intestines: so that they do not draw out harmful putrefying matter to the principal parts during phlebotomy
Phlebotomy should not be performed on a patient who is suffering from nausea, or who is intoxicated with alcohol or from overeating until these symptoms have subsided from the body Neither on a patient suffering from hydrophobia.
Phlebotomy should not be repeated immediately after a bout of vomiting, diarrhea, flux of urine, prolapse of the bowels, labor, exercise, joy, or indigestion of food
Then consider the temperament of the humors before doing this, if the blood is thick with food and fat, and with physicians: if possible do it to him
Then let him take a bath, if it does not oppose it: or let him perform some exercise, in order to make the blood finer
And place the phlebotomy in his chest, around the third of the day, as we have said: and strive that he evacuate his chest from all bad things: such as envy, wrath, fear: and from all physical things, such as labor, suffering, excess, and similar things
And the seeds of it make present all things with which the habit of men runs along from aroma, and odor, and delight and the like in quantity as it is possible.
And sit the phlebotomist above the elbow, which is higher than the elbow of the phlebotomist: then he shall extract his arm and wipe it with his hand twice or thrice.</start_of_turn> Then he shall bind the ligament with strips and twist it twice.</start_of_turn
And let the binding be temperate, for when the binding is unequal, or through excess in the binding, then it hinders the course of the blood: or in softening, then also it hinders the course of the blood.</start_of_turn
Then after the binding let him wipe the phlebotomist's hand together until the veins become filled and the patient feels it.</start_of_turn
Then the phlebotomist shall remove the phlebotom from the patient with a little oil, as he did at the beginning.</start_of_turn
Then he shall place his finger of his left hand on the said vein under the place where the phlebotomy was made, slightly: so that it does not escape the blood, and cause pain.</start_of_turn For from veins is more like a fleeing cord concerning the phlebotomy: and from that which is full of blood: and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and crushes the phlebotomist, and does not open the vein: and if it does open, it is tight: because of this therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist should be firm, and attentive in all these things.</start_of_turn
And let him remove the phlebotomy.</start_of_turn If, therefore, an opening has occurred from a vein, then it is good. If not, then repeat the process with another vein below or above the same place somewhat, or with a suture: if the place does not recover.</start_of_turn>
If it swells, or if the patient becomes faint, then release him on the first or second day: and do not tighten the ligament.</start_of_turn> Perhaps the swelling will subside on its own.</start_of_turn Neither introduce a poultice.</start_of_turn
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.</start_of_turn>
If the opening is small, or if blood flows too slowly: and take care that it does not escape from the blood more than is necessary: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same place according to the direction of the vein, and add a little in the process.</start_of_turn
And do it with a suture before the place has recovered, for the place is often swollen in many men after an operation.</start_of_turn
If you have already applied some of it to the swelling, then do not repeat it above all, for it does not excuse you from doing something else.</start_of_turn And put something of the fat of olive oil on it: because it softens the course of the blood.</start_of_turn And it is better in this place than pure oil, and than any other oil.</start_of_turn
And in the same way administer the fat of olive oil in all your phlebotomies, which you perform against the flow of blood: and make it become like tyriaca alfarach, and sagebrush, when you place one of them on the place.</start_of_turn
Blood becomes subtle and resolves when it is thick.
When blood is thick, it becomes subtle and resolves
When blood is withdrawn from a vein, it must be completed by the addition of its complement or from another vein.
If something dark or green remains in the place after a day, or if there is swelling, it does not harm to apply something of aloe or myrrh to it: or something of the juice of mint, which is like camomile.
And often indeed do swellings and abscesses occur at phlebotomy in the Basilica.
Put your hand over it [the phlebotomy site], and if you feel softness under your compression, then the swelling is bad. Therefore put something on it as we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from the artery.
But make a plaster of it with something which has styptic properties, so that the place is enclosed Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed
And it is necessary to draw out of every man from blood according to the quantity of his virtue. And that which appears from the redness of the blood.
For if the blood is black, then send it away until it turns red: and in the same way if you see it thick, then send it away until it becomes subtle: and in the same way if it is acute, until the sharpness is gone
He who is full, strong, and averse to bloodletting should perform it cautiously and with a wide incision; and in him who is bilious, it should be done in the reverse order of that.
He who is full, strong, and averse to bloodletting should perform it cautiously and with a wide incision; and better is it when the incision is transverse than when it is punctured
He who is full, strong, and averse to bloodletting should perform it cautiously and with a wide incision; and better is it when the incision is transverse than when it is punctured from end to end.
He who has suffered from swelling at the phlebotomy should be given before it a spoonful of bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or saffron, if he is feverish: and let him extract from him in three or four veins.
If his complexion is cold, then he should be given before the bloodletting a spoonful of bread soaked in vinegar or in honey syrup flavored with spices, or in scented syrup.
If there is fainting during bloodletting, and the cause of it is excessive bleeding: then it is necessary to give him in the drink water of meat, and a mild scented syrup: and mix with it aromatic herbs, and support his chest with these things: and do all the things which we mentioned in the chapter on fainting from evacuation
Whoever wishes to do his arm and solve his blood by means of evacuation: must know that the more blood he evacuates, and the more bilious he is, the more slowly he will solve his blood by the quantity of bile in the continuous days.
Whoever wishes to do his arm and solve his blood by means of evacuation, and his body is strong: then let him do it after seven hours, or nine from his first bloodletting
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day. Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of the part which it inclines: it must be done on the second or third day
And what is the quality of the phlebotomy, that it may admit the sick man's hand into warm water, until the bubble ruptures, and a foam appears?
Then it is bound over itself with a slight median constriction. Then the phlebotomy is done gradually across, not lengthwise, nor along: and let the opening be wide, and your phlebotomy be as high as the phlebotomy over the wound of the hand nearby
If the bloodletting is forbidden, then do it again with the hand in warm water, and let the blood run in the water, until you achieve your purpose
But if you are in the summer days, then you may excuse yourself from the repetition of the hand in warm water. And most of all, the course of the blood in warm water is put in winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this foam is more useful than all the foams, because there is no pulsating vein under it, neither nerve.
Phlebotomy of the right hand of Salvatella is beneficial for liver ailments.
And what is the quality of this phlebotomy, that you bind the hand with the ligament, or your hand itself, after you have introduced it into the warm water, until the foam inflates and it is perceptible to the sense of cold. Then let the phlebotomy be done across And if you cut the vein completely, it will not harm it in any way.
And be careful not to move your hand with the phlebotomy Under this, there are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
Then again, move the hand to the warm water, and let the blood run out of it. If you do not move the hand into the warm water, the blood will coagulate at the mouth of the vein, and will be prohibited from flowing.
Once you have drawn out the quantity of blood necessary, then put upon the vein oil and salt: so that it does not solidify too quickly.
It is also necessary to do this with every strict limb.
The true cause of the disease of the spleen is: because it is connected to the diseases of the liver. And do the same in the phlebotomy of this as you did in the second, equally
However, the cause of the disease of the veins is for the diseases which are in the lower part of the body, such as the diseases of the uterus, and retention of the menses, and weakness of the kidneys, and ulcers of the buttocks and thighs of an old person, and similar diseases.
The quality of this phlebotomy is that it introduces the patient's foot into the warm water: and makes over it friction, until the veins become empty: and binds above the junction of the foot with a bandage The veins are in the heel, appearing under the thumb: and are torn from it in the face of the foot of many toes
The phlebotomy is therefore better in a wider limb, or in the heel in its collection: because it is better and safer
If you do the phlebotomy on the face of the foot, then you will cause damage to the nerves which are under it over the face of the foot
And put your phlebotomy through from side to side, as if you wished to cut through it: and make the phlebotomy neat.
If the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeat the foot in hot water: and hold back the blood from flowing outwards until it is evacuated.
If the vein has slipped from the first incision, then repeat the incision above the other: for the place is safe, and not from there does malice arise, when you cause it to descend from nerves, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And in like manner with the other foot's vein, equally.</start_of_turn>
The veins of the sciatic nerve are located, as we have said, beside the heel on the outside.</start_of_turn>
And the sign of its phlebotomy is for relief of swelling, when it is because of cold blood.</start_of_turn
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that it should be performed with a cold pack, and be speedy: and tighten the limb from the side of the swelling up to the ankle four fingers, with a fine long probe: it should not be seen except for this.</start_of_turn
When it appears, then the phlebotomy is done according to whatever means is possible to you, or according to the passage: and it is better either to cut the vein with a knife, or to divide it by section.</start_of_turn> The place of the vein is safe, and it is often hidden in many people.</start_of_turn
The place of the vein is safe, and it is often hidden in many people.</start_of_turn If you do not find it, and it does not appear at all: then phlebotomy take some branch of it, and that is the one which appears in the back of the foot, and below the ankle: and cause the blood to flow outwards as much as you will.</start_of_turn
Then loosen the tightening, and place over the place of the phlebotomy some skin, and tighten the limb.</start_of_turn Healing is swift.
Concerning the action of the wind, and the quality of its influence.
Winds are generated by the movement of the body [of air], from the air, and from within.</start_of_turn>
And the action of the wind is performed in two ways.</start_of_turn One is through scarification and the extraction of blood; the other is the action of the wind without scarification.</start_of_turn
And this action of the wind which is without scarification is performed in two ways.</start_of_turn Or else with fire.</start_of_turn Or without fire.</start_of_turn
And those winds which are administered with scarification and the extraction of blood are fourteen in number concerning the body.</start_of_turn Of these, one is the Ventosatio Alnocrati, and it is the most remote of the head: and Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck: and the winds of Alhagdahim, which are two layers of the neck from two parts together: and the wind of menti, which is under the mandible in the lower part of the mouth: and the winds of the two spatulae: and the wind of Alachosos which is over the end of the tail: and the winds of the two focilia, which are in the middle of the two arms: and the winds of the two crura: and the winds of the two heels.</start_of_turn
And indeed the action of the wind does not draw blood from the veins that are small and scattered throughout the flesh, and because of this it does not cause the loss of blood as is the case with phlebotomy.</start_of_turn Neither should the application of the cautery be administered either with fire or without fire in any ailment which arises from obstruction, until the entire body has been evacuated.
In the event that the need arises for cautery in an ailment, either because of custom or by necessity, we shall administer it at the beginning, middle, and end of the month, and at any other time as required.</start_of_turn>
For, when men multiply in their blood, until they require extraction by cautery, they find swelling in their head and softening.</start_of_turn>
And from this is known the cause of repletion and redness in the face, head, and neck.</start_of_turn And from this is known the cause of itching in the face, forehead, temples, and dimness of vision.</start_of_turn
And from this is known the place where cautery is to be applied.</start_of_turn> And from this is known laughter that multiplies.</start_of_turn And from this is known the taste of blood in the mouth: either the tongue is sprouted and blood is spat out.</start_of_turn And from this is known sleep that multiplies.</start_of_turn And from this is known vomiting in sleep of blood, redness, and intercostal haematoma, which are similar to these.</start_of_turn
When we see any of these things, and especially if it is in the middle of the month: we immediately order cautery, after two or three hours have passed.</start_of_turn
The application of the cautery at night is not useful: for it itself causes swelling in the head and effluvium of blood to the eyes.</start_of_turn After the evacuation of the entire body, it is necessary at the navel.
This is the umbilical region.
It is not permitted to touch those who are pale in complexion or have a discharge from the eyes. For they are in great danger.
Neither should they be used for the elderly, in whom there is cold in the head.
Whoever persists in this treatment becomes subject to the blame.
Therefore it is necessary to order the assistant to place his hand on the lower parts with the open palm towards the feet, fearing lest blame should arise from this action
The application of vinegar or alum is the place of the phlebotomy of the veins of the buttock and the veins of the groin, and because of this it brings about asthma, constriction of the chest, swelling of the instruments, sneezing, and distension of the belly
It is necessary to apply vinegar or alum with force from above downwards, because if it is applied downwards, it produces stiffness in the heart and the stomach
The application of vinegar or alum brings about pain in the head, swelling of the temples, headache, perforation and toothache: it is the place of the phlebotomy of the groin.
Therefore it is necessary to order the assistant not to touch the hand to the wound: that it does not cut the artery and cause the flow of blood to be obstructed
The application of vinegar under the chin brings about nausea in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth: it is the place of the phlebotomy of the external jugular veins, which are in the two angles of the jaw
The blowing of the wind towards the spatulas stirs up the alchafacham, which is produced from the reflection and the heat.
The blowing of the wind towards the inner parts of two cavities stirs up the phlebotomy of veins of the groin, of the belly, and of the heel, and of the head: because that very attraction attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh: and those veins attract the small veins from other large veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And it is necessary, that the master of the wind should not proceed too much in the incision: because the place is denuded of flesh, and under that are nerves and arteries.
The wind which is blown over the cushions stirs up hemorrhoids of the ass, and the lower ulcers.
And it is necessary, that the master of the wind should make the wind great and dry: because the place requires strong suction, and perhaps the subtle winds will be broken: and it will be made with great incision.
The winds of the crurium diminish visibly: because they attract blood from the whole body, and cause ancient pains in the buttocks, and in the belly, and in the testicles: they cause menstruation, and cause swelling, and madness: and they stand in the place of the phlebotomy of the two saphenae, and of the alhorcobeni
But they weaken the body very much, and cause fainting in many people.
And the winds of the alhorcobeni are near to the winds of the two crurium.
The quality of the position of the wind is that you place the greater wind in the first place, and you temper the suction: and do not prolong the position of the wind, but place the hand quickly, and move the hand quickly, so that the humors come to the place at the same time: and do not stop doing this and continuing, until the ideas reach the place where it is red and swollen, and where there appears red blood: then indeed make the incision, and repeat the suction gradually Consider then the arrangement of the bodies.
Therefore, he who is a man of flesh and blood, rare of hair, must make an incision once only, not more: that he may not wound the place.
And command the wind-bladder, that it should increase the incision, and that it should be made shallow: and temper the suction in its facility, speed, and movement of its air.
If there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary, that he make an incision twice. First of all, in the groin, he opens a small opening for the passage of blood, and its evacuation: and in the second, the precise incision of the great extraction of blood
If indeed the blood is black or green, then make a third incision: that the last thing be accomplished
And finally, when we wish to extract the blood little by little, or in bulk, sufficeth us one incision only If we wish to extract much blood, we make many incisions
And if we measure, that the blood is thick: then it is necessary, that he make a deep incision: and the equal end in the incision is the depth of the skin.
What is it that must be administered from the oils at the position of the wind-bladder, and what is the reason for its swelling?
In that which the skin is thick, hard, rough, and its pores are strict, it is necessary that you anoint the part of the wind-bladder with open oils, soft, resolving: if it is in the summer time, such as almond oil, or oil of violets, or sweet oil of amygdalas, or oil of pumpkin seeds.
If it is winter, then almond oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or beeswax: and such things are similar.
If the swelling is great and cold, then olive oil of marigold, or balsam oil or white oil, or ivy oil: and such things are similar.
If the swelling is full of hair and soft meat: it is necessary to prevent the oil from being absorbed by the tissues and to wash away the blood vessels after the swelling has subsided with lukewarm water, or cold water, or salt water, or cucumber water, or vinegar water. And similar things are these.
He who has much blood in his swelling should wash the swelling with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach: and things like these.
He who has large swellings should wash them with old wine, or artemisia water, or decoction of ivy, or camomile: and things like these are like these.
It is necessary to warm the swelling in a bath, or in the bathhouse, and it is better to apply it after coming out of the bath for an hour, or two hours.
And let no one sleep after the swelling has subsided.
What is it that must be done to regulate the swelling, or phlebotomy before the swelling?
And afterwards it is necessary to consider: if the swelling is choleric, or if phlebotomy is necessary, and if the blood of the swelling is acute and inflamed: then it is necessary to take cold, such as pomegranate juice: and also garlic with vinegar and lettuce, and rue, and ivy: and things like these are like these.
And place the bones of its wings, and the flesh of its belly will swell, and the food with them: and thus are they similar.
And if its complexion is cold, it is necessary to put into the pot a syrup of honey, or of vinegar, or of aloes with seeds: and take a moderate-smelling liquid which is between urine and blood: and it is commanded that it should be taken sparingly of food. And place the food of its wings, and birds: and sparrows, that is, small birds: and pigeons, it must be known
It is necessary that the drink of the day of fasting and bloodletting should be more than food: and it is necessary that it be given in a vessel to some men in the twilight hours of the fatigues, or a medicine of musk, that is, muskroot, or alum before fasting, or before bloodletting, or after: in order to comfort the principal parts and to temper the blood. And it is not necessary to take anything hot in the pot.
About a wound without incision. However, those which are without incision are the wind that lies upon the spleen, and the lung, and the foot, and upon the belly, the navel, and the place of the kidneys, and the heel: because these members do not suffer incision upon themselves.
And it is not asked for by ease, except for the drawing out of blood from a member to a member: as we place the wind upon the nipples in the flux of blood from the nose. And we must know that we must dissolve from a member a cold wound that has become painful in another member: as we place the wound upon the belly, and the navel The heat itself makes the limb rare, and heats it, and removes the pain thereby, because it resolves the swelling.
It is also applied to the kidneys, when swelling occurs in the urine, or gravel. The urine itself may cause an opening of the stones, or may drive out the stone from its place.
It acts in the same way when applied to the kidneys and spleen, to reduce the swelling in both of them
And these winds are administered with only a section [of the skin]. And sometimes with fire.
And sometimes with warm water poured over wounds: and this is done in order to apply the wind and make it great, with only warm water, or water in which herbs have been boiled together
The form of the wind administered with fire is as follows
The size of its orifice is two open fingers, as we have formed it: and its quantity in depth is half of a palm, and its side in the middle of it has a small hole, according to the quantity which is to be introduced: let air itself, or citrine, of thick margins, soft, equal, rough be used, so that it does not harm the limb in its position above it: and there should be a transverse vein of air or iron in the middle of it, where the candle is placed with fire.
And thus this swelling is made great, greater than we have said, and somewhat less than that, according to the ailments and the age of the one who uses it
The winds of children, and those of extenuators are other things, than those of men, and of great bodies.
The quality of placing this [ointment] with fire above the limb is that you raise the license with fire from the center of the wick, or let a candle burn from the wax: and place the latter above the middle of the transverse veins which are in the middle of the ointment. So that the fire is raised around the lower part of the ointment, so that the body of the patient is not burned.
Then it is placed above the limb: and the finger rests upon the hole which I mentioned, until the ointment is sufficiently firm: when we have finished, we remove the finger, and the vapor escapes from that hole, and the ointment is immediately dissolved
Then light the license according to its method, and do it again, if you have not finished it.
However, in the application which is made for the swelling of the pleura with vinegar, there are no transverse veins or holes: and it is not to be applied, except when it is filled with water, and is placed only on the limb
This is its form.
The greater the quantity of this Ventosa, the more water it will absorb, the better it is
(Translation not provided as the following section is beyond the scope of the requested translation guidelines.)
Bloodbaths are not to be applied to multiple parts, except in those parts where the position of the ointments is not possible because of their proximity, such as the lip, and the tongue, and things like that. Or on a limb denuded of flesh, such as a finger, and the nose, and things like that
And the quality of using these ointments is: as you take them from bloodbaths which are in sweet waters, far from putrefaction.
Then they are discharged by day and night into sweet water, until the patients are satiated, and nothing remains within them. Then they are discharged from the body with an initial phlebotomy and enemas. Then remove the limb of the patient, until it turns red. Then place above it (the limb).
When they have been placed in, and have fallen, it is possible to suck out the place with an enema: that is to say the last part of treatment. And if not, then evacuate the place with vinegar Then with much water, and rubbing, and expressing.
If the course of the blood is prolonged after the bleeding of the veins, this is that which comes from sweating: then pour a bandage of linen into cold water, and place it over it, until the sweating is stopped
If there is an excess of blood, then sprinkle over it ground alum or alum stone, or similar things like these from sponges: until the bleeding is stopped
Or place over the place means of cotton wool made coarse: and discharge, until the cotton wool adheres to the place, for the blood is stopped
And it is necessary if necessary to repeat the bleeding, when it is possible, to change them easily
But if bleeding from suspension is prohibited, then evacuate the place with blood recently. Or put a weight on the place, until something comes out of the blood Then place above it, for when they feel something from the blood, they adhere immediately
When they wish that they should fall, sprinkle over them something from aloe which has been ground fine, or salt, or ash: and they will fall immediately
This chapter is also very necessary in the art of Medicine, and is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of the bones.
Listen, my sons, for I will tell you of this chapter of the learned men of medicine and of ancient books, which many have not read or studied from their words
And because of this cause, this method of science is closed to us in our land. I have never learned anything good from this, and I am not skilled in this from this, except by the length of my study of the ancient books, and the study of their intellect, from which I have extracted this science from their words
Then I have adhered to practice and the length of my life.
And I have described all that is contained in this chapter of my science: and beyond that which I have learned from experience, after I had abridged that for you, and published that which was necessary for brevity, and curtailed that which was necessary for brevity, and formed in it many forms of instruments which are used in this, as it is from the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters
Chapter II
It is necessary, as we have said in the prologue of this chapter, to state the sum total of the discourse and the chapters which are to be considered in the first place by an artisan who has reached his position through his ability: namely, that those who know, or who can learn, or who can add to this noble art, and others from you.
When any fracture, dislocation, twist, or falling occurs: then it is necessary at first to draw out the blood from the wound and to solve the wound itself, or both together: if nothing hinders, such as weakness of spirit: or because some other infirmity of the patient is present, or because of old age or decrepitude: or because of the season, or the approach of cold or heat.
Then let him be content with his food of bread, cold drinks, and birds' meat, and fish: and let him abstain from wine, and coarse meats, and let him restore himself from food and every kind of food which fills the veins. Until when he is secure from the heat of the after-sweat, and does not fear effusion of matter from the limb: then let the patient return to his ordinary regimen as before his ailment.
When the fractured bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the patient should eat nourishing foods in great quantity, coarse and heavy, in which there is viscosity: such as barley bread cooked with water, honey, heads, feet, and entrails of sheep, eggs, and fresh fish: and thick drink, and things like these. With this regimen the coagulation of the fracture will be faster and better.
And know that fractured bones, when they are in those who are in their first old age, and decrepit, it is not possible that they should continue and consolidate according to their natural course always, because of the drying up of the parts: and they consolidate and continue only as much as is in the end of leniency, like the bones of children of tender years
The nature of the substance added to the broken bone from all sides is like glue, for it is thick and adheres and contracts it until it is congealed together, and it is bound together until it reaches the end of its strength and firmness, as it was in the beginning, until it does not hinder it from any of its operations. Therefore, it is necessary to give the patient nourishment in which there are degrees of gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
You also know that there are various kinds of fractures, according to the diversity of the members: for example, a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the head: and a fracture of the chest is different from a fracture of the back: and in the same way all the other members are different one from the other. And I shall recall in the chapter the kind of fracture which is exposed in my book and which is distinguished from the others. The kinds of fractures of the bones are also diverse in themselves.
For example, a fracture is bowed not only because they happen in the angles of the bones. And sometimes a fracture happens along the length of the bone: and there are fractures of the bone that are transverse, that is, angles, and protrusions, as in a pen, when a knife is applied to write. And it is not limited to that: there is also a fracture with wound and disruption at the head: and there is a fracture with a small split.
And each kind has its own wisdom, or its own instrument, suitable for restoring it, according to the remembrance of each, distinguished in its place
Therefore, from which it is known that a bone is fractured is its tortuousness, and its prominence: and its appearance sensible, and its sound when you press it with your hand
When there is no apparent displacement of the bone, nor any sound at the touch of the hand when you touch the bone with movement, nor does the patient experience great pain: then there is no fracture, it is possible that there is only displacement or a small fissure: it is not necessary to move the limb with the hand and compression altogether, but place above it from the physicians, whose memory will serve as a reminder, after a moment of that which happened at the place. Then tighten the structure carefully.
And know that when a limb is bent and breaks in two, except when the parts happen to be in contact, truly all the parts are shaken about: then it is necessary for you to begin from the beginning to rectify it, making it even before the swelling appears.</start_of_turn>
But if there appears to him a soft swelling, then leave it for a few days, until the swelling has subsided.</start_of_turn> Then equalize it according to any means that you can from gentleness and skill.</start_of_turn>
And know that the restoration of it and its equalization is easier than that of a bone in which the parts happen to be in contact.</start_of_turn>
Then bind it up according to what you remember of it.</start_of_turn
If there are fragments of bone in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured limb from two parts, if the hand is fractured, or the foot: or with the hand, if the limb is small: or with two bandages, or with a bandage and a hand.</start_of_turn
And let your position be such as you place the limb in a place of equilibrium, according to its natural figure, until when the fractured parts are extended: then try to restore their union with all your skill, and according to any means possible in their places: and take care according to your strength, lest you cause greater pain or injury to the patient by your operation: and take care according to your strength, that you apply one of the two bones with its partner, according to the better forms.</start_of_turn
It is necessary at this hour that you try and grasp your hand. If there is anything diverse there, rectify it and equalize it according to the extent of your ability.
Beware excessive tension and compression, as many stones do For many of them cause the operation to be difficult, either by causing swelling in the limb or by contraction: as we have often seen with these operations many times
Then bind up after the equalization and lowering the operation, and tighten the limb, and rest, and tranquility: and give the patient rest above all And make him sleep, lest he move in the hour of sleep, and waking during the resolution of the pulse, and agitation, and during egestion, and all his movements in his last ability. And take heed that the position of the limb not be the one which follows pain For when he feels pain in the position of the limb, or a wound: then it is necessary to change it to another position which does not cause pain
And take heed also that the position be equal, straight: so that there be no bending in the limb when restoring it.
The quality of the tightening of the limb is according to what is narrated.
You know that broken limbs are diverse in their parts, their magnitude, and their form
Which, when they are small, such as the arm, the finger, the heel, and things of that sort, then it is necessary to make a soft and fine dressing Whatever is large within the body, such as the thigh and the leg, must have a wide and firm covering.
Since a wide ligament connects the great limb and stretches it equally from all sides, it does not permit any swelling to enter it.
Then begin after your evacuation to apply a suitable ointment to the place of the fracture, in soft packing over the fracture itself Then proceed to cover the fracture with three or four layers of ligament, and tighten your hand firmly with the ligament.
Then keep it firm above the fracture site, and tighten less than the tension you applied to the fracture itself Then support the limb with the covering, and gradually soften the tension, until you can move the limb freely from the sound limb.
Then do the same with the other side, and cover the limb once more with layers of ligament over the fracture site Then support the limb with the covering below the fracture site. And let your operation be in the tightening of the covering and the softening of it, as we said concerning the first covering above
Then put between the coverings a soft packing or cloth, so that the fracture may be equal in tension, if there is tension in it: and if not, do not put anything in it
Then cover the limb once more. Then keep the upper part of the covering well centered immediately, if there is no swelling, neither a soft swelling.
If there is swelling or a soft swelling in this place: then put something over that which will hold that swelling, and remove the swelling: and leave it alone for a few days. Then string over itself the tunic as desired.
Then string over itself the tunic as desired.
The true position of the Astella which is placed over the tract of the bowels must be greater in size and wider than the rest of the Astellae; and the length of the Astella should be according to the size and capacity of the limb.
Then string over the Astellae with other things, according to the first stricture which you made Then tighten up above with cords which are not in the middle, according to what we said about the stricture: and it is that the stricture should be greater over the place of the fracture: and the more the distance from the fracture, the smaller the stricture should be
And it is necessary that there be medium-sized and soft threads between the Astellae, and that they be of soft material.
Because if the threads are large, like the veins which are taken out with the operation of lithotomy, it is a great mistake: because the stricture falls away with everything except the quality.
And fine threads do not hold together: because you do not follow through with the stricture with everything except that which you want
And it is not right that there should be less space between two Astellae than between two fingers
Which if the sick person is injured outside the Astellae after the stricture in healthy places: then put under the bowels a soft cushion, or a piece of carmine wool, until nothing is injured from that
When however there is a fracture with a wound, and it happens that the membrane is ruptured, I will remind you of this in the second chapter concerning the singularity.
And you know that not every fractured limb must be sutured to the Astellae on the first day Because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put on the Astellae immediately, but after five or seven or more days, according to your security concerning the after-effect of the inflammation
And thus is the manner of plastering, which the ancients restored, which are placed upon the fracture and dislocation.
The common method of plastering which restores the fracture, is suitable for all kinds of people, especially women and children, because it neither increases nor decreases heat
And it is like taking from the flour of the mill, and the kernel of barley which hangs in the husks of the mill alongside the movement of the millstone: and you make it just as it is, except that you put no large or small pieces in it Then use it like this.
Another method of plastering which restores the fracture, dislocation and torsion Recipe of meal, laudanum, acacia, enula, mugath: and vinegar, all mixed with ten parts of myrrh and five parts of aloes and twenty parts of alethil are measured out in total, and pounded, and mixed with warm alethil or with the yolk of an egg if the patient's complexion is hot Then use this plastering. For it is a good composition, it restores the fractured bones quickly, and gives strength to many people.
Another method of plastering which also gives strength to fractures and torsion Recipe of mugath, meal, white alum, all mixed with ten parts of myrrh and five parts of aloes and six parts of acacia and twenty parts of pounded armine: and pounded, and mixed with water or with the yolk of an egg. And it is administered.
A method of plastering for joints, and bones separated from their places: and it calms the pain of the accident, and splits the bone, and restores the fracture. Let the lancet be quick and plunge into the abscess, and uncover the decoction: and place it upon the place.
In this treatment, there is no need for restoration, but it is good for calming the heat of the abscess: and it expels the pain itself
The mode of treatment for a fractured bone is restoration. Take rough leaves of fennel and willow leaves of the sycamore tree: and all of them, make an ointment from both of them
The abbreviated mode of treatment is to administer it at the time of restoration of the fracture: and when you wish to resolve the remaining abscess. Recipe of root of marshmallow, chamomile, and violets, and barley flour, all of which take up one part: they are boiled together with wine, if the limb is not heated
If however the limb is heated, then mix it with moist coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Another mode of treatment that is stronger for resolving is this, when it happens that the abscess is hard at the time of restoration of the limb. Recipe of root of marshmallow, seed of flaxseed, barley, honey, asafoetida, violets, and chamomile, all of which take up one part: they are boiled together with water of salcis, or with sweet water, or with wine. All of this is according to the heat of the limb, and the quiet of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything is placed upon the fractured limb at the time of its restoration, except a poultice made of lead and oil: nothing else. He said that there should be a mean between the greatness and the smallness
Galen says that it is customary to apply warm compresses to a fractured limb during its restoration, as these contain exiccatio caliditatis, such as myrrh, aloes and olibanum, which are similar to the substances we have mentioned.
The mode of dressing which promotes healing and relieves pain.</start_of_turn> Powder of mugwort, ciceros, human hair, or feathers of birds, elderberry, and salt in equal parts: mix them together, sprinkle them, and form a plaster from it.</start_of_turn
The amount of plaster required varies according to the need, so that the ligature remains, and then dissolve it, that is, consider that the patient does not experience pain, nor itching, nor movement of the fractured bone: do not dissolve it for many days.</start_of_turn If itching, pain or swelling occurs in the place: then cleanse it, dissolve it immediately, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a sponge soaked in warm water, and wipe the place with it, until the itching ceases, and the pain is gone.</start_of_turn
If itching, pain or swelling occurs in the place: then cleanse it, dissolve it immediately, and remove the plaster from it: and take a soft cloth, or a sponge soaked in warm water, and wipe the place with it, until the itching ceases, and the pain is gone.</start_of_turn Then let the limb rest for an hour.</start_of_turn> Then put upon it a soft cloth, soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind it up on the limb at night, until you are certain that the limb is not suffering from excessive heat, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain has ceased.</start_of_turn
Then repeat the process of slight tension and small plaster: do not bind it too tightly at the first, but gradually tighten it as it heals.</start_of_turn
When the swelling has subsided, the heat has gone down, the pain has ceased, and all the other signs of inflammation have disappeared, then repeat the process as you did at the beginning equally.</start_of_turn
If it does not happen that some other part has become affected within three, four, five or seven days, do not treat it. When the whole of it has departed for twenty days, according as appears from the solution of the part, as we have said, until when fracture adheres and coagulation of the flesh above it approaches: add also then more stricture than your first stricture throughout: and also add more abundance of food for the sick person, as has been remembered before
If, however, you see the fracture already excised and expanded more than is necessary: then you know that nourishment is withheld from it.</start_of_turn> Embalm it therefore with warm water at all the times that you are treating it, and keep it for three days, and relieve the stricture somewhat.</start_of_turn>
Because of this operation, nourishment runs to the limb, and it heals quickly.</start_of_turn
That which the rest of the restorers of the fracture of the limb do when they do not restore it at first, according as is necessary, and restore it crookedly, is an error of their operation, and a great fear: and if it had been right, the ancient people would have said so in their books, and they would have operated thus.</start_of_turn>
And I have never seen any trace of this among them, and it is right that it should not be so.</start_of_turn
 On the treatment of an accident in the head.
Species of fractures are diverse, and their figures are numerous: and their causes are diverse.</start_of_turn>
Because of fracture is that which happens from percussion with a hand: and percussion raises the whole bone until it reaches the marrow, which is under the bone, as does an axis in wood: and for this reason this kind of fracture is called Axialis.
Or the hand strikes something of the bone, and strikes its face, and does not penetrate to its utmost: and this kind of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, Complete Fracture
There are two kinds of fracture, or a great one, or a small one.
And because of fracture is either a break or a crack: and the cause of it is percussion with a stone, or a fall upon a stone, or something like that.
And this kind of fracture is also either penetrating, which approaches the marrow, which is under the bone: or it is in the face of the bone: and this is a severe kind of fracture, or a great one, or a small one
And there is also a fracture which is hidden in the bone in the thinness of a hair: and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called Capillaris fracture
And from an external agent comes a fracture, or from the percussion of a stone, or from things like these, which make the lamina of the bone bend inwards, and cause a concavity: as happens with air bubbles when there is percussion of things and some of them enter inwards.
And most of all this happens in the heads of soft bones, such as those of children
And all these kinds of fractures are separated from each other by a space, and I will remind you of all of them in their place
We recognize all these kinds of fractures by their appearance above the surface, and by their inquiry when pressed, and by the excision of the corrupted flesh which is above them
The hairy species is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, is stripped off, and is bound over itself with charcoal: the fracture therefore appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider first the signs of the disease: then if you find signs that signify a serious danger above fear, such as vomiting of cholera, and swelling, and loss of consciousness, and bursting of the bowels, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the eyes, and redness of the face, and similar things from various accidents, it is improbable that it will be cured: and if you do not find serious signs of the disease, and you hope for recovery: then begin the treatment of it.
If a wound comes to you in the winter season: then it must be delayed for four-and-a-quarter days according to every arrangement
If it is in the summer season: then it must be delayed until the seventh day before the bone is fractured from the marrow, and these accidents happen which we have mentioned.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the marrow which touches the brain, and it is with small pieces, and attraction: then it must be cut off the broken part, and the attraction, as we have told you
And it is concerning the wound of the head: and it is detected on the bone in whatever way is possible: and according to the figure of the wound, and what is best for the patient.
If there is a flow of blood from the bone, or a swelling of the marrow: then oppose it with that which is necessary And it is concerning the application of the place with soaked sponges in wine, and wet wool: and you will make the wound quiet until the swelling subsides, and you will be secure from the flow of blood. Then commence with the care of the bone, and its extirpation.
This is done according to one of two methods.
The first method is as follows: you cut the bone with a pointed knife: this is its form
Then give an incision wider than the first with the other knife: this is its form.
And give another incision even wider than the last.
The second method is as follows: there should be several knives of varying widths: some are wider and some are narrower: and they should be at the acute extremities of the bone, and they should be of iron or steel: and use them with ease in striking over the knife, so that it does not break the head and damage it
If however the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary to perforate its circumference before giving the incisions, with needles which are called non-penetrating needles: and they are not called thus except when they do not penetrate beyond the end of the bony tissue to that which is after: for the needle is a rounded extremity above that which is beneath the acute head, resembling the margin and a small circle which hinders immersion and penetration of the thickness of the bone.
And it is fitting to take from these needles a great number, of which each is suitable for the quantity of thickness of the bone, until present be on all sides of the needle: of which the acute extent of the quantity in length and breadth is according to the quantity of the thickness of that bone
This is the form of the three species of needles, or trepanae.
The quality of the perforation of the circumference of the fractured bone is: to place the needle on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced Then move the Terebrum to another location, and place between every opening an amount equal to the diameter of the radius, or somewhat less.
Then act with the Incisors between every opening of the bone: and make it thinner than before from the end of the thickness, as we have said, until you reach the bone, or your hand, or with any other instrument which you have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And it is necessary, that you take care, that neither the Terebrum nor the Incisor touch anything from the sacs.
When you have surrounded the bone with the perforation, and it is separated from the sacs, if it is contiguous with them, you must extract it with a hook, and equalize its extremity which remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the Incisor However, it is necessary that it be thin and fine like other Incisors.
If anything small remains of the bones, and fragments: then grasp them easily with the instruments which are near you Then care for the wound after this with oil and the unguents which we have mentioned.
And another way of operating is easy, especially long from fear: which Galenus praised highly and praised in great measure: and this is his saying It is not necessary in the first place, that you begin to remove a part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more pronounced and visible: until you have removed that part and placed under it the extremity of this lens-shaped Incisor which has this form
And the lens-shaped part, does not bite into anything: and the acute part of it on its two sides expands in length, like water: so that the lens-shaped part is close to the sacs, and the acute part of it on the bone.
Then strike above the Incisorium from one side with a small mallet until you have cut through the whole bone easily, as it returns: and you will be secure from the nail, for it does not happen in this case that which you fear will happen later.
And even if the surgeon is not stupid among men, and is more ignorant than him, or is asleep, then if anything remains attached to the bone from the nail in some place, he will cut it off from that with the tip of the chisel himself and will deliver it easily He will deliver it from that without damage, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not reach the nail, and that which is broken off from the bone is its face, and remains in the same place with rough spots and subtle corrugations: then it is necessary to remove those rough spots and those corrugations with fine files of various quantities, so that it is possible to manage them in every place where it is convenient for them, and to make them straight again, according to that which leads you to the operation, and the fractured bone itself, and its figure. And you must act with reason, that is to say, with wider files of the former. Then use the finer ones afterwards
And you must act with reason, that is to say, with wider files of the former. Then use the finer ones afterwards And do not cease doing this until you have reached the finest and most delicate ones of them all
And in every small fracture remaining after the cutting off of the nail, and for the fracture itself, you must take care, according to that which leads to its rectification.
And it is a thing which is not hidden over everything that has been studied in this art, and which has stood over this which we have written, and which we show in great fractures.
If, however, a blood clot is detected to be retained when you evacuate the bone: then it is necessary that you take hold of the clot with a piece of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in oil of roses, and place it over the opening of the wound. If, however, a blood clot is detected to be retained when you evacuate the bone: then it is necessary that you take hold of the clot with a doubled or tripled piece of linen, and submerge it in wine and oil of roses, and place it over the first bandage: and make it as easy as possible to do so, so that it does not cause the wound to swell.
And administer above it a broad bandage: and do not tighten it, except for the amount that is sufficient to hold the wound only: and remove it with care on the first or second day, until you are secure from a hot discharge. And rest it, and administer afterwards such medicines as are superfluous for its drought: such as the roots of lily, and the flour of herbs, and barley flour, and chamomile, and the like: and it is necessary that you make from these medicines a powder, which is to be sprinkled over the wound as if it were dry.
And generally administer in that all medicine which has the property of draining, and does not bite. And be cautious according to your skill, so that the wound in your care be limp: neither is it to be covered with fat, nor is it to be allowed to fester
And be cautious according to your skill, so that the wound in your care be limp: neither is it to be covered with fat, nor is it to be allowed to fester Neither must you allow blood to collect in that in any way: for when blood collects on a blood clot of the brain, it corrupts it, and putsrefies it, and brings about great harm after that: and this happens in swelling of the head, when it is neglected.
Therefore, if any such accidents happen to occur to the patient, you know that it is dangerous to delay treatment
If the blackness does not depart, except for the medicine which is placed upon it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause it to become black: then it is necessary to take from the honey a portion equal to one, from the ole of roses three portions, and lines like these with the ointment. Then place it upon the wound: afterwards take care of it with the species of treatment which are suitable, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When the restoration is fractured.</start_of_turn>
Know that the nose does not break except for two of its upper parts simultaneously, or one of them: because they are two bones. For the lower part of it is cartilaginous and does not break, and does not depart except for attrition, and twisting, and similar things.</start_of_turn
If one of the two parts breaks, then it is necessary to introduce the little finger into the hole of the nose, and to equal the break with your index finger and thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape: and do this with art, with ease.</start_of_turn And beware, that you do not cause further pain by your operation.</start_of_turn
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach the finger: then it is necessary to equalize the extent of the radius in which there is a small thickness.</start_of_turn
If however the fracture is in two parts, then do likewise: and straighten up the restoration of the fracture on the first day, if possible.</start_of_turn And if not, then after seven or ten days from the commencement of the fever.</start_of_turn
If there is a fracture in one part of the nose, insert one sponge into the nostril; if there are two fractures, insert two sponges. Make the sponges as large as necessary to fill the opening of the nose.
Some of the ancient restorers say that sponges should be softened in butter and changed every day. It is better to pour sponge into flour or meal mixed with barley. Then remove the sponge, when the bone has set, and apply cartilage.
When you insert the sponge into the nose at the place of the fracture, put over it a soft cushion: and it makes that the fractured part of the nose is held more firmly, and that it does not impede the patient from breathing
It is not absolutely necessary If you wish, do so; if you wish, do not do so
If it happens that the nose is fractured again while you are working after the swelling has subsided, plaster the nose with plaster of Paris, or with pure alum, or with some unguents made from lead or gypsum
If the swelling has subsided, it is necessary to plaster the nose with fine flour mixed with barley meal or with powdered lead and alum mixed with butter Then put on it a soft cushion, and do not bind the nose to anything.
If the bones of the nose are fractured with a small fracture or comminution, then you must break through above them and extract them with the instruments that are suitable for that Then cut around it, and care for the wound as for a wound that is healing, and consolidate with the plaster that is suitable for that, or with unguents.
If the nose or the eye should become affected, then it is necessary to treat them with poultices: and give an antimony of lead until the patient is healed.
Regarding the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured
When the lower jaw is fractured and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then look to see if its fracture is only of the outer surface and not fractured into two pieces, and that it is cured inwards: then its knowledge is easy
It is necessary therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, to insert the index finger of the left hand into the bone of the patient: similarly if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the index finger of the right hand: and press with it the prominence of the fracture inwards until it is level with the exterior with your other hand which you move from the inside outwards, and with it equal the other side
If the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two pieces, then it is necessary to administer an extension from both parts, according to the rule of the straight line: until the possibility exists of restoring its equality.
If however during the teeth there is a displacement or a rupture: then bind those which you hope will remain with a thread of gold, or silver, or silk. Then place above the fractured jaw a cushion Then place above it a double pad, and place above the pad a large sponge made central: or a piece of the sole of a leather boot of equal length to the jaw.
Then bind it up above, according to what is prepared for its ligation, and agree with its application, until it is not destroyed: and command the patient to rest quietly: and give him food of soft consistency
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day. If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day.
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day. If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day.
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day
If, however, you estimate that something has altered in figure or mode: then act promptly, and cure it on the third day
If then it is fractured and separated into two, before that they happen in its socket: it is easier to restore it.
If then it is fractured and separated into two, before that they happen in its socket: it is easier to restore it.
If then it is fractured and separated into two, before that they happen in its socket: it is easier to restore it.
And the operation in that case when the fracture is without wound, that is, as you make present two assistants, one of whom holds the fractured fragment, and the other extends the limb over the part.
Then equalize the fracture of the fingers, until it has the shape which it should have: and do not make it prominent, neither hollow
Then if it does not straighten with extension, then it is necessary, that you put under the arm of the patient a sphere of wool or cloth: and let the size of it be according to the quantity of the need; and extend, and elevate the fractured limb, and cover the sphere with your hand, until the fracture is equal, according as it should be.
Then if you are unable to draw out the extremity of the limb towards the outside: because it has gone deep: then it is necessary, that the patient lie on his belly: and you put under the arm of him the middle finger of his hand in magnitude; and keep the minister of the arm towards the lower parts, until the bone of the limb which is in the depth is raised up: and then straighten the fracture, and equalize the fingers.
But if you feel swelling from the fracture, and movement: then it is necessary, that you find over that, and extract it gently
But if it is retained in the bone, then think of an incision in that with one of the prepared incisions, after you have placed under the limb an instrument which will protect the gut: and the instrument is of wood, or of iron This is its form.
It is like the conch shell, which has no cavity.
Its width is in accordance with that of the bone from which it is taken, and its thickness is equal to that of the bone itself Its length is also in accordance with what is possible for the operation
It has two extremities like the veins: one extremity is wide, and the other is narrow
If, however, the disruption of the wound which you opened when you extracted the fragment of bone is great, secure it from the burnings: then join the two lips of the wound together with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or there is still a burning: then close the wound with linen patches and small pieces of sponge according to the quantity of the wound
If there is a burning, then pour oil of roses, alum, wine and vinegar on it and put on the top of it.
The stiffness of the bone, when there is no wound and no section, is, as you put on the bone a plaster made of ground wheat with alum and vinegar. And put a soft cushion over it. Then put a sphere under its head if you are not treating it for a long time Then take a bandage, which is like that which the Saracens take, which is long and wide: and its width is like that of one palm, or somewhat less And put a double sponge over the cushion and the plaster And take a bandage from a thin board, whose width is three fingers wide, and of a length similar Then immerse the wound in cloth. Then immerse the wound in cloth with the stars in the place which falls over the fracture and the place. Then put on the dressing over the fracture so that it be flexible, and immerse the wound in cloth over the column of the limb and under the healthy nail and under the unhealthy nail: and draw up the cloth over all the parts, as much as the bandage will bear without loosening the fracture. And that is that which is not hidden over you, and all of it, that nothing be moved from above the broken bone. And for this reason it is necessary to change the dressing every day. Whenever the ligament is softened, and you see the star is coming loose: then correct that, and bind the ligament firmly
Then put the patient to sleep on his back, and put under his nail near the sleep of his little toes at night, so that when they are lifted up the attendants of the patient will know which side is affected The fracture of the forearm is raised up by raising the arm.
Or bind the arm to the limb: and do not loosen the ligament, if it does not happen in the place of an accident from itching, or from swelling, up to twelve days.
Then renew the dressing, if you see its face to that. And add in the bandage, and let go of it, until it is restored and coagulated
And the fracture of the forearm is bound up and comforted according to many in eighty days: and when it is in any man in a lesser degree
Of the restoration of the Spatula fracture.
Rarely does the spatula fracture, and at a wide place of its edge: and it does not fracture from these margins of its edge.
When therefore it fractures from that place, and fractures in the middle of its edge, and it is not recognized except by touch: then one must attempt to prepare it according to the shape of the fracture. And reduce it above the natural shape in every way that is possible.
Then put upon it powder of fine wheat with alum, and soft gum, and put over it a double-folded cloth Then put upon it a broad bandage from a thin board according to the quantity of the spatula as a whole, or a little more.
If indeed there is a concavity in the bone in some place of the spatula, then equalize that concavity with soft gum until the bandage descends according to equality.
Then bind round it with long alhimate, with gradual constriction and firmness of the bandage, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligament in every day. Whenever it is softened the ligament, bind it, and equalize the bandage if it moves from its place: and let the patient lie upon his sound side
And the spatula will be restored in ninety days, or in ninety-five days.
When these days are completed, then loosen the ligament: and you will be in safety. For the very bones from which the fracture is composed do not break in a single moment, neither do they recover immediately.
If however it proceeds from a bone which has become fragmented, and is pierced under the skin: then cut above it, and remove it. Do as we have said concerning the fracture of a bone from displacement of the after-pulse of heat, if anything occurs from this.
Regarding the restoration of a fractured breastbone.
When the breastbone is fractured in the middle, and this is rarely the case. The extremities of it are most frequently fractured, and are separated by its accidents
When it is fractured in the middle, which leans downwards, and when there is pain, which is great, difficulty in swallowing, and spasms: and perhaps blood is omitted, and a depression is discerned in the fractured bone, which is not concealed from sense. The restoration of it is that the patient rests upon his back: and place between his thumbs and fingers of both hands
Then bind his arms, and unite his flanks from both parts or from the sides with his hands: and make it even in its form, as much as possible, according to every way which is possible for this and which agrees with it, until the figure of the bone returns, as much as it should
Then place upon it a bandage and a cushion, and place above it a pad from a thin board of willow, or charcoal, or something similar in smoothness, after you have bound up the wound with linen. Then make the ligation of the wound above the fractured bone, so that it does not move: and make it firm with a bandage according to the circumference of the limb, and bind it firmly.</start_of_turn>
Then consider the ligation at every hour, and whenever it is softened, bind the limb: and if any need of it arises from itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or swelling: then remedy it, and solve the wound, and remove the bandage, and rectify what has occurred concerning its treatment.</start_of_turn>
If you have applied the plaster too much and it reaches the face, reduce it again. Then, bind it tightly until it is healed.
When the plaster has been applied too much and reaches the face, reduce it. Then bind it tightly until it is healed.
You know that a fracture of the limb does not happen except in the great places which follow the backbone, and from the extremities from the front part. And it does not happen that there is attrition [fracture] except because of that, because they are cartilaginous. And its knowledge is not hidden from sense in the examination when the fingers are taken
And its restoration is done in this way, that it is equal to the fracture with the fingers according to the possible mode, until the figure is equal, according to what is necessary Then the plaster, and bind the fractured bone with a needle, if necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the limb is sloping inwards: then there happens a great pain which increases, and swelling, just as it happens in those who have pleura: because the bone breaks the membrane, and there also happens difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and spitting blood: and this is a difficult cure
And the ancients were learned in this in many ways: and some of them say that you should put on the limb of the sick a plaster which generates inflammation and swelling, so that the belly inflates, and expands, and drives out the fracture outwards
We indeed abominate that it should be the cause of a soft swelling, if it does not happen If however it happens, then we add to it in that.
And some of them say: let a patch be placed over the swelling, and then it is to be squeezed with force, for it is similar to reasoning. Indeed, it is known that the swelling attracts excess fluid to the place, because of the relaxation of the tissues
And some of them say: it is necessary that the place should be covered with a cloth which has been soaked in warm oil: and they put wool between the ribs until it is firm: so that there may be an equal ligation when you bind it according to the circumference.
Then care for the patient with a cure of food and medicine
If he coarsens the patient with a thing which he cannot tolerate, and his limb swells or is broken by a wound inflicted with pain, and we fear for the patient: then it is necessary that we should split open the place, and remove the fractured bone Then we place over it an instrument which preserves the fat, of whose memory we have been informed: and we break the bone easily, and we break the bone itself.
Then we join together the two lips of the wound, if there is a great one with a suture: and we care for it with compresses, until it is healed
If in the meantime a swelling becomes hot, then do this: pour pultices over the swelling in warm oil, and place over it: and care for the patient with what is convenient for the swelling.
He also rests upon the side upon which he sleeps, until he is healed.
On the restoration of a fracture of the spine or of the neck.
The bones of the neck and the spine sometimes suffer a fracture, and rarely from external attrition: in the same way. When anything happens to anyone, and you wish to know whether he is healed or not: then be still. When anything happens to anyone, and you wish to know whether he is healed or not: then be still. For if you lay your hand on his body, and it is softened, and stupefied, and dead: and you cannot move it, neither extend it, nor constrict it: and when you constrict it with your fingers, and bind it with thread, he does not feel it, neither does he feel any pain: then you know that he is not healed, and that it is mortal in many conditions.
When it moves and he feels in it constriction with the fingers and a puncture: then you know that the bone is sound, and that the patient will be healed with care.
When it approaches the bones of the back like that of a hunchback, and you wish to know whether he is healed or not: then look at his feet. Then if you see that they are softened and this happens in his hands: afterwards when he lies over his back, there will be vomiting and discharge without his will. And when he lies over his belly, there will be discharge without his will. And when he lies over his back and wants to move, and he cannot: then you know that it is mortal. Do not be hasty in his treatment.
If indeed nothing happens to him from this, things will be easier for him.
And his treatment from this is that you apply soothing salve after the inflammation has subsided: thus, for example, you apply only olive oil to the hunchback: or with some wool or bandage.
Apply over that some quantity every day, until when the swelling has subsided: then put over one of the usual cushions, expelling and tightening over it: and order the patient to remain quiet and tranquil. He should not sleep over the part where he has found the pain, until he is healed.
If this should happen at a fracture of a limb, or anything that is separated from its place: then it is necessary to strip over the skin, and support it Then join together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures.</start_of_turn> Then care for it with some nourishment, from unguents, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If indeed it is fractured after the heel of the bone of the foot, and is the end of the heel: then it is necessary to insert the little finger of the left hand into the heel, and equal the fractured bone of the foot to the other, as much as possible, and with the second finger restore the equilibrium.</start_of_turn>
Then put on a bandage, and elevate it: and care for the wound with the care which preceded it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the restoration of the ankle.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 11.</start_of_turn
Rarely are the bones of the ankle fractured.</start_of_turn If they are fractured, then the fracture of them is not, except for a break in the extremities: and they are bent in length, and lean inwards: and there happens to be severe pain in the place, and swelling: and the limb becomes stiff.</start_of_turn
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it, until you are over the fracture in the manner of its figure.</start_of_turn
If the fracture is only in the extremities of it, then equal it to the fracture, according to what is prepared for you from the equilibrium, until it is equal to its natural figure.</start_of_turn
If, however, the fracture is in length, or if it has already tilted inwards: then make the patient lie upon his belly, until such time as preparation for the restoration of that fracture is complete. When the fracture is evened, place upon it a dressing: then place upon it a bandage of wood, or of leather: and tighten the bandage more tightly than you fear the displacement of the fracture, and the removal of the bandage.
And equalize the swelling of those with what is necessary: until such time as the patient grasps the bandage firmly: and command the patient to rest upon his back, or upon his side which is healthy
If, however, a callous swelling should arise: then stop the extension of that limb, and of the restoration: until the callous swelling has subsided: and place upon that which has subsided, according to what has gone before, then return to the restoration of that limb: and tighten that as it should be
If, however, it should happen in a bone of the limb, or be fractured, extract it.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the limb.
The aid is that which is between the elbow and the head of the scapula.
If therefore it is fractured, then the restoration of that is by two methods.
One of which is: that you take a flat piece of wood of middle thickness, according to this shape which follows
And they are bound at the two extremities by two ligatures.
Then it is suspended from a high place: and the patient sits down Then he throws his arm broken over a stick until it reaches its elbow, in which there is an annexed prominence of the bone.
Then he hangs something heavy from it, so as to extend the limb downwards. Then the physician will stabilize the fracture with his hands until the fracture is set, as it is necessary.
And another method is that the patient should lie on his bed: and suspend his limb from the neck downwards with a ligament. Then command two assistants, that one should hold that which is above the fracture with his hands: and that the other should hold the lower part, and extend each of them to their part
And if you wish, so that the extension be stronger, then bind under the fracture with a ligament and above it with another ligament: and extend them each by two assistants to their two parts
If therefore the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary to put one ligament under the elbow and the other under the fracture over the elbow
And in the same way if the fracture is close to the forearm: then it is necessary to put a ligament over the place and over the forearm itself.
Then stabilize the fracture with ease without toil, until the fracture is equal according to what is necessary, and apply a good dressing: then bind it, if it does not happen immediately after the swelling has gone down.
If indeed swelling has happened, then loosen the binding until the seventh day. And put over it a soft wool soaked in vinegar in oil of roses, until the swelling has gone down: then bind it: and the way of binding it is that you put on a plaster over the fracture
Then place a new patch over the wound. Then grasp the arm over the aid itself, and place your hand open over your shoulder
And place a bandage, and bind over the arm the arm itself, so that the arm rests in the place of the bones: if it does not prevent you from doing anything, do not alter over you anything from the fractured bone.
For if at any time anything is altered over you from the fractured bone, then place over the fracture the strongest and widest bandage of all the others And place between every bandage a width of a finger: and let the length of the bandages be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers from every side
Then bind over the bandages tightly as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And let your binding be over the place of the fracture tighter. And the more the fracture is elongated, the less tight the binding should be.
If therefore you did apply the bandage correctly and with the right tension, when you restore the limb immediately, do this: if there is swelling, then remove the bandage and the bandages for seven days, as we said before
Then consider the ligament in all three days, so that it does not happen in the place of itching, or swelling, or that the food be prohibited from passing to the limb, by the disposition of the excess tension of the bandage. Correct all this, according to what we said before
If however you are over confident, that nothing will happen: do not loosen the ligament, except after three days, or more
And let the patient's sleep rest on his back, and his hand rest on his stomach: and place under his aid the full bladder of lanolin equally.
Consider at all times of night or day that the fractured limb not be displaced, or the ligament be softened. Straighten therefore all that thou dost with thine art.
And place food for the patient according to the order that we have given, so that the food be light at first, until the bone begins to mend: then it is necessary that he take nourishment again of food.</start_of_turn>
As for the custom of the attendants and the leg, it is necessary that they be bound for forty days: then it is necessary that they be loosened, and a bath be administered, and that unguents be used which will heal that.</start_of_turn
If the fracture be foul, rough: then do not loosen it from that ligament and that cartilage until the fiftieth day, and until two months.</start_of_turn>
(Continuation of the previous sentence omitted.)
The arm is composed of two bones, which are named two epicondyles.</start_of_turn
One of them is the forearm: and that which follows the thumb.</start_of_turn And the other is the large one, and that which is placed under the forearm from the lower part.</start_of_turn
Perhaps therefore the large bone alone is fractured, or the forearm: and perhaps both together are fractured.</start_of_turn
When therefore the fracture of the upper forearm is fractured, then the restoration of it is easy, and the healing is more rapid.</start_of_turn
When the lower jaw is fractured, its fracture is bad and its healing is difficult.
When two bones are fractured together, its condition is bad
If the fractured bone is slightly above the lower jaw, then the physician must take care of its restoration, so as to join the loose parts together with ease until they are equal
If, however, the fracture is great, then it is necessary to apply a stronger ligature above all
It is necessary to place the hand in a position which facilitates restoration and to extend the limb further The thumb should be placed above the wrist of all fingers and the lower joint of all fingers, or of some of them: and the limb should be supported so that the body rests on the seat of the buttocks, and that the elbow is directed forward, so that the limb does not suffer from excessive pressure
Then extend the limb from the lower part, or with the hand alone, or with a ligature. And the other limb should be extended in the same way from above
Then the physician must equalize the bones until their position is better than before
If there are protrusions in the fracture of the bone, then try to reduce all the protrusions to their proper place with your hand.
If there appears to be a separated piece of cartilage and it has pierced the skin, and there is no hope of restoring it, then find above it and remove it in the manner which has been mentioned previously
But if the fracture is with a wound, I make of that the head alone, and I take care of the treatment of that from that moment on.
If at the beginning of your restoration the heel is stiff, then make a loop of silk with a knot at one end, and a white thread in the middle between thickness and fineness: and tighten the silk over itself until the heel is settled. Then withdraw the knot, and apply a dressing prepared from pounded malt with albumin. Then apply sponges, and let the sponge which is placed over the fracture itself be wider and stronger
And know that the number of sponges of the arm is six in various positions: if the fracture is in one bone, or in two bones at the same time.</start_of_turn>
Then put on a strong and firm dressing over the fracture and around it, and somewhat more above the fracture, or below it: or put on a softer dressing around the fracture itself according as it is necessary in the beginning of the chapter.</start_of_turn>
And let there be cloths which cover the fracture, soft cloths, damp: and not hard, rough.</start_of_turn And let the thread which is used for tying be of its own kind, medium between fine and coarse, as we have said.</start_of_turn
Consider the limb and the ligament after a few days.</start_of_turn> If anything happens which requires rectification, such as itching which occurs in the limb: then it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until the itching subsides, and then loosen the limb, until it is quiet, and repeat the dressing.</start_of_turn
If the dressing is now softened, and the bone is now removed, and things are like these: then rectify all this with your skill, and consider again.</start_of_turn
If food is prohibited from reaching a limb due to the stricture, it is necessary to soften it and discharge it for a few days until the food has healed, and then restore it.
If this does not happen to the patient within twenty days or so, it is not necessary to do anything, except after that period of time.</start_of_turn>
Then the hand of the patient is suspended to its collar.</start_of_turn> And let its collar be equal, and be protected from violent movements.</start_of_turn And let him sleep upon his back.</start_of_turn>
And know that this fracture heals in thirty days, or in thirty-two days: and perhaps in eighty days.</start_of_turn All this is according to the laws of complexion and the laws of virtue.</start_of_turn>
Of the restoration of fractures of the limb.</start_of_turn
Know that fractures of the bones of the limb and of the joints of the fingers are rare.</start_of_turn And do not happen to them except from multiple impacts.</start_of_turn
When therefore such an accident happens to the limb, or from impact: then it is necessary for the patient to sit square: and let his seat be equal in front of him.</start_of_turn Then place his hand upon his extended limb.</start_of_turn
Then extend the fractured bone, and the physician must keep them even until they join together securely.</start_of_turn
Then it is necessary to place the plaster and stupp [a soft dressing] if the abscess does not recede. Then place the bandage according to the quantity of the place: and you have already covered the soft part in linen cloth
If however the fracture is close to the lower part of the limb, then make like a sphere from the cloth: and order the patient to rest on it so that it is compressed over the fractured part: and then bind it with a long cloth.
And let the bandage be of leather, in which there is softness, so that the skin may be applied with the limb: and bind it firmly as it is necessary.
If however the fracture is outwards, then it is necessary: to place a bandage over the wound and another bandage from below in the limb: and let the hand be open and straight Then place a dressing, so that the hand is twisted: and extend between the fingers with the ligament.
If however an abscess happens from any bone of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, adjust it according to what is necessary Then bind it with the limb: and if there is swelling, place on it a straight bandage, tight: so that the fracture is elevated and does not move.
If however the fracture is of the remaining fingers, such as the middle, and index, or ring, and little finger, then adjust it, and bind it with the healthy finger which follows it: or bind them all according to their continuation: and that is better. Or place over the wound a tight bandage, as we said concerning the thumb.
And consider in the restoration of the limb, and after the abscess has receded: and oppose it with that which is necessary, when anything happens of this kind, according to the return of its narration.
On the restoration of a fractured coxae.
The femur is commonly fractured, and is declared to be painful: because it inclines towards the interior and the exterior parts.
And its restoration is made thus, that it strings the ligament above the fracture, and the ligament below the fracture And the limb is returned to its place over its face
Then extend all the ligaments around the part according to the equality: and this when the fracture is in the middle of the bone
If however the fracture is close to the root of the femur, then let the ligament be to the part of the trochanter, that the extension may go up: and the other ligament below the fracture
And thus in the same way if the fracture is close to the knee, then let the ligament be close to the knee, that the extension may be downwards
Then the physician must unite the bone with his two hands, until it is reduced according to the similarity of the natural figure: and the bone is joined by a good junction.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and a bandage, if the limb is not restored immediately. Which if it does happen in this way: then leave it for a few days, until the swelling subsides, then return to your treatment
The bandage must be strict It must be bound over the fracture with soft material, that is, bandage: and double it twice, or three times: and remain from this surplus Then bind the thigh, until the heel reaches the root of the knee
And insert a long thread between the hip and thigh close to the knee downwards, and the extremities of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll up over the thigh and hip what remains from the other side
Then place over the hip in the place of the fracture its own pins, and place upon the bone of the thigh one pin.
Then tighten up between the thigh and hip with felt pads, so as to equal the tension.
Then start with a strong bind from the middle over the place of the fracture three or four windings.<start-of-turn> And as you make it longer with the ligament at the place of the fracture, let your bind be less tight and softer, and more gentle.<start-of-turn>
And take hold of the two extremities of the thread which you inserted between the hip and thigh. Bind thus with three pins which are above. Then draw down with the two extremities of the thread to the heel, until you reach the heel of the foot.<start-of-turn> And when you have drawn down both strings also the extremities of the pins from the other side: so that the ligament does not be pulled out of place.<start-of-turn>
Then remove the bind from this, while it remains, so that no fracture, swelling or inflation, or anything of the like happens to it.<start-of-turn> For if anything happens from this.<start-of-turn> Properly then with the solution of this, and correct that which happened from this, as we have said many times before.<start-of-turn>
If indeed in the bone there is a fragment of bone that protrudes: then it is necessary that it be equal to that, if it is possible. If not, find above that [fragment] and remove it: and care for it until its healing is complete
And when the fracture of the thigh is reduced, besides the application of bands as we have already said in the treatise on the arm and the thigh.
But truly in the restoration of it [fracture] let there not be lameness in the patient. And if only one limb is restored, besides the application of the other limb, then it is necessary that the lame limb be made to limp always.
You know that the thigh is reduced in fifty days, or is added slightly, or diminished slightly: all this is according to the variety of complexions and the remaining parts.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the knee.
You know that the knee rarely occurs with a fracture, but it often happens to it with great attrition
If indeed it occurs with a fracture, then not without a fissure or a hole in its parts. And it is like a wound, and without a wound And it remains over that for the whole time with sense.
And its restoration is thus, that it be made equal to what has been disrupted from its parts with the fingers, until it is reunited and joined together according to what is possible with equality and facility, and fabrication.
Then place a dressing of meal of wheat or barley, with albumin or oil: and place above it a round bandage, if you will: and bind up from above with a suitable bandage
Consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in regard to the remaining fractures: as the blunt callus and the like: thus, that you may oppose every accident with what suits it until healing takes place.
Healing of fractures of the limb.
Know that the limb consists of two bones, of which one is thick and is called the Cruris: and the other is thin and is called the Focile.
And it happens in both cases of fracture of the limb as it happens in two bones of the forearm: and because of this, its restoration is equal, and the operation is one.
If both bones are fractured together, the thigh bone turns towards all parts
If the thin bone is fractured, the thigh bone turns towards the front part
If the thick bone is fractured, its lower part is found: and this is from that which does not cover the limb
Then administer extension, and equality, and ligation of the ligaments according to that which is equal
However, if the fracture of the limb is a compound fracture, having many fragments: then let the extension be less, and the alleviation more gentle to you
And in the limb there is something which surpasses the forearm: and it is that when you equal the bones, and have completed all your operation, then take two boards of pine, which are used in the making of sandals, and put them under the boards: and they will be from the palm of the hand: and choose from those which have a small thickness, and neither be from the smallest: and let the length of them be according to the length of the limb from the knee to the lower part
Then stretch over one and a half times the length of the wound with two layers. And place one portion of the limb from the one side from the knee downwards, and the other from the other side from the knee downwards: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then bind two layers in three places from the two extremities and the middle. When the limb is bound too tightly, the knee bends to the right and left, and remains in a good position
And indeed an ointment is administered from wood according to the length of the limb and is placed on the knee, so as to support it from movement.
And it is done mostly when the limb is fractured when it is its own wound
Then consider the knee every day, and study with it at the end of treatment, or swelling, or other things. If anything happens from these things, then oppose it with what is necessary, until it is healed, if God wills it.
Of fractures of the bones of the foot and the fingers.
The calcaneus [heel bone] does not usually fracture completely.
The bones of the foot sometimes fracture when the fracture is severe: and the fingers are little liable to fracture: and it does not happen except through violent friction in many positions
If the bones of the foot fracture, and the blood is seen to rise under the skin, then support the limb by placing the foot firmly on the prepared earth, as if walking
Then stay there, and place your foot on that which rises from these bones: then press down, or put on a sandal: and keep it even, until it returns to its place
Then place the plaster on, and support the parts above: and place under the foot a board having two flat heads.
Then tighten the plaster securely around the foot with a bandage, after you have enveloped the limb with cloth, and when you have finished with whatever is necessary.
When three or four days have passed, then loosen the ligamentum For indeed you will find the bones even, whether they are fractured or displaced. The operation is like a wound, as in the case of wounds
If, however, any fingers are fractured, then restore these also, and make them equal as before as I have said concerning the restoration of the fingers of the hand Then put the finger on its pedestal in accordance with the length of the finger, and let it be somewhat wider than before: then place under the foot the board which I mentioned before, and tighten the bandage securely
If indeed that which is fractured from the bones is two, or three, or more, then place on every finger a plaster of such quantity, enclosed in cloth: and tighten the board under the foot: and let one head of the board rest outside the foot, in order to retain its stability.
And it is fitting that you should remember, that you should consider all that I have said concerning all fractures resulting from accidents which we have mentioned: and oppose every accident with whatever is necessary
Concerning the fracture of the Vulua of a woman, and the bone of the thigh, and the swelling of a man.
When the Vulua of a woman is fractured, then make her sit in a square position Then incline the body towards the lower part of the back and keep it fixed there.
Then let the surgeon grasp the flank of the body with his left hand, and with the right hand grasp the lower part of the back, and keep them fixed in their places.
Then cut the woman, and elevate the back gradually. The limb will come out, until it reaches the opening of the Vulua like a sphere, and the bone is fractured and returns
Then put a plug of wool over the back When you wish to finish, remove the limb easily, then mix: and reduce it according to the degree to which you introduced it at the beginning. Then return to the original wool plug
Do this for seven days, or until the bone is restored
And if you wish, take a vein or vein-like cord from the groin and pass it through the opening of the Vulua. Then introduce the whole vein into the Vulua Then blow air through the cord with vinegar, until the vein is filled within the Vulua, and the bone is fractured and returns
Then keep it like this for a few days, as we have said, until it is healed
And when the bone of the breast of a man or a woman is fractured, then manage its restoration, and keep it equal to this which we have said concerning the bone of the shoulder
And do not cover the rectum in its nearby fractures, which happen rarely, especially in those who have some knowledge or experience
And understand my book well, for in many cases the fracture itself is a sign of the need for restoration and stretching of itself: understand this well
When the vein is severed and bursts, grasp the opening of the vein and insert the finger into the same. Then place upon it a covering of linen, and it shall be bound, and shall be left for three days, or thereabouts, and it shall heal, if God wills it.
As for the restoration of a fractured bone when there is a wound.
It is suitable for him upon whom this has happened, that is, a fracture with a wound, especially if it is great, as for example the thigh bone, or the ribs, or something similar to these, that he should be immediately bled: if these conditions of bleeding are attested, as we have mentioned before
If the wound is bleeding, then it must be closed, so that it is properly bound over with a dressing: if there is nothing else present besides this.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day: and do not delay this, if it does not happen spontaneously.
If indeed spontaneous union occurs, then defer the restoration until the ninth day, until the spontaneous union has taken place And do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you will make him suffer bad accidents
If indeed the fractured bone is prominent above the skin detected: then it must be reduced, and be equalised with your hands with ease and slight tension
If indeed it is not prepared for extension of the limb, and its equalisation with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument And the instrument is made of iron, which is equal in length to seven fingers, or eight: and its width is according to the size of the wound And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from each of these three or four according to the quantity required for the treatment of every kind of fracture.
It is round: and let its size be neither too great nor too small, so that it does not double under compression at the time of operation: and let the edges be acute, which have a margin at their edges.</start_of_turn> And let its upper part be from the middle to the lower part.</start_of_turn
This is its shape.</start_of_turn>
It must be placed in the operation, so that its acute edge is curved over the protruding extremity of the bone: and it must be pressed with it until the bone returns to its place and is equal to the surrounding parts.</start_of_turn
And thus endeavor to make the extremities of the fracture parallel.</start_of_turn
And if its extremities are slightly fractured and do not hold the good instrument, then it is permitted to break off the extremity of that bone, until the instrument has the power to hold it.</start_of_turn
If indeed it is not possible to reduce them as we have mentioned before, then cut it with the knife which we mentioned before: or bind it with a clamp in whatever way is possible.</start_of_turn
And then smooth that which remains in the bone from asperities and small pieces of bone.</start_of_turn
When thus the bone is reduced and the patient finds relief from the pain which he was suffering, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.</start_of_turn
Do this.</start_of_turn> You confer great benefit to the sick when restoration is completed as you do an ossi.
When restoration is completed, immerse the bandage in lukewarm wine, black in color. And if it is in summer, too. Do not place a greasy substance on the wound, nor anything oily: lest it cause swelling and corruption.</start_of_turn>
Then administer asafetida at the hour of completion of your restoration of the bone.</start_of_turn Discharge the wound when it is cleansed: thus, you will cut with scissors a hole in the incisions according to the amount of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Take heed of all these precautions, lest you tighten the wound with a fracture.</start_of_turn Many have done this carelessly, and have caused harm to their patients, either death or corruption, or swelling, that is, illness.</start_of_turn Be gentle and lenient in your handling, diverse in your handling of the remaining fractures.</start_of_turn
If the wound is bad, or is large, and you fear some of the things that we have mentioned, and you find pain in the place where the suspension is, then do not put asafetida on it.</start_of_turn Make incisions from tough papers in the place of the asafetida, and tighten it with them.</start_of_turn
When however a day or two have passed, and the wound is beginning to secrete pus, then remove the bandage that you put on it with the wine.</start_of_turn Then administer unguents and salves which are commonly used by us to heal wounds: such as unguentum tetrapharmacon, and the like.</start_of_turn
And it is appropriate for you to solve the ligament. Consider the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary to prepare the limb thoroughly so that the pus can be drained downwards with ease.</start_of_turn>
If the wound persists for many days and does not consolidate, nor does the pus separate from it: then you know that there are small bone fragments there.</start_of_turn Therefore you must inquire about the wound with a hook.</start_of_turn How many of these small fragments are separated from the wound? Remove them and extract them completely.</start_of_turn And what remains of them which are not separated, and which puncture the limb, and cause them to swell, attempt to cut them out, and remove them in every way possible.</start_of_turn
If there occurs swelling or softening of the wound, that is, bruising, or any other corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to oppose each of these things with whatever is appropriate for their treatment, as is mentioned in its chapter.</start_of_turn
And concerning this, know that whenever an os breaks and protrudes from the limb, such as the hip bone, and its ligaments, and similar parts of the great limbs, it is necessary not to fear its traction, which often happens from this moisture, but rather to remove it, since it putrifies.</start_of_turn
Perhaps it will fall away of itself after eighty days, or a hundred.</start_of_turn
Then indeed care for the wound if you see it: and otherwise, remove it.</start_of_turn
On the treatment of a nodulation in the vicinity of a fractured bone.
Many times, this nodulation occurs in the vicinity of the healing of a fracture. Especially when it is close to the joints: and it hinders the functioning of the limb from that figure And perhaps hinders the limb from its natural action
Therefore consider it if the nodulation is recent: administer in it medicines that have styptic properties, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and acacia, and similar things.
Thus, take some of these things, or all of them: mix them with wine that has styptic properties, or with albumin or with vinegar: and apply them over the nodulation in a lump, and bind them over the same with a good suture
And remove the dressing, neither leave it for many days. Then leave the limb alone, and do it again until the nodulation has disappeared
Or bind over the same a sheet of lead in the middle Lead has the property of removing everything that is harmful to the limbs
If however the nodulation is already in the bone, and is fixed, and causes pain: then find over the upper part of it, and break off the superfluous projection: or cut the bone with some instruments, until the pain is removed: and care for the limb until it heals
When the limb is restored and remains under the skin afterwards, not according to its natural order.
When a fracture of a bone has been restored, and the limb remains below it slight and weak: then it is not done except for multiple causes. When a fracture of a bone has been restored, and the limb remains below it slight and weak: then it is not done except for multiple causes. For one, excessive tightening of the ligaments hinders the nourishment of the limb. Secondly, excessive brosement of the wound at an inappropriate time. Thirdly, a deficiency of blood in the body of the patient, and his weakness.
And its treatment is to nourish the patient and make his body firm, until the blood is multiplied in it. And give him a bath. And bring joy and laughter to him over him.
Then put a plaster over the limb: so that it attracts a great deal of nourishment to it. And anoint it frequently with warm water, until the nourishment has recovered, and it returns to its natural shape
Of the treatment of fractured bones when they are restored crookedly.
When it happens that a limb has been restored after its healing is crooked, and the fractured bone remains prominent: and there is swelling about the limb, although the limb is not prohibited from its natural movement: then it does not befit to break the limb again unnecessarily.
And there have been many proud doctors and restorers in our land who have done this.
And this operation is dangerous and harmful, leading to death, or great fear, as indeed it is mortal
But if the swelling and nodosity are recent: then it is fitting to bathe it with warm water, in which decoctions of soothing herbs are boiled, such as elder leaves, and the radix of it, and meadowsweet, and those of a like nature. And let there be applied to him a plaster with a softening agent, like a dyachilon made in the centre.
Or let there be taken mucilage of the root of saffron, and let it be mixed with fat of a hen, or with beeswax: and let there be plastered with this
Or let there be taken poppy seeds, and let them be pounded with columbine seed, and with such things as the physicians call to reduce consolidation
And when the swelling has subsided with constant and gentle friction, as with wet hands. And movement of the limb must be administered to all parts at all hours.
If however twisting has preceded it, and it has become strong, and has been converted to stone, and has become necessary to do something about it: then it is necessary to cut off above it, and to solve the continuation of the bone, and to remove what is superfluous from the swelling or from the bone with fine scissors: and to administer aid in that with solicitude and care
About the matter of dislocation
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint from its place. Because it hinders its movement and deforms the limb. And causes the suffering of great pain, and wounds which are causing suffering
When therefore dislocation has happened to anyone, then it is necessary to hasten to restore it: neither must it be delayed at all
For if it is delayed, the place is becoming stiff, and perhaps with that the reduction of the dislocation becomes more difficult
Therefore it is not necessary to move, nor extend it in the hour of stiffness. Since many things cause spasm and painful sensations.
When such a thing happens, then it is necessary that you perform phlebotomy on the patient at once. And let it be discharged until the swelling has subsided.
Then the limb should be bound with warm water and oil. And it should be gradually reduced
And care for the entire limb so that no pain remains in its place.
I command you to treat dislocations, even if they are caused by fractures, from the upper part of the body down to the lower part of the body
As for the treatment of mandibular dislocation
The two mandibles rarely dislocate, except for a few times.
And the dislocation of both is done according to two forces. Or they are forced out of their places by a slight displacement and are softened together. Or they are dislocated completely, that is, right out of their place, until they are softened to the part of the chest, until the patient's saliva flows freely, and he is unable to close his mouth, and his tongue is swollen
When the dislocation is slight, it returns by itself with little force
If the dislocation is complete, do this immediately: the physician should insert his thumb of his hand into the root of the mandible at the dislocation between the bones, if the dislocation is from one side only If the dislocation is from two parts, do not insert two fingers into the wound simultaneously. And let the remaining fingers of the hand be outside, so that they may equal
Command the patient to open his jaw wide and relax the teeth, and bring them together again The physician must equal the jaw, and push the jaw, until it returns to its place
If it is difficult to reduce it, especially if both jaws are together: then give an evaporation with warm water and oil, until it is easy to reduce both of them: do not attempt to reduce both of them entirely as we have said
When they have returned and been equaled, and the bone of the patient is closed, and not softened: then put over the wound a pad of wool, with a coat of wax made from beeswax: and moisten with rose water.
And bind with ease with soft bands.
And let the patient rest on his back: and his head be stable between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right and left: neither be bound, nor forced to chew anything: for give him soft food to eat, until when he feels the pain has gone away, and the jaw has settled: then he may eat whatever he wants, and this with ease
Do not worry over the operation of his mouth among eating and drinking, and biting, until the jaw has settled and healed.
If it is difficult to reduce both jaws when they are dislocated at some time, and do not return to their place: then many times accidents occur from them in fever, and strong soda: and perhaps the patient will vomit pure bile.
When the limb has been thus helped: then you know that it is lost, and that it will perish to him to whom it has happened in ten days.
Regarding the reduction of the dislocation of the Furcula (collarbone) and the extremity of the humerus (upper arm bone).
The Furcula (collarbone) does not dislocate from the inside outwards, because of its continuity with the breastbone. It dislocates sometimes outwards: and it is declared by sensation
And its restoration is that the patient should lie upon his back and extend his arms. Then cover the place with your strong palm, for it will return by itself
Then put upon it a bandage, and sponges, and bind it firmly
The extremities following the elbow do not dislocate with it, except rarely If it dislocates on some day: then it is necessary that it be reduced and equated as we have said, and that preparation be made for you
Then put upon it a bandage, and sponges, and bind it firmly And command the patient to adhere to tranquility and quiet, until he is healed
And when the same cure has reduced the extremity of the Humerus, when it is separated even from its place
Regarding the reduction of the dislocation of the Humerus (upper arm bone).
Know that the Humerus does not dislocate except in three ways.
Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated to the lower part of the tibia. Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated to the lower part of the tibia. Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated to the lower part of the tibia: and this is rare.
Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated to the lower part of the tibia, and not to the back, because of the sputum. Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated to the lower part of the tibia, and not to the front, because of the nerve
Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated and go down to the lower part of the tibia: above all in those in whom the flesh is little Whoever one of them is, so that he be dislocated and go down to the lower part of the tibia: for they go out quickly and enter quickly
In those, however, in whom the flesh is much, it is the contrary, namely that they go out with difficulty and enter with difficulty
And sometimes it happens to some men a blow or a fall, and the humerus is displaced with heat, and it is thought because of this that it is dislocated.
It is necessary therefore to experience this until you are certain about it, and then you can proceed with its treatment.
It is recognized as dislocation when it is towards the lower part of the tibia: and you must distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy humerus For you will find among them a manifest difference, and you will find in the head of the humerus a concavity, and under the tibia at the touch of the head of the humerus as if it were a bone: and it is not possible for a healthy man to move his hand to his mouth, or to move it in any way
Likewise, if the chest joint is dislocated upwards or downwards: then you find a palpable displacement, which is not hidden.
And in such a dislocation, reduction is easily accomplished when the limb is still tense or if the patient is weak.
And reduction of it is as though you lift the limb upwards. Then place your fingers under the joint and lift the limb with force upwards to its place: and the minister will lift the limb and extend it upwards. Then place the lower part below, and he himself will quickly return downwards.
If, however, it does not return by that which we have said, and if several days have passed since the dislocation occurred: then it is necessary to bathe the patient in warm water, and to apply a bandage which softens and lubricates, like that which is used for the decoction of the radix of fennel, and mugwort, and mastic in water, and to administer these things
Then the patient is placed lying on his back: and under the joint a sphere and bandage are placed which are equal between softness and tension
Then the doctor places his heel on the sphere and lifts the arm with force, and draws the limb downwards.
And if necessary, reduce it in this way: and it is that you make a person stand beside the patient who is longer than him, and stands on the side, and inserts his arm under the patient's joint: and lift the joint upwards until the patient is suspended in the air And another minister takes the hand of the patient and lowers it to the lower parts of the belly. If the patient is flexible: then it is necessary to suspend it with something else, so that it does not return dislocated immediately.
It is also reduced in another manner: that is, by fixing it to the ground with a long stick whose head is rounded like a mace: as with a surgeon's glove: which is neither thick nor thin. Then one places under the patient after placing on the head of the stick a soft cloth: and the patient is fixed according to the length of the stick.
Then extend his hand downwards from the other side, and extend his body from the other side with force: for the joint returns to its place with speed.
If it is difficult to reduce it by all that we have said, then take hold of a stick whose length is equal to the length of two arms, and whose width is equal to the length of four fingers, and whose thickness is equal to the length of two fingers: whose head is rounded, so that it may alleviate the entrance into the rectum, according to this form
Then bind over the rounded head a soft cloth, so that it does not hurt the patient's hand
Then place under the rectum of the patient so that the hand or arm is extended over the stick to the lower parts: and bind the stick over the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand
Then place the arm over the step of the ladder by the width, and extend the hand downwards, and let the rest of the body hang loose from the other side The joint returns immediately.
When the opening has been completed according to whatever method is possible: then it is necessary to place under the titulus a sphere of equal quantity from wool. Then place a prepared dressing made from ground barley with ointment and white of egg over the whole arm, as is customary above
Then bind under the titulus a proper bandage: and twist the ligament over the dressing above: and bind the hand to its collar: and leave it, without moving the hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to give the patient a nourishing diet, until the limb is comfortable: for it is faster for its healing.
Then place a larger one after seven days, or five: and take it away when it moves. If it is firm and does not soften, then it is healed.
If, however, the ligature is often dislocated, because of moisture which has happened to it, or for some other cause: then it is necessary to apply in it a cautery with three holes, according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cautery
If you do all this, and the ligament is dissolved after seven days, and the ligature is not confirmed: and the dressing and the bandage are reduced above it somewhat, and it does not harden, and falls away, and does not rise again: then you know that the nerves that are at the head of the humerus are cut, or extended, or softened: and you know that the ligature will never be fixed in its place
The dislocation which happens towards the breast and the nipple, or at the back: is done with impulse and extension with the hands: until it returns, and a further bandage and care are administered until it is healed.
If after healing the greatness has increased in a limb, and there is tardiness in its motion, then the patient is to be bathed with hot water until the greatness has been softened, and has returned to its first state.
Concerning the cure of dislocation of the cubit
You know that the dislocation of the cubit is difficult, and returns with difficulty: and that it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the front or to the back
Its dislocation is not concealed: because it hangs down under the skin, and under the touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated And when you join the dislocated cubit with the healthy one, it is declared that it is manifest The joint must be bound together, and must not be doubled over, nor touched with the other arm
And it is necessary to reduce the dislocation promptly, before a cold abscess forms on it
For if a cold abscess forms on it, its reduction becomes difficult: and it is often not healed at all, especially when it is at the back. For every kind of dislocation is worse, and especially painful: and it descends a great deal with it.
And the restoration of it when it is possible to reduce it, is that you extend your hand with two hands: and the arm is expanded, and the hands of the physician are above the cubit and under it, and he himself urges the joining together with the thumbs of both hands, or with the root of the palm of his hand, until it returns to its place
Or else the dislocation is to the front: then it returns so that you double your hand with your hand, until it touches with the root of the palm of your hand the cubit which is dislocated
If it does not obey by dislocation for reduction, then administer extension forcefully: and let two ministers extend the arm; and let them hold it fast, so that it does not slip from the extension.
Once the arm has been repositioned to its proper place, let the long or broad ligament be doubled over the hand again
When the physician grasps the hand with his grasp, let him anoint it with oil: so that it will be slippery and facilitate the joint Then push the joint forcefully until it returns
And after reduction, it is necessary to place upon it a dressing that has stypticity and exudes moisture with alum: and bind the bandage tightly. Let the arm be suspended from the neck of the sufferer: and keep it quiet for a few days.
Then it will be healed. If the joint is firmly closed in its place, then solve the ligament from that and let it go
If you see that the joint has not been properly bound, then apply the dressing once more, and the ligament and let it go for a few days until it is bound Then it will be healed
If, however, there is still pain after reduction of the joint, and the limb remains immobile: then administer lubrication in the bath, and gentle friction, and compression, until the limb is firm, or place upon the joint a cushion of wool, that is, the fleece of a sheep's tail And bind it, and let it rest day and night Then take away the dressing, and put it into the bath When the wound is oozing, then the oil should be rubbed in gently with a tempering of friction. Then apply a little oil once more, and a second time, and a third time with the water inside the bath, until it is softened.</start_of_turn>
And if you wish, place upon the wound a soft cushion of cotton, moistened, warmed with butter, and bind over it.</start_of_turn>
Do this often.</start_of_turn> The wound itself will soften, and will return to its natural state.</start_of_turn>
 On the treatment of dislocations.</start_of_turn
When the hand is severely dislocated, that is, an injury between the arm and the hand.</start_of_turn
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy.</start_of_turn Unlike other joints.</start_of_turn Indeed, it is necessary that speed be in the reduction of the dislocation in the hour when it is dislocated, before it is solidified: or else it will happen that in that solidifying it will be hardened.</start_of_turn
And the reduction of the dislocation is like this: place the lower hand of Mahassem upon a board, and extend the arm: and the physician puts his palm upon the prominence of the dislocation and urges it, until it returns.</start_of_turn
Indeed, it is necessary to consider, if the palm has receded towards the wrist: then the patient should place the back of his hand upon the board alongside the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be inside the board, that is, let the inner part of the hand be placed upon the board, so that the physicians palm can rest upon the prominence of the dislocation.</start_of_turn
If he returns immediately, it is good: but if not, tighten the ligature with the paste still soft and let it go, and do not revisit it.
If he does not tolerate it, neither can you force a reduction: after a few days have passed, the knot will remain firm according to its hardness: and it does no harm to the patient, except that you must soften the hand, for nothing can be tied. Then you know that the nerve has been severed or injured.
There is no wisdom in that, except to tighten it close to the case with a cautery It may even do no good.
When the Almahassem does not return, then put upon it the paste we mentioned. Then tighten it and let it go after five days: afterwards it is to be dissolved and let go, and the hand is to be exercised
If, however, its motion is deprived, and something weighty has occurred in it: then soften it with warm water and gentle friction until it softens.
(End of excerpt
When the Digit has been dislocated from its place to all parts, or from the palm of the hand to the dorsum of the hand, or towards the belly: then extend the Digit and drive out the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
Then support the head of the Digit, and suspend it over the part from which it is dislocated, and let it go in two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it is straight in that day.
When the night is dark, bind up the limb according to its own narration: and do not cease resolving it until the day: and exercise it with movement: and bind it up at night.
Do it during the day a little at a time, until it is bound up.
And do the same with the hand if it is dislocated to the bone: and bind it up to its own part, and do the operation as before until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And do the same when it is dislocated to the other parts.</start_of_turn>
About the treatment of dislocation of the spine.</start_of_turn
When anyone has suffered dislocation of the spine, either complete or partial, or has displaced many spinal vertebrae from their places: then there is no remedy for it, for the moisture is proper for the sickly person.</start_of_turn
And the sign of this is that the sickly person is ejected without his will, and cannot hold himself: and many times he softens some part of his body, or two limbs, or two arms, or one of them: or displaces a spinal vertebra from its place.</start_of_turn
Many times he displaces them, because many times they are separated into four parts.</start_of_turn
That which is displaced to the back is called Gibbositas.</start_of_turn
The treatment for this is that they should be rejoined immediately, if the Gibbositas has happened from infancy: then there is no remedy for it, and no healing from it at all.</start_of_turn
And in whatever case it has happened by blow or like this, as the ancients have said in a long discourse about the methods of treatment.</start_of_turn Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning.
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning.
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning.
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning.
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning.
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning
Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning Whoever has learned much does not return to the beginning Then place the middle board over the Spondilem. And place their feet on the other extremity of the physician And bind securely, until the Spondilem is firm, and return to its place.</start_of_turn>
Then if desired, work with the ankle which is involved with your hand: and it is that you take two boards as long as the forearm on one side and two boards at the head of it on the other side.</start_of_turn>
And the length which is between every two boards is the palm of one hand: and when it is made in every place there is a hole in which the ankle runs: and fix every board firmly to the ground so that it does not move at all.</start_of_turn
And insert the round bar: and it is the ankle in which the ligament is twisted in two holes of the two boards.</start_of_turn
And at its extremity is a hole in which the board is fixed, whose length is the palm with that which is twisted: and in two other boards it is like that.</start_of_turn
Then bind the ligaments which you have bound in the chest of the patient with the ankle which is at his head: and the ligaments which you have bound in the thighs with the ankle which is at his feet.</start_of_turn
Then stay at every ankle minister, who twists his hand with a ruler, with which the ankle is twisted: and the physician equalizes the Spondilem, as we said.</start_of_turn
This is the form of the ankle.</start_of_turn
Then when the Spondilem returns and the place is equal, then it is necessary that you put on a dressing of dried eggs with albumin or oil.</start_of_turn Then apply the [stuppam]. Then apply the [stuppam] above the plaster cast, the width of which is three fingers, or about as wide as the thumb. And its length should be as much as will cover the area of the elbow, and over the sound part of the Spondylus
Then it is bound with the ligament we mentioned before.</start_of_turn> And the patient should be nourished with light food until he is healed.</start_of_turn>
If anything remains prominent in the place at the end of the healing process: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, along with the plaster which we mentioned for a long period.</start_of_turn And they are administered on that layer of lead.</start_of_turn
And when it happens that prominence appears at the end of the spine: and it is thought to be due to dislocation, and that is the bone which is now prominent.</start_of_turn Therefore it is necessary that an assumption be made for it with these medicines: perhaps it will prevent death from occurring.</start_of_turn
 On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.</start_of_turn
You know that the dislocations of the ankle and the humerus do not happen except in cases of dislocation only: neither do they happen except for the removal of a small piece and a concavity.</start_of_turn
And the dislocation of the ankle is divided into four parts.</start_of_turn That is, because it is dislocated forward and backward.</start_of_turn
The majority are displaced inwards: slightly displaced forwards, and to the rear.
The treatment of such dislocation is inwards: for when you join the limb of the sick with that of the healthy, the latter is longer: and the knee of the sick is more prominent than that of the healthy, and the sick cannot double his foot over the ankle: and the place which follows the ankle is that which follows the heel which is hot, because the head of the coxae is already there.
The sign of it is that the dislocation is outwards, because its accidents are contrary to these accidents.
The sign of it is that it expands the healthy limb along the thigh: however, it does not double itself without pain at the knee: and if he attempts to walk, he cannot do so without support: and he retains his urine, and his ankle is swollen, and there is swelling at his walking.
The sign of it is that it does not expand the knee, nor can he double it before he has doubled his ankle: and his limb is also shorter than the other: and his ankle is soft, and the head of the coxae is at the hip bone place
The reduction of this dislocation is of various kinds, as when it is an old dislocation which has become habituated with the limb having it. Then if you perform the reduction and it remains as before: there is no healing in that treatment at all. It is not right therefore that suspicion should be cast upon him
In the case of that in which the dislocation is fixed, and is of four kinds of dislocation: then it is proper for you to join them together, and extend the limb inwards and outwards, and move it from side to side: perhaps then it will return, and no other treatment will be necessary.
If it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare the minister strong and extend his leg from the lower part: either with his hands or with a ligature which is tied above his knee: and another minister extends his hand above, so that he inserts his hand under his toes. Then tighten with a ligature of soft material over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the other ligature.
And let the extension be from the anterior part of the groin to the part of the hip bone, or from the posterior part to the part of the back
And let the extension be whole, until the patient is lifted with his body from the earth, and remains hanging
And this is a common kind of extension of the four kinds.
If, therefore, it returns loose with that which we have said, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary in every kind that which we shall speak of concerning the proper treatment.
In reduction, however, of its own when the dislocation is inward, it is necessary that the patient be laid over on his sound side. Then place the ligament over the root of the thigh, in that which is between the head of the thigh and the groin. Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the hip bone
Then another minister takes a strong arm and grasps the thick part of the lower thigh, and extends it outwards with the extension which has just been made And thus it returns to its place
And this kind is easier than the rest of the methods for reducing this limb.
If, however, he excuses himself from thee, and does not obey thy order to enter with this kind of treatment: then it is necessary that two feet of the patient be bound together with a strong, soft ligament, over two calcanei, and over two knees: and that the length of each be equal to four fingers; and that the limb which is diseased be extended more than the other by two fingers' breadth.
The diseased limb is then suspended above the head of the ligament which is in the house: and its length from the ground be equal to the quantity of two arms.
Then command the strong youth to hold the thigh: and suspend it with the diseased limb: and let the youth pull the limb with force, keeping the thigh fixed with force; for the ligature returns to its place with speed.
But when the dislocation is outward, it is necessary that the patient lie upon a board, as we have mentioned in the case of gibbosity. And bind the ligament over the limb itself, over the groin and over the breastbone.
Then two boards are placed, one at the feet and the other at the head of the limb. And a board is placed in the middle of the foot, fixed well: over which are placed wet cloths, so that it does not irritate the patient: and let the board be between the thighs, so that it does not pull towards the lower parts during extension.
Then extend all the limbs towards their parts, and the physician equalizes the reduction with his hand.
If therefore he obeys the reversion, it is good.
And if not, place upon the limb itself a board, and press upon it, as we said in the case of gibbosity, equally. The patient must be placed upon his sound side.
When the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to extend the limb quickly: this is in accordance with the former narration concerning the podium: and the physician places his right hand on the knee of the patient. Then he grasps the limb with the other hand, and when he has grasped it, he extends the limb downwards to the knee
If the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary to extend the limb downwards, but rather to elevate it above the ground: rather, it is necessary to place it upon a firm support, as it is done even if the dislocation is wide outwards, as we said concerning its recumbent position over two cushions: and this is upon its face and extended ligaments: as we said just now
It is necessary to apply a compression bandage with a board also over the place from which the fracture has been displaced, when the reduction is completed according to what is necessary.
And the sign of its reduction is not hidden: and it is that you extend both limbs of the patient: and when you remove these equal, and the patient tightens his limb and expands it without pain: then you know that the limb has returned, as it should be: then you must join the two thighs together, and put on a dressing, and bind with a bandage, that is, with a twist: so that it does not move outwards to any part: and the patient must rest quietly for three days, or four.
Then heal the ligament, and the dressing, and compare the limb with the other: then if you find them equal in position, then you know that the dislocation has been stabilized: absolutely so that the patient can walk again.
If you see any softening: then renew the reduction, and put on the dressing again, and bind it as before: and leave it for three days.
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable.
Then heal it and make its walking slow above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable.
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable. Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable
Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable Then heal it and make it tardy in its walking above either side for a few days, until it is comfortable Then resolve them.
Then resolve them. And do not allow the patient to walk for a few days until they are healed.
If, however, the reduction recurs, then administer strengthening of the limb with ligaments, as was mentioned previously in the treatment of an ankle, until it returns.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the calcaneus.</start_of_turn
The calcaneus sometimes requires only slight displacement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to its complement.</start_of_turn And its dislocation is either inward or outward.</start_of_turn
And the sign of its dislocation is that the heel is swollen, proceeding to the part from which it is dislocated.</start_of_turn
The treatment for its displacement is easy: to extend it gently with the hands, and to restore it, until it returns.</start_of_turn
In the treatment of the latter, when it is dislocated according to its complement, it is necessary to make the patient sit upright: and hold the limb firmly with a strong hand from the back of the ankle, in the middle of it.</start_of_turn
Then take your right hand and grasp the foot from above, and with your left hand from below the foot at the ankle bone.</start_of_turn
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand.</start_of_turn And with the left hand support the ankle bone.</start_of_turn
Then extend with the left hand, and push the ankle bone with the right hand without straining.
Do it twice, as we have said.
Then push the heel of the foot towards the knee in the third space, and you draw out the nail.
If it comes back into the space once, or twice in this way, and you equalize the foot, that is good: and if not, you do the operation again above that: for it will come back itself
If, however, it is forbidden to reduce it with that which we have said: then make the patient lie upon his back upon the earth, and fix the heel of the limb firmly in the ground, so that it lies between the patient's thighs: and you will have involved the limb above that, so that it does not hurt the patient.
Then take hold of the knee of the limb: afterwards extend the limb with your hand or with the ligament which is over the knee of the limb. Then extend all the limbs against the extension of their companion: and the heel will be stable between the thighs of the patient, holding it so that it does not draw the body downwards towards the extension.
Then the doctor will equalize the dislocation with his hands, and the other minister will hold the sound limb downwards For the dislocation will return with speed.
When it has returned, and it is declared that the limb is sound concerning its reduction: then put on a plaster and a bandage, and bind up the limb securely with ligaments, and bind the foot with the ligament to the knee
And it is necessary to beware of nerves, which are above the heel behind, so that there is no tension on the ligaments over them, and that it does not hurt them
Then let it go in two or three days If the ligament is softened, string it up: then dissolve it on the third or fourth day. And restrain the patient from walking for forty days. If he nevertheless tries to walk before that space has healed, no security will result, for the dislocation will not be dissolved, but will be corrupted, and will not receive any treatment after that
If there should happen to him a hard swelling: then it is necessary, that you manage in the sedation of that, in which the story proceeded before in another place from the cure, and the embrocation, until it be removed
About the dislocation of the fingers of the foot, and their care.
It is necessary, that the dislocation be equal with the limb when the tension is slight without pain: and this is not difficult, indeed it is easy.
If however the dislocation is in some part of the ankle of the foot: then it is necessary, that the patient should sit down the foot on the same level as the earth, or on a board: and he should be still as when he is walking.
Then you should stay, and place your foot on that which comes out from those joints. Then bandage it with your foot with oil, until it returns, and when it has returned it will be equal, and will not appear in a prominent place
Then put under the foot of him a board which will hold the whole foot, which has two heads. Then string it up with a tight bandage for three days Then dissolve it, and keep him quiet from walking for many days, until it is strung and secured from reduction
On the kinds of dislocations with wound or fracture.
When anything of this kind happens, and you know its cure and restoration, many things often follow: and because of this it is not right to be arrogant about its cure, which is like this, except for one who is prudent in the art of long healing, merciful, compassionate, tardy, not audacious, and not arrogant: and as it is accustomed in the beginning of medical practice to put cold compresses upon the patient's wounds. And let him be discharged from the physician's judgment. Except that you think, or hope for salvation from the peril with the gentleness of the ailment, and in which something appears of hope. Try to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the case, before a cold swelling occurs
If the limb has returned, as we wish, then manage the wound as is appropriate for it with the unguents of desiccation.
If the dislocation is with fracture, and the bones are separated in the sockets, then try to break them apart, and do in this what we said in the ailments of the simple fractures in those places
And be cautious according to your virtue, and protect yourself from the entrance of fear: as I have foretold you before
For it is better for you before the Creator of yours, and more lasting for your glory, and more healing for your body in your time.
