After I have finished with you, my son, this book, which is the last of my works on medicine, and having completed it with the addition of its contents, I have reached the end of my exposition and declarations, so that I deemed it fitting to join this treatise to the work on surgery, which is the hand of the art.
For surgery is a hand of the art which has been cast aside in our time and age; and for a long time it has been cast aside due to the scarcity of its secrets and the hazes of tradition. And it has not remained except for a few slight descriptions in the ancient books, which have been changed by the hands of men. And this has caused error and hesitation, until the intentions of these works have been closed and prolonged is has become necessary. It is therefore necessary for me to set forth this treatise in this way, in order to explain its forms and arrangements of instruments, along with their preparations, which are necessary for the work.
But the greatest cause why one does not find a good surgeon of the hand in our time is that the art of medicine is a long one, and the author must exercise himself beforehand in the science of anatomy as Galen has narrated, until he knows the movements of the limbs, their forms, and their connections, and the separation and union of the bones, nerves, and vessels, and their number, and their emergence and pulsation, and quietness, and the location of their exits
And thus Hippocrates said, "A name is little when it comes to fame, but work is great, especially in the art of the hand.
We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is ignorant of what we have said concerning anatomy will fall into error, for many have perished from this lack of knowledge, who have puffed up with pride from their supposed knowledge of this science without any knowledge or experience
What is this, since the doctor has secured the swollen abscess with a scrophulus in the woman's neck, and has thereby obstructed some arteries in the neck: why does blood flow from the woman, until it dies between her hands?
And the doctor has also said that he would extract the stone from the bladder, which was proceeding in its age, and the stone was great.
So it came to pass that he extracted it with the bladder's bladder-sac.
Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself was called to extract it: and I saw from the greatness of the stone, and the condition of the patient, that he would die.
And the doctor saw another man receive a blow from a certain Duke of our land for a physician: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him, that he fractured his leg near his heel: and the doctor did not know what to do, and he bound up the fracture with wool and nails, and strong stitches, and did not let the wound breathe.
And he left him according to his desires.
Afterwards he sent him away for a few days, and commanded him not to loosen the ligament: and he stood thus until the abscess of his leg had gone down, and his foot and leg, and it came to pass to his destruction
I was called to him again: and I proceeded to loosen the ligament: and there was peace, and he was freed from his pains
But indeed the corruption was already confirmed in the limb: and I could not restrain it
Therefore the corruption ceased to walk in the limb until it died
And the physician went to another, who had perforated the cancerous tumor: and it had ulcerated after days, until the malice of the former increased with the master himself.
When the tumor is pure from black bile, it does not suffice to endure it with all one's might, except in the limb where it can be excised whole
And thus, my son, you must know that surgery is divided into two parts: that which is associated with health, and that which carries risk in many situations. I am grieved in every place of this book in which surgery is mentioned, in which there is fear and terror.
Therefore you must be cautious of this, and humble yourself: so that you do not become proud, and thereby lose your dignity
Receive therefore measure with humility and protection, and the sick with ease and firmness, and use the better way for the bringing about of glory to God for salvation and praiseworthy succession: and banish from you the terrible anxieties which make you fear for your soul, that there should be no hesitation in your heart or coolness in your spirit For there remains in this world only the glory of God, and the shadow of this life, and finally the account of each one.
For Galen has said in some of his admonitions. You do not cure the bad ailment: do not call the physician a bad man.
Chapter 1.
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and packing, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and things of that kind: and the whole chapter, arranged in the form of instruments.
Third Chapter.
On restoration, and dislocation, and treatment of twisting, and things of that kind: the chapter is arranged from the head to the feet, and the form of instruments.
Glory be to God.
The Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part I.
On the application of a dressing, and the use of the cautery: and on what complexion it is suitable, and when: and whether with iron or gold.
Chapter I
But before one remembers any operation, it is necessary to say what is the quality of the dressings and instruments: and in what complexion it should be shown
I say therefore, that the discourse concerning the quality of the cautery dressing and its instrument is a lengthy, subtle, scientific and hidden art.
And it has been said by many learned men in this matter, and they have differed among themselves: and indeed little is to be learned from their discourses, fearing the prolongation of the subject
I say therefore, that the cautery is useful for all complexions, that is with material and without material: except for two complexions which are the hot complexion without material, and the dry complexion without material
In the hot and dry complexion with material they differ
Some indeed say that the cautery is useful in these matters
Others have said the contrary, namely that Cauterium is not suitable for ailments caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat: and it is inappropriate to heal from a heat and dry ailment with heat and dryness.
Others have said the contrary, namely that Cauterium is not suitable for treating ailments caused by heat and dryness, which arise in the bodies of men: for when you compare the body of a man to the nature of fire, you find the body of a man to be cool to the touch
I too, however, have learned from experience that this is the case.
It is true that this should not be assumed without testing, exercising the final exercise of Cauterium, and recognizing the diversity of the temperaments of men, and the causes and effects of ailments, and the speed of their course.
Except in the case of extremely cold and humid temperaments, there is no reason to fear these things: and especially in the case of ailments caused by heat and moisture. I have seen all physicians agree on this: and they do not hesitate to apply Cauterium in such cases.
Note that the action of fire is simple, and its power does not extend beyond the part that is cauterized: and it does no harm to any other part connected to it, except for a slight burn.
The action of the burning medicine extends beyond the part which is cauterized: and perhaps makes the healing of the ailment more difficult in other parts, and perhaps causes death.
Fire, however, by its subtlety and the goodness of its material, does not cause this unless it be excessive.
I am indeed aware of that through experiment and by the length of service and study with art, and the position above reality of things: and because of that from the length of speech.
And behold, sons, that they themselves dissent in the time when the cautery is to be made, and say that it is better to delay the time of your work.
I say indeed that the cautery agrees in all time: forasmuch as the document is absorbed by moisture over time, which is attracted by the cautery.
Above all, if the cautery is for necessary and urgent pains, strong, fast, which do not tolerate delay: for they fear the moisture which arises from the wound, which increases the malice which is greater than the slight abrasion caused by the passage of time.
And do not let it be thought by anyone, sons, or physicians of little experience, that because it does not abate, it is therefore useless: for indeed it is not the cause of the disease that is cauterized, but the moisture and humors which are the cause of the disease.
However, the cautery surpasses the art of medicine by the swiftness of its action, the excellence of its operation, and the extent of its domination: and it is possible that the disease will vanish at some time according to the complexion of the patient, the location of the disease, and the excellence of the operation: and that which is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superabundances in him: and which comes to him from the cause itself, except in the case of a disease in which the cautery is administered. Acute pain in a limb with few superfluous and humid swellings, like a tooth cautery due to pain, is also possible for the enemy, so that it does not return in that area of pain.
However, this is in few cases.</start_of_turn>
Indeed, the word often returns, because cautery is the last of medicine. It is the right word: not to this which they themselves intend, because they believe that there is no cure which brings relief along with medicine, nor with anything following the cautery.</start_of_turn>
But it is the contrary of that which they themselves think. For the intention of the cautery, which is the last of medicine, is not except when we administer methods of treatment in some ailment, and these do not bring relief; then we administer the cautery at the end of everything, and it brings relief: thus it is that the cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and many learned men of medicine understand.</start_of_turn>
The ancients said that the cautery with gold is better than the cautery with iron: and they did not say this except because of the equality of gold, and the fineness of its substance: and they said that it does not make pus at the site of the cautery.</start_of_turn But this is not absolutely true: for I myself have seen this to be the case, and I have found that it does not make this in some bodies without other things.</start_of_turn
And the cautery with itself is good, and better than with iron, as they themselves said.</start_of_turn>
But when you burn the cautery with gold in fire, you must not tell me when you light it, according to the quantity which you will, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches itself to the cold, and if you add more fuel to it, it liquefies in the fire, and turns into plates.</start_of_turn
Why does the artificer depart from that to the execution of the office? And because of this, the Cauterium with iron is applied to us more quickly and closer to the operation, from the straightness of the work.
I have indeed completed this Chapter on Cauterization, following the chapters: and I have directed them from the head to the feet: so that they may fulfill whatever the seeker wishes from this work Regarding the cauterization of the head in the coronal suture.
Chapter 2: Regarding the head
Here the cauterization is applied to the lord of humidity and cold above the brain: which are two causes of sweat, and of the multitude of the flow of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and of the multitude of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain: and generally all ailments that arise from cold, such as paralysis, and sweat, and convulsions, and apoplexy, and things similar to these ailments.
The method of cauterization is as follows: immediately before the operation, the physician should give the patient a purgative that will empty the bowels three or four nights before, according to the nature of the patient, his age, and his habit
Then he should order him to shave his head with a razor.
Then make him sit between your hands, with your hands placed over his shoulders
Then place the heel of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes Wherever your middle finger reaches, that is the place to apply the cautery. Then apply the Cauterium with Olive Oil: thus it has this shape Then place it over the marked place with the burn, descending gradually, until your hand is clasped.
Then draw your hand quickly away and grasp the place.
If you see any part of bone or flesh of the head or hair remaining, then draw your hand away from it.
And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with another which is warmed: until you see the bone which I mentioned to you.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink from it: and apply it to the place: and keep it for three days.
Then apply butter soaked in oil over it, and keep the lamp above the place until the eschar is destroyed by fire. Then care for the place with unguents until it is healed
I have said that the greater the wound is, the more pus it emits: which is better and more effective
And some people say that the skin should be cauterized until the bone is reached: and keep the Cauterium until some part of the thickness of the bone has been burnt
Then it will be removed after that which has been scorched from the bone, and it will be cured
And others say that it is necessary that when cauterizing it should be continued until the very end, until an imprint of the instrument is left on the bone, so that the bone will break: or the instrument which women use for tying up their hair: and they say that the vapor of the head escapes from this place slowly: and the wound will be closed up in a long time
Then he cares until consolidated.
Neither of two species of cautery is harmful to anyone except in some people according to the degree of fear.
And dismiss it, for it is better with me than with your health.
The head suffers from the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified in other limbs: and especially when the head is weak by nature: of which the first kind of cautery is the most safe and better for me, and that which is most useful: for I work with it in health
In this way cauterizes the head in the pain of the whole head
Head Chapter III
When in the whole head happens chronic pain: and it lasts in the sick person, and uses herbs, and ointments, and poultices, and oils, and implements.
And especially if it has been cauterized with one cautery, which we mentioned, and does not cause it anything of those things: then consider it
For if the head of the sick person is strong by nature, and is not weak, and finds cold or heat: then cauterize with another cautery under that slightly
Then cauterize it over all the horns of the head with that cautery, so that it does not pass through the skin, and uncover from the bone the quantity that we mentioned
And cauterize it with one cautery in the back of the head in the place that is called the vault: and it is the place where the brains are placed: and raise your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone
The sick person finds because of this heat and diverse from the pain of the other cauteries of the head all together
And I say concerning this Cauterium: it must be applied in its proper place. And it is necessary that the Cauterium should be applied to the horns of the head and the nape of the head more delicately, so that the middle of the head is cauterized.
This is its form.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the method of cauterization in hemicrania, both with medicinal poultices and with the instrument itself.</start_of_turn
Chapter III.</start_of_turn
When it happens in the part of the head that there is pain and swelling, or that the pain extends up to the eye, and it evacuates with physicians who are making the head better, and the rest of the treatment is administered, as I have said in the discourse on diseases, and it does not suffice for everything: then cauterization is to be performed in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with an iron.</start_of_turn But with acute burning medicine, take a tooth from another person and burn the area with it, and cut away the extremities from both sides.</start_of_turn
Then cut away the place of pain at the same time as phlebotomy from the side, until there is a blister under the skin where the tooth is held.</start_of_turn
Introduce it there under the skin until it is hidden: then bind over it with a bandage of moderate constriction and leave it for fifteen hours. Then remove it, and extract the tooth, and leave it out for two days or three: afterwards put on a wet cushion over it in butter, until the place has healed. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if you wish to do this with some of the burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth book on medicinal unguents.</start_of_turn>
Burning of the uterus with iron is performed in this manner.
Burning of the uterus with iron is performed in this fashion
And is called Clavis: because its shape is like the head of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
Then place it upon the place, and hold your hand: and turn the iron gradually with speed: and as much as burns from the thickness of the skin, like half of it
And lift your hand, so that it does not burn the artery which is below, and so that blood flow does not increase
Then soak the area in salt water, and place upon the place, and leave it for three days: then place the area with butter: afterwards care with unguent until it is healed. And if necessary, burn this half of the hemisphere with the second extremity of the knife following the Cauterization.
Burn from the incision of the artery in this hemisphere, not the old way alone.
In the old way, cauterization was performed in the entire hemisphere.
Chapter V.
When you are treating the hemisphere, when that which we mentioned in the preceding section concerning the treatment of ailments, and when the treatment has not been successful: and if you see from the ailment that it has not been sufficiently cured by the first cauterization with medicine or by cauterization with fire, then you must burn the Cauterization with a knife until it becomes white when there are signs of pain with a line whose length is half of a finger, or like that: and put your hand away from the wound with one hand, and hold the other hand until you have cut the artery, and hold it until you reach the bone. It is necessary to moisten the jaws, that they may not become dry and cause pain during biting, neither may the nerve which moves them suffer damage, from which arises spasm.
Take care of the blood supply of the artery which has been severed.</start_of_turn>
In the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who is ignorant of that which he does, and who is not studious and expert: and he departs from the operation at once.</start_of_turn>
And I will remind you of the method of the passage of blood which is caused by the severance of an artery, as it is in this book.</start_of_turn
If the diseased part cannot bear the Cauterium, and the body of the patient tolerates it in the middle of the head, as we have said, care for the wound, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if you wish, apply the Cauterium, as we said in the chapter on the severance of an artery with a Cauterium which has two blades.</start_of_turn
For the Cauterium is better and more secure.</start_of_turn> Of the manner of cauterizing in the pain of the ears.</start_of_turn
Chapter VI.</start_of_turn> When there is pain in the ear from cold, and it is cured with solutions, and the rest of the treatment which we have mentioned in the treatise, and the pain does not cease, then apply the Cauterium: and that is called the Punctum, which has this shape.</start_of_turn
Then touch the Punctum with it after its ignition around the whole ear, as it is turned: or around both, if there is pain in both.</start_of_turn
And prolong thee with the Cauterium from the root of the ear downwards, after you have marked the place with the Cautery: and let the quantity of the Cauterium be ten points in every ear, and as much as that.
And take care of the place until it heals
In this manner the Cautery is to be used in the Torment
Chapter VII
The Torment which is cured by Cautery is not except for those kinds which arise from phlegmas, as we have said in the discourse on the causes of diseases. And you must apply the Cautery to the kind which arises from constriction and nervous spasm
When you have cured this kind of torment with urine and fumigations, and vomiting, and hiccups, and the cure does not suffice, then you must burn the patient three times with the Cautery: once at the root of the ear, and once a little lower from the temple, and once at the junction of the two lips.
And place your Cautery on the side opposite the diseased part
For the softening does not take place except in the part which appears healthy.
And the form of the Cautery is that you burn the Cautery itself with the outer edge of the upper ear under the earlobe a little: and the other in the temple. And the length of the burn should be as long as the length of the thumb
And hold your hand with the Cautery until the quantity of the middle third of the thickness of the skin has been consumed
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is like a knife whose form is like this: indeed it is not finer than that of a needle: and you must make the knife to be of such a size as that it is not too thick Then care for the place where it preceded: until it is healed.
Thus care for the place where it preceded: until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.</start_of_turn>
When the old [blood clot] is decayed, and you have cared for it as we said, and the medicine does not suffice, and the patient does not have a fever, then burn it four times over the horns of the head, and burn in the middle of the head, as we said, and burn in the nape of the neck, as it preceded: and the manner of burning should be as it preceded.</start_of_turn>
It is also burned with a burn over the bones of the stomach: and this is the last resort.</start_of_turn
Then care for the place where it preceded: until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Thus care for the place where it preceded: until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Chapter IX.</start_of_turn
It is necessary that in the first instance in the sick person be given large barley seeds and mild pills that soften the brain.</start_of_turn
Then bind the head of the patient completely, and put over his neck a patch of wool described in the treatise on patches: and put some of it on.</start_of_turn This is the manner of burning: and do this as I said there.</start_of_turn If therefore it is healed by this, it is good.</start_of_turn
If not: then make for him three incisions at the back of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and put between every burn the width of a finger.</start_of_turn
Then care for the Cauterium, when that has gone before.
Then care for the Cauterium, when that has gone before.
Then care for the Cauterium, when that has gone before. If however you wish to make an addition, and the patient is tolerant of that: then make for him the Cauterium in the middle.
Then care for itself, until it is healed: and let the Cauterium rest according to its form, as it is before.
In the case of palsy and softening, care must be taken in such a way that the Cauterium does not enter the bone or the marrow.
Chapter X.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary to proceed in the treatment of the head with sponges, and with that which we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
Then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize the middle of the head, and the cauterize over every horn of the head, and over the back of the head, and three times over the joints of the neck.</start_of_turn
If however he is unwilling in bodily pain for the mollification of the body by these many: and the patient is tolerant, and the pain is great: then make four cauterizations over the joints of the back, and the last one with the cauterium, until the greatest part of it is consumed by the fire, and lift your hand.</start_of_turn
Then care for itself, until it is healed: and let the Cauterium rest.
In the case of epilepsy, care must be taken in such a way that the Cauterium does not enter the bone or the marrow
Chapter XI.</start_of_turn
The epileptic patient is not cauterized, except for that of whom the epilepsy is from phlegmas.</start_of_turn It is necessary therefore that the physician should first of all temper the brain of the patient, and afterwards with the remaining treatment which we mentioned in the preceding discourse: when the patient is great, or when he is tolerant of the reception of medical treatment.
If, however, the patient is young and does not tolerate medical treatment, then gargling and chewing are administered to temper the brain, before many days with the improvement of the food.</start_of_turn>
Then the head of him is to be treated, afterwards the cauterization of the same in the middle of the head, according as has been said before in this manner: and a cauterization of the other in the nape of the neck, and over all the horns of his head a cauterization is to be made.</start_of_turn>
And if the patient be strong and be tolerant, then a cauterization is to be made of the cauteries which were said of in the case of paralysis, and softening of the body above the collarbone and the vertebrae of the back: and the cauterization is to be made of olive oil according to the manner which has been said.</start_of_turn> If the patient is young, then let a subtle cauterization be made according to this manner.</start_of_turn
(The provided text does not include the subsequent sentence, so the translation of the paragraph is incomplete.)</start_of_turn>
(The provided text does not include the remaining chapters or sections, so the translation of the book is incomplete.)</start_of_turn
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then a cauterization of the cauteries which were said of in the case of paralysis is to be made.</start_of_turn
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of slippery humors that incline to melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give him to drink that which will temper his brain, according as was said in the preceding discourse: then temper the head of the patient, and make afterwards a swelling formed of linen, like a circle.</start_of_turn
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the sitting patient is held fast from all sides.
Then present the unguents. And it is better from old butter or oil.
And warm it over a tempered fire, as the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it
Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and hold it until it is cold.
Do this to the patient every week once, with the rest of his regimen being good, until he is healed
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small punctures many of them, except that you hold the hand with the cautery: for it smells
For these are the qualities of wet cautery.
Then place over it a soaked cushion in butter, or fat from a hen
In descending water concerning the eye
Chapter XIII
When the water is declared in the eye by the signals which I mentioned in the preceding discourse, then begin and pour the water over the patient, with the hand which will temper the head of the patient.
And keep it away from all humilities, and make him sit in a bath, for a few days.
Then command him to raise his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head Then cauterize it over two times with two cautery instruments, if there is an incipient evacuation of water from both eyes simultaneously: or from one side only, if there is an incipient evacuation of water from one eye only: and cut away with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let there be cautery marks in them which are long in the width of the time: and burn from the flow of blood.
If you have applied something from it, then immediately cut it away with whatever medicine is available: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting away of them, and precautions against the flow of blood.
And when cauterizing is performed in the rectum, under two bones, two cauteries must be made at the last.
Concerning the cauterization of the ancient lacrimal glands...
Chapter XIIIII.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, sluggish: and are above the nails, and the arteries which are in the outer part of the head, it is verified that this is from superabundance of cold, phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with the same cautery which I mentioned in the commencement of the descending water, the cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above two temporal regions, and two cauteries in the rectum under two bones
And if digestion is not sufficient, then cauterize itself throughout the side of the eye, over the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery
Concerning the cauterization of the foeto of the nose...
Chapter XV
When you are treating this, with what we have mentioned in the treatise, and the medicine does not suffice: then prepare, and give in the patient's drink three times a night: then shave his head, and cauterize it with the middle cautery, with the olive cautery.
Then cauterize it with the claw cautery with two cauteries, over two superciliums under the hair slightly
And take care of the artery, so that you do not cut it
This is the form of the cautery of Claudius.
This is the method of cauterization in the mollification of the Palpebrae.
Chapter XVI.</start_of_turn>
When the Palpebra of the eye is softened by ulceration or moisture: then cauterize the Palpebra with one cautery, like a lunar cautery.</start_of_turn
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two supercilii by a little of two cauteries in every part: and extend it from two times: and the length of every cautery should be according to the length of the supercilium: and do not bring your hand close to the cautery, but rather according to the quantity of what is to be cauterized of the third of the Palpebrae.</start_of_turn>
And this is the form of the cautery according to this method of lunar cautery.</start_of_turn
Method of cauterization of the Palpebra with the nails of the teeth that are turned inwards towards the eye.</start_of_turn Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn
There are two methods of cautery: either with fire or with burning medicine.</start_of_turn
And in the cautery with fire, command the patient to expel his hair before this, if there are any that move on it, until they are prolonged and equal.</start_of_turn If however they are pierced at the root of their hair: then hold the eyes shut with a piece of cloth, so that they do not move, until they heal.</start_of_turn
When they have healed and are equal, then place the head of the patient on your lap: then mark over the Palpebra of the eye with charcoal, in the shape of the leaf of the Myrtle: and let the beginning of the mark be close to the hair.</start_of_turn
Then place the soaked cushion in albumin or: on the mucous membrane of the eyelashes above the eye.
Then apply the cautery, which is shaped like this
Then cauterize over the shape, as you have indicated gradually in many wounds, until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, turns completely white
And the sign of the success of your work is: when the eyelashes of the eye recoil from the point of the wound and the hair is raised at the point of the wound.
Raise your hand then: and let go of him in three days.
Then place upon it a cushion with butter, until the pus is eradicated
Then care for it with unguent until it is healed
And if some hair should remain after an hour, and the eyelashes are softened: then apply the cautery once more to the same place as before
But if the hair is in the lower part: then cauterize it there, until they rise to their natural place: and make sure that they do not puncture the eye
In the same way as with the burning cautery, when using cautery with medicinal herbs.
Chapter XVIII
It is necessary for the patient to pluck out the hair, until they grow long and even
Make from a piece of linen a shape like a myrtle leaf.
Then take from soap the size of a bean, and from the heel of your hand take an inch or almost that: then mix these together with a little warmth, and do this with a gentle touch, so as not to freeze it
Then from the palm of your hand over the chart which you have made like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the pupil of one eye, or two eyes.
And place under the eye a sponge soaked in albumin: and the head of the patient is in your lap.</start_of_turn>
And place your finger on the sign of the physician, and press it lightly.</start_of_turn>
And you will move it whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine: for its bite is like fire.</start_of_turn>
While you have done this and found the bite, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger.</start_of_turn
When the bite has subsided, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.</start_of_turn
Consider then, if the pupil is raised, like that which is raised with contraction with fire, or with incision, it is well: and if not, then repeat the medicine over the place where the medicine does not stick, and does not cause harm, until your operation is complete and the eye is contracted.</start_of_turn>
Then place upon it a sponge with butter, until the edge of the wound is eradicated.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with ointment of diaphanicon, or something else, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary for you during the operation to take care that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye.</start_of_turn
For if the pupil becomes softened after a few days, and there is something of hair in the eye, then repeat the medicine over the place where the pupil is softened by the eye itself, as you did at the beginning.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself until you are healed.
This is the manner of the myrtle leaf.
Know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape
Therefore consider this: and do not conceal the uprightness of this art which is the study of this craft
Concerning the cauterization of the fistula of the tear duct.
Chapter XIX
When you have treated the fistula, when it is not cured by your treatment: then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method
Command the patient to place his head in your lap and hold his head between your hands like this, so that it does not move or shake with his head
Then place the soaked sponge in the white of the eye, or on the mucous membrane of the eyelashes above his eye: then ignite the Cauterium, which is in this shape.
Hold it concave, like the shape of a feather quill at one end, as it is with the Cauterium: and if you wish it to penetrate until the other end, and if you wish it to be above, do so with the attempt.
It is better to hold it concave for your work
Then place over the fistula the Cauterium which is ignited lukewarmly
And hold your hand close to the Cauterium from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not move or shake: and place the Cauterium on the fat of the eye, and burn it through
If therefore you proceed with the Cauterization from the beginning until the bone, it will be well.
If not: then repeat the Cauterization once or twice, if you tolerate it: and discharge it in three days.
Then place a compress with butter, and care for it with an unguent dressing, until it heals. If for forty days they do not heal: then place upon it a sharp corrosive medicine, until the bone is exposed: and then remove it according to what is written in its chapter
And there is another method of Cauterization of fistulas, which some of the former have said.
Direct it to the place of the fistula, and find it: then place in the fistula a thin needle, that is, a needle with a fine point, of which the shape is this
And mix in it the quantity of lead from a penny, and hold your hand with the needle firmly in place, and do not move the patient at all, so that it does not run, or that the liquefied lead should not reach his eye
And it is necessary that you place upon the eye of the patient a compress soaked in albumin or in water.
Lead therefore burns the place of the fistula, and heals it with a miraculous healing
When the fistula is healed, with what we have said of the Cauterization and the treatment, it is good
And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nose-opening passage, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what is written in its own place
¶ On the method of cauterizing of the lip-fissures.
Chapter XX.
Many wounds occur in the lip split, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these splits, when you have done what we said in the instruction on ailments, and the cure has not been effected, then burn a small cautery with this shape
And let the curvature of it be according to the thickness of the knife.
Then care for it with the cautery until it is healed
In the same way, cauterize in the fistula of the mouth.
Chapter XXI.
When swelling occurs at the root of the tooth, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus forms, and it ruptures: afterwards it is treated, pus runs, and a fistula is formed: then one must burn the cautery in this quantity, as much as is taken up in the fistula
Then insert the flame into the cavity of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the iron is consumed by the depth of it, and its extremity: do this once, or twice at most.
Then care for it afterwards, as we said concerning the cure until it is healed.
If it is cut away when healthy, and healed, it is good.
And if not, then it is necessary to remove the corrupted bone according to what comes to pass in its head
On the method of cauterizing in the Gingiues, and softening of the Dentibus.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the Gingiues, and softening of the Dentibus.
When softened by moisture, the Gingiues and teeth move, and the physician must take care with them as with colleagues, and must not cause injury: then place the patient's head in your lap
Then apply the cautery, whose form will appear afterwards, so that you place the Cautery over the tooth: and introduce the flame into it quickly: and hold your hand near the patient, until the patient feels the heat of the flame has reached the root of the tooth.
And lift your hand away: then repeat the Cautery a few times, as you wish.
Then let the patient rinse their mouth with salt water, and keep it for an hour: and then expel it.
The tooth will then be firm, and the Gingiues softened, and the corrupt moisture will dry up
When a toothache is severe, and the tooth is sensitive to cold, heat, or biting, and the pain persists, or is not relieved by other means, then take hold of the patient's head and open their mouth widely.
When the toothache is caused by cold, or by heat, or biting, and the pain does not subside with treatment by physicians: then apply the Cautery in two ways: either with butter or with fire
The butter must be taken from cows which have eaten well, and the Cautery must be placed on the tooth in a pan or crucible made of iron or stone
Then take hold of the tooth, and place the Cautery over the tip of the tooth
Then immerse the affected part in boiling butter: and place the part above the aching tooth quickly, and hold it there until it cools: then repeat the procedure several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
Or if desired, immerse wool or cotton in cold butter, and place it above the aching tooth: and place upon it a burning iron until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
The cauterization of it with fire is to be done, as in the case of a wound, so as to bring about the escape of air or iron. And let there be some bulk in its body, so that the fire may not penetrate too deeply into the bone of the infirm person.
Then let the Cauterium take its natural shape: and place it above the tooth: and hold your hand until the Cauterium cools down.
Repeat this several times, for the pain will disappear, or on the same day, or on another day
And it is necessary to press down upon the Cauterium so that the infirm person may suck his own butter from his bone, and keep it for an hour: then remove it.
This is the form of the Cauterium.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you wish, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the Canula.
In this way the cauterization is to be done in the teeth.
Chapter XXIII.
When the teeth are affected by phlegmas and by cold humors, and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to hasten their digestion: then cauterize the cavity, which is of this shape
Having two open extremities, like smoke emerging from Cauterium from the other limb: place the flame upon the latter and, if it does not suffice, continue until it reaches the depth of the cavity.
If the cavity is small: then place Cauterium according to the size of the cavity.</start_of_turn>
Then remove the flame after three days, and place upon it a pad soaked in butter, until the burn has subsided.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it with tooth unguent until the burn is healed.</start_of_turn
In the case of a wound of the rachis or constriction of the airway.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXV.</start_of_turn>
When the wind is moist upon the canal of the lungs, and especially when it is with the coldness of complexion, then it is necessary to expel the patient immediately with the physicians who are skilled in solution.</start_of_turn
Then burn in the night at the root of the guttur in a depressed place: and be careful, lest you should penetrate the gut with Cauterium, or in the skin, except for some of its substance.</start_of_turn
Then burn again with another Cauterium at the junction of the collar in the last rib: and let the Cauterium be closed according to the mode which went before.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with what has gone before until it is healed.</start_of_turn
In the case of carbuncles of the Lung and Cough.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXVI.</start_of_turn
When cough and pulmonary carbuncles are from cold humilities, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, and old cough: then burn with two Cauteriums above the nipple in depressed places, gentle, thick, and dark.</start_of_turn
And the cautery is done with another instrument in the middle of the chest between two nipples: and let the cautery be according to the shape which preceded.
And if you wish the cautery to be made by puncture with the cautery, which is called Punctum, whose shape preceded in the puncture of the ear: let there be punctures from thirty punctures up to almost as many
Then take care of that which preceded, until it is healed. And let the cautery be carried out with three branches: according to this shape
For the surrounding parts are relaxed when you do this with three Cauteria at once.
Thus the cautery is done in Titillico, in dislocation of the Humerus.
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn>
When the head of the adductor is dislocated by the cause of humidity, and does not return to its place in the hour following its dislocation, until it has become accustomed to the resumption of its place, then it must be displaced by a slight movement, which as we have testified above, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation immediately.</start_of_turn>
Then the patient is laid down on his back, or on the sound side.</start_of_turn>
Then lift the skin which is inside the Titillicum towards the upper parts with your left hand: and if the dislocation has gone inwards.</start_of_turn
Then take two forceps.</start_of_turn Whose shape is this.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the cautery will appear with four cauteries.</start_of_turn
When the cautery is performed with a cautery having three hairs, the figure of the cautery then consists of six cauteries: and the hairs are stretched according to their length.
This is the figure of the cautery which has three hairs.
And when one more is added in this way, there are eight cauteries in all
Then place upon the cautery the hairs bound together with salt.
Then make the patient steady and calm, so that the limb does not move at any time until it is comfortable
And if displacement has occurred to the upper parts, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it upon the shoulder with the cautery of the claw, or with many punctures.
For the joining is firm, and the moisture is evacuated: and the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterizing the stomach
Chapter XXVIII.
When in the stomach there are cold and many humilities, until you have expelled it from its composition, and multiplied the catarrh towards it, and applied various methods of treatment, and you do not confer: then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, extend his limbs, and move his hands
Then cauterize with three cauteries, with a cautery under the collar of the breast of the size of a single digit with the claw cautery, and two cauteries below from two sides of the single cautery, until you obtain the triangular figure of the cauteries.
And lengthen between each so that they do not join, when they make pus The depth of the burn should be equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
The burn should be square in shape without adding any [irregularities]: if you wish to burn in the middle of the stomach according to this shape, then the burn should be as big as this burn alone according to the circular shape of this
The burn is cauterized by pricking the area around it which has been scorched by the burn: and it is that the signs on the stomach should be in number according to the quantity of the burn. Then cauterize the burn itself with the burn of the puncture. Then care for the burn with care until it heals.
In the manner of cauterizing with cold:
So it is necessary to know how to cauterize with cold in order to preserve life and limb.
When it happens in the case of pain due to cold and humidity, or from a large wound, until it comes out naturally from its natural configuration, and the sick person is cured, as we have said, and has not progressed in this: then it is necessary to cover the sick person with his own bed and to make three burns with the cautery, according to this shape and this quantity on the lower part of the Ep, where the elbow of a man lies: and let there be space between every burn according to the width of a finger. And let the burn be according to the length of the body from the rectum: and do not press your hand too much with the burn
And let the quantity of the burn be such as to burn out the thickness of the skin, without adding the middle quantity: and let the sick person stand on his own feet.
If he is not able to stand, then let him lie down, who has extended his legs and raised his arms This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible that these cauteries are performed with the cautery of a knife, when there is skill and prudence in the art.
Beware lest you go too far with the cautery, and that you burn the whole body, because the body is thereby burned through to the intestines: for the skin there is thinness there, as you know well.</start_of_turn>
As regards the cautery of the after-effects of the liver.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXX.</start_of_turn
When this happens, and you wish to write, if that after-effect is in the flesh of the liver, or in its membrane: if it is in the flesh of the liver, it causes pain and great swelling without sharpness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with sharp pain which excites: and you must know that it fatigues the physicians of its care.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary that the patient lie on his belly over his cushion.</start_of_turn
Then the figure of the after-effect with the cautery: then you apply the cautery which is assimilated by the beam.</start_of_turn
And this is its form.</start_of_turn
And cauterize with one cautery until the whole skin is burned through, and passes to the intestines, until the whole body is healed: then care for the after-effects of the cautery until they are healed.</start_of_turn
And it is not fitting that these cauteries should be repeated except by him who has studied the art of medicine for a long time: and by whom these ailments have been accompanied by experiments: for he who has heard of such an operation will be bold.</start_of_turn
Better for her to depart from me.
Better for her to depart from me.
Better for her to depart from me.
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
Better for her to depart from me
And let the quantity of the cautery be between that of the breadth of a finger, or less.
And let the mode of the cautery be as we said concerning the cautery of the liver, equally.</start_of_turn>
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the sickly man lie supine above his back.</start_of_turn
And another mode of cautery is: as when you have two rings of cautery, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus: and elevate the skin which is over the spleen, where the left elbow of the sickly man lies: and elevate your hand as much as you elevate the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cautery drops according to the length of the body.</start_of_turn>
Then introduce two rings of fire slowly, until when the fire has penetrated the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cautery: there will remain four cauteries.</start_of_turn And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery which has three rings.</start_of_turn
Then take care of the cautery after you have finished with it to emit pus for many days: for this is better than any other remedy which has preceded it.</start_of_turn
And thus cauterize in Hydropisis.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXXIII.</start_of_turn>
The cautery does not fall in Hydropisis, except as required.</start_of_turn
When you are treating Hydropisis with the methods of treatment which we mentioned in the previous chapter, and the cure does not take hold, then you must cauterize the four corners of the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one between the ribs, and two below the shoulder-blades, and one in the chest, and one in the stomach: and let the quantity of the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.</start_of_turn
Then discharge the open cautery, so that it emits pus over a long time.
Then do not leave the patient without care after the cautery: for two intentions must be joined together, and it will speed up his healing with the help of God.
The form of the cautery which is used for the belly is like nails: according as it has gone before: and that which is used for the back is like olive-leaves according as it has gone before
Regarding the cautery of feet and limbs: Chapter XXXIV.
When swelling appears in the Hydrope, and the limb is filled with citrine urine: it is necessary to cauterize over the back of the foot between the ankle and the heel: and raise your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand again: and do not move it at all
The urine is citrine: and the cautery must be in this form.
Then make on each limb two cauteries at the ankle: and do the cautery with the tip of the cautery: and do the cautery according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below it at about the middle of the limb: and on every heel make two cauteries: and discharge the open cautery without care for a long time: so that some water may remain from it: then care for the limb as before
Regarding the cautery of the belly in solution Chapter V
When the belly is in a state of heat and moisture from cold and dampness, until it has become weak in holding and digesting, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cured by the methods of treatment and not by nature: and you must give the patient the power to tolerate the excessive heat of the cautery: then cauterize it with a large cautery over the stomach, as it is done for the cautery of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four cauteries around the navel, with a nail cautery under the skin: and a cautery over the omentum above the intestines, or two cauteries.
If the moisture has become excessive and the patient tolerates it, then burn the [affected area] with a cautery over the navel and over every ileum.  Perhaps two small cauteries may be added upon the stomach near the greater one.
It is a perfect cure whose method does not err
Method of cautery for hemorrhoids.
Chapter 6
When in the rectum are many old hemorrhoids, or one, and are from thick, cold, or moist humours, and are cured by that which we have said in the preceding discourse, and do not require cure: then burn three cauteries over the lower spin of the loin under the almond-shaped area triangularly, and a burn under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is hardened, and that his food does not digest, and that his face is pale from the moisture of the feces, then burn him over the stomach with a large cautery, as we have said before: and a burn over the liver and another over the spleen, with the cautery of the navel: and leave the cautery open for a while: then care for him until he is healed.
Method of cautery for the carbuncle after its excision
Chapter 7
When you excise the carbuncle, then burn a cautery which absorbs the heat.
Then introduce the burning cautery into the excised carbuncle: and move your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice If there are many carbuncles, then burn each one according to what we have said before.
Then care for it until it heals, when the moisture is removed from it.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery over the scales, this is the most perfect remedy.
Thus cauterize the fistula in the rectum.
Chapter XXXVIII.</start_of_turn>
When the patient does not obey the section and the work that we have mentioned in its place, and returns from it, perhaps it will heal with cautery.</start_of_turn>
When this happens to any fistula, and it becomes old, pus runs from it, and moistens the corruptions.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to explore it with a fine hook.</start_of_turn
Then learn the depth of its cavity with the hook.</start_of_turn
Then burn the cautery, which is like a ray.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the burning cautery into the fistula itself and the quantity in which the gut has entered.</start_of_turn And repeat the cautery over the gut until all the corrupt bodies are consumed, once, or twice, or three times, according to the necessity.</start_of_turn
And take care that there is no scorching of nerves, if they are there, or large veins: or if the fistula comes close to the mesentery or to the intestines, then take care to avoid these places.</start_of_turn
Do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think, for it is not penetrating.</start_of_turn
Then care for the place until it heals.</start_of_turn
If, however, the mark be sealed and the matter be severed from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then you know that it is already healed throughout.
If it is not severed from the matter, then you know that it is penetrating, or that there is a broken bone beneath the surface, or something like that: of which the memory will arise in its place.
In this way, concerning the cautering of the reins.
Chapter XXXIX.
When it happens in the reins that there is pain from cold or from great swelling, and it is diminished through this from that which makes the patient infirm, then it is necessary to cauterize it above the marrow above the kidneys, with cautery over every kidney along with the cautery of the claw, of which there is memory.
And perhaps we cauterize it again in the same cavity.
Because there will arise three lines.
Therefore there will be two last things in the treatment.
Concerning the cautering of the bladder.
Chapter XL When there is weakness in the bladder, and softening from gravel and moisture until the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the belly above the bladder, where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right side of the belly and from the left side of it: and let the length of that cautery be as much as the breadth of the thumb: and cauterize the lower back, or with two cauteries, if you like: and let that be according to what precedes the cautery of the claw
Concerning the cautering of the matrix Chapter 41.
When cold and moisture abound in the matrix and impede its impregnation, and its menstrual blood is corrupted, its period is delayed, and there is pain in its companion, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we mentioned in the cauterization of the uterus, and to cauterize over the lower part of the navel, or to make two cauterizations: and let the cauterization be blunt.
In the dislocation of the Ancham, cauterize three times around the navel, and over the lower part of the navel, or make two cauterizations: and let the cauterization be blunt.
Chapter 42.
When moisture of the mucous membrane flows down to the heel of the Ancham, and becomes the cause of its displacement from its place: and its sign is that the heel rests upon the instep, when they are compared together: and the place of dislocation is found in that hollow space.
It is therefore necessary to cauterize the diseased heel of the Ancham with a cautery similar to a circle: after having drawn a circle around the heel with the cautery, as it is returned: and let the heel fall into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the form which we mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present, then make three cauterizations with a large olive cautery: and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin of the whole
Then take care of it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
(The text continues with instructions on how to cauterize the Sciatica.) Chapter 43
When pain occurs in the testicles, and the cause is cold and moisture: the physician should treat the patient with something which we have mentioned previously, and not leave the treatment uncompleted; for it will become old. Then it is necessary to remove the patient from the thick humours with foul pills, or with artificial pills, and the like.
Then cauterize him.
And the manner of cauterization in these two ways: either with cautery with burning medicines, or with cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is in many ways
One of them is that you cauterize over the testicles three times with triangular cautery, according to this form.
And make the depth good, or bad
And there should be space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be oily
When, however, the cautery is done in the middle over the head of the testicles.
Then there are four cauteries
And if you cauterize in a circle, whose form precedes the cautery of dislocation of the testicles, one: so that it surrounds the whole testicles
And burn the hairiness of the whole skin
This is the manner of cautery in Sciatica, when the pain adheres to the testicles and does not extend until the cox and the thigh
If it extends until the cox and the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries over the cox, over the place where the patient feels pain there, and cauterize with your hand four fingers to the side of the base: and let the cautery be in a straight line The depth of the burn should be in accordance with the depth of the thickness of the skin.
If the patient complains that the pain extends up to the toes, then burn there where the pain originates, with a burn of three, four, or more points as needed.</start_of_turn>
If the pain is below the knee, burn only with a single burn.</start_of_turn
In all your burnings, take care not to reach the nerves or great arteries, nor to cause pain or contraction.</start_of_turn>
I also know of one who burnt a patient on the thigh, and the burn did not take hold, and the limb became swollen, until the foot was completely blown up, and the whole limb was perforated and corrupted: afterwards, the belly was resolved, and the wound was healed.</start_of_turn>
If there is pain in two parts together, burn both according to this manner.</start_of_turn
And some wise men say concerning the burn of an ache, that this is the way to burn it.</start_of_turn>
Make a mark like that of iron, whose diameter is half the palm: and let it be at a distance from its opening equal to the thickness of the knuckle of the finger, or less.</start_of_turn
And there should be a space between every mark equal to the length of the thumb node: and let the marks be open from two sides: and let their height be like a knot, or two knots: and make a handle of iron well adapted to the marks.</start_of_turn
This is its form.</start_of_turn
Then it is ignited in fire until it turns red, and it throws sparks: then it is placed upon the bandage covering the sick person on the side of the healthy person.
It is cauterized three times with round cautery irons in one vessel
Then leave it for three days.
Then plaster with butter: and leave the wound open for many days.
Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says: We rarely use this kind of cautery because of its harsh appearance: and because few people endure it
But in truth, from the good cautery instruments it is useful to those who can endure it, and it is found to be useful in its place.</start_of_turn>
The cautery is useful with physicians who are accustomed to surgery, as when you make two incisions in the arm, in which the radial artery comes out of the bone, or with iron, the length of the edge is two nodes, or as if by itself.</start_of_turn>
And there should be space between the two incisions equal to the thickness of a finger, and there should be an opening above and below: and that they should enclose the nerve, following this shape.</start_of_turn
Then place it upon the bandage covering the sick person on the side of the healthy person.</start_of_turn
And press your hand heavily upon the bandage.</start_of_turn
Then pour between two circles of lukewarm water, which is warmed with fire slightly, and keep it for the quantity of an hour: and the patient will tolerate the pain of the cautery, and even the pain of the instrument, for he finds the pain of the cautery to be like that of fire until the pain subsides.</start_of_turn
Then raise your hand with the instrument and bathe the entire area with warm water and sweet water: then leave it for three days.
And place butter over it, until the black spot of the wound has vanished: then leave it for a few days, and pus will run out of it
This is the last remedy.
Then care for it with unguents until it is healed.
If the pain extends up to the hip or the thigh: make for it a basin containing water, as you did in the area
This is the manner of warm water: and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Take alkali, and unburnt lime of both, and take a portion of each and put them into a new vessel, of which the lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity of the radius: and put under the bottom of the vessel another vessel filled with water: and throw over alkali and lime from sweet water, which submerges both through a finger: and when you have pressed them with your hand with a good compression: and leave the vessel until the acute water has descended from the bottom of the treated vessel.
Then gather up the whole water, and throw over it another lime: and leave it, until it recovers
These are indeed strong and acute things which are administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the remainder of the limbs.
Because it does the work of the fire itself
And from the physicians, who cauterize the area, even like testicles, and mastic resin, and chalk with soap, thus that both are mixed together.
Galenus also reports that a certain man from ancient times received treatment for pain in his groin and sciatica: and he praised his modesty.
He also says that he did not deem it necessary for any other treatment, and that he was healed with one bath alone, because he himself perhaps suffered from a painful bath and emerged from it healed.</start_of_turn> It is like taking from the proverb of the green man: if it is not to be found green, take the dry, recommend: and do it often with some fat, and put it on the groin, or the thigh, or the hip: and bind it, and leave it for the space of three hours, or for as long as the patient feels the pain diminishing.</start_of_turn>
Then put it into the bath.</start_of_turn>
When the body is softened by the heat of the bath, put it into the bath.</start_of_turn
For the pain will subside and he will be healed.</start_of_turn
And you know that it is not proper to use any cautery with these remedies except after the evacuation of the body.</start_of_turn
And Dioscorides says that when the buttocks of a goat are cauterized with regard to the sciatic bone, it brings about a cautery of the second kind.</start_of_turn
Take wool, soak it in old oil, and put it on the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and the heel, and is nearer to the heel.</start_of_turn
Then take the dry buttocks of a goat, burn them in the fire, until they are charcoal.</start_of_turn
Then put it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished.</start_of_turn
Then do it again.
Then do it again until the sensation returns above the middle, and the pain rests.
This is the method of cauterization called 'cauterium Vaccinum'.
Concerning the cauterization of back pain.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 44.</start_of_turn>
When there is pain in the back from many causes, such as from a wound, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, or in similar cases, from the infusion of cold and moist material: and cauterization is not useless, except for one kind only, which is done by the infusion of cold material.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the patient with foetid pills, and things of a similar kind, to make three lines on the back where the pain is, according to the width of the patient's palm, after having marked with the cautery every five cauteries, or as many as the patient's tolerance allows of its kind: and then make the cauterization with the pointed cautery.</start_of_turn
And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with the middle cautery, according to this form.</start_of_turn
Concerning the method of cauterization in the armpit.</start_of_turn
Chapter 45.</start_of_turn
This pain often occurs in young children.</start_of_turn
Its sign in children is: when there is a stricture in the armpit during elevation and movement, and swelling: and you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and the nodes of the back, which begin to swell above the others.</start_of_turn
When you have done that, and when you wish to do that, then cauterize it with the cautery that is in the shape of a circle according to this form.
Take the cautery and grasp it over the entire area of the sponge equally: and if you wish to cauterize the circumference of the sponge with the cautery, make two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Then take care of the place, until it is healed as we have said.
And be cautious, lest you administer the cautery to a prominence, which causes spasm of the nerve.
As for cauterizing in Podagra and for joined pains. Chapter XLVI.
When the pains of the joints are from cold humors which flow upon every limb of the body, then when these pains happen in the feet, it is customary among doctors to call that Podagra
When it is cured by cold causes of Podagra with methods of treatment, and the pains are not removed, then the cautery removes them
And it is necessary to cauterize around the joints of the feet after the evacuation of many cauteries: and let the cautery be of Olive Oil
Whose is this shape?
And if you do not wish to puncture the sole of the foot, then make it with the cautery of a point.
When the pains rise up to the knees, or reach the other joints, and many such things happen, then cauterize over every knee with three cauteries, or from every side with four, with this same cautery of Clauili If, however, several of these are necessary, then cauterize them. Do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather keep the thickness of the skin at a distance.
If, however, pain arises to the knee and back: then apply what we have said of the cautery in its chapter
If the pain is only in the hands: then prick around the edges of the wound, as two lines are twisted together
If, however, the pain remains in the fingers: then prick throughout, over every nodule and over the palm of the hand
If, however, pain arises after a few days to the cubits or arms: then cauterize both from every side
And do not weaken the patient by excessive use of the cautery, but by the recovery of medicines.
For if good treatment is done and phlegm is evacuated, healing will come with the help of God through this cautery.
In the event of a rupture...
Chapter XLVII.</start_of_turn>
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or bladder has descended close to the testicles: then it is necessary to discharge the contents of the bowels on that day
And let him be cleansed with soft things, so that the stool may descend from its belly
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and command him to hold his breath until the bladder or intestine comes out, or until it is seen
Then draw it out with your fingers, and sign with the cautery under the rupture over the bone of the hip, with a sign like that which has its extremity similar to the middle of the circle towards the upper parts of the body
Then the cautery is ignited, its form being like this until it turns white, and it throws sparks.
Then the intestine is reduced, or the liver to its own concavity.
Then the minister places his hand over the place [of the wound], so that the intestine does not escape: and you have opened between the crura of the patient, and put under it powder, and another servant over the crura, and another over the belly which holds the hand.
Then the cautery is placed over the very sign, your hand with the cautery being held straight up
And hold it there until you reach the bone: or repeat it again with the same, if you have not reached the bone in the first place until the bone itself
And observe cautiously the exit of the intestine in the hour of your cautery, lest you burn it, and it escapes through that over the patient or the wound, or maliciousness great
And you know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation will be in vain.
And it is necessary that the cautery be fine for infants, according to their measure
Then take care of the rest of the unguents, until they are healed.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days, until the wound is healed.
And it is necessary that you give the patient food during the time of his cure, which will soften his belly: that the intestine does not escape from the wound and be evacuated
Then when you wish to remove the cautery after forty days, then administer the ligature of the center made, and keep it for another forty days.
When one adheres to this regimen, complete healing is achieved.
When, however, ruptures happen in the remainder of the belly, and are just beginning, and you wish them not to grow, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let it be so that what is burned away from that moment be like a third of it
Then care for the rest, as we have said: and do not add to it
And some people say: cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this form
When it is signed with a burn, and a line is drawn which passes through the width at the upper side of the rupture, and a second line is drawn downwards. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery claw
But the first cautery is easier and better In the case of pains caused by a fall, or a blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When something happens in some limb by a fall, or a blow, and the pain persists for a long time, and does not yield to treatment with doctors: then it is necessary to cauterize with a Puncti cautery
And the cautery of every limb must be done according to the size of it, and its proportion, and its flexibility, and its toughness, and the position of torsion, and the pain from it
If, therefore, the patient is healed by the first cautery, it is well.
If not: then repeat the process with a second cautery.</start_of_turn>
For in the habit of these pains, it is necessary to change from one part to another that approaches them.</start_of_turn>
Therefore it is necessary to follow the cautery with other things until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
(The text continues with instructions on treating leprosy using cautery.)</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLVIX.</start_of_turn>
Leprosy, however, is sometimes treated with the greatest cautery.</start_of_turn
And especially those species of leprosy which arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: in such cases the physician must carefully consider the cautery itself.</start_of_turn
If, however, leprosy is not readily eliminated by the first cautery, and if it persists, and does not yield: and the disease spreads over the whole face: then repeat the cautery five times over: one in the middle of the head, and one below at the front near the hair's end, and two over the two horns, and one behind the nape of the neck.</start_of_turn
And finally hold your hand with the cautery close by, until you make an imprint in the bone; thus the cortex will be loosened and the thick vapor will be driven out. And burn the spleen also with the cautery, as before.</start_of_turn
If, however, leprosy has become sparse over the patient, and is clearly visible: then it is necessary to burn with these cauteries which we mentioned in the head, and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on the two cheeks, and two on the thyroid cartilage, and six on the spinal column, and one large one on the hairless parts of the buttock and one above the testicles: and two on the shoulders: that is, one on each shoulder, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the upper arms, and two on the forearms, and two on the chest. Burn the whole of the joints of the hands and feet, and the soles of the feet.</start_of_turn
And take care of the nerves that are above the heel, so that you do not burn them. When you burn with the cautery above the bones of the heel, and also above the bones of the stomach, and also above the spleen.
And you know that the more you add the cautery, the more damage you cause, and the more suffering you produce.
And you know that the sick man does not feel pain in the cautery, just as he does not feel it in his health: because his body is already stupefied.
And it is necessary that the cautery should be of a suitable size, and of a degree of fineness corresponding to the parts and the connections: according to what preceded from the kinds of instruments
The head of L.
When some part is swollen and is being treated with doctors, and oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then burn that part which is swollen with the cautery, according to the measure of the size of the part, or its degree of fineness
And let your cautery not penetrate too deeply into the thickness of the skin
Then take care of it with ointment, until he is healed
And when you burn something of a swelling, which happens to the hand and the foot, on the bones of the back near the exit of the nerves which move that limb: and you will remove the swelling.
But do not be proud of this, except for one who is learned in the anatomy of the limbs, and the coming out of the nerves which move the body
How to cauterize in Albaras.
How to cauterize in Albaras.
When Albaras becomes hardened and no longer yields to medical treatment: then cauterize over the area with a deep burn, according to the amount of thickness of the skin, until the white is removed and its color is changed.
Then care for it with barley meal and lentils with oil of rose, and rue leaves, and columbine blood and hyacinth blood: a little of each: mix these together and smear over the wound, and bind firmly in place until healed
How to cauterize in Cancer
How to cauterize in Cancer
When Cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular burn around its circumference as it shrinks.
Wise men however say, that the last should be burned in the middle
I do not see that: for I fear that it will ulcerate: and I have seen this happen many times. It is better to burn around it with a circle, as we said: or with multiple burns. How to cauterize in Adubelati
How to cauterize in Adubelati
When anyone has Adubelati and they are delayed in maturity, or because of excess flesh, or because of age's infirmity, when he is weak from lack of blood, or from time, and wishes to hasten the maturity of the Adubelati: then cauterize around its circumference with many small burns puncturing
Then discharge him.
For indeed he will recover with the passage of time.
If, however, you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then apply the cautery, for this is its form.
And place it in the middle of the Adubelat, until it pierces the skin: and let the cautery follow the diseased part, so that it may alleviate the flow of pus
Then care for it until it is healed
Thus cauterize in a soft swelling Chapter 14.
A swelling is not without corruption in a movable limb, and corrupts it: thus as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you wish to cauterize a swelling which tolerates it with fire, then apply the cautery many times, with small and large claws, according as it will be convenient in the place where the swelling is located
Then cauterize it from all sides until you have eradicated the whole corruption, and let nothing remain of it except the healthy tissue Then discharge him in three days, and place over the cauterized place powdered sulphur with oil, until all the eschar has disappeared and all the corruption is gone.
Then care for it with nourishing unguents of flesh.
If therefore after three days the flesh has recovered its natural health, without corruption, this is good
And if not: then repeat the cautery over that which remains of the corrupted parts
The swelling is treated when it is acute with acute medicine.
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery.
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery.
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery. The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery.
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery
The fire itself arises at the place of the cautery
Then let go of it, for the abscess will vanish with its roots.
Do so with one hand after the other, until you have gone over all that is in the body from the hand that is lower
Then take care of the wound after it has vanished, when that which has been produced by the abscess from the roots is gone.
In this way, cauterize in Tremore.
Chapter 66.</start_of_turn>
When it happens to anyone to have a tremor from cold in a nerve, or from a quartan fever, or from something else: then it is necessary to cauterize it four times with the cautery, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize, and in its belly cauterize, and over its stomach cauterize.</start_of_turn>
The tremor will cease with the cautery of oil, and the health of the cold will be restored.</start_of_turn> In this way, cauterize Albathir.</start_of_turn
Chapter 67.</start_of_turn
When there are expelled from the body in the body of Albathir pus, that is, bubbles, which are caused by corrupted thick materials.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore at first when they appear to cauterize over every head of the bubbles with fine cautery with a twig of myrtles, whose extremity is inflamed with fire.</start_of_turn
Or with the root of long aristolochia.</start_of_turn
Or with lenticular cautery.</start_of_turn And when they have been cauterized enough, at the beginning of their expulsion in this way: and they do not increase: and the superfluous is ruptured making it go away, and it is healed from the remnants.</start_of_turn
It is proper to perform this after evacuation with a phlebotomy.
In the flow of blood from the artery to the wound.
Chapter 58.</start_of_turn> Many things happen with the flow of blood from the artery, which has been cut at the wound, which happens outside, or at the incision of the after-pulse, or by cautery of the limb, and the like: and this makes it difficult to close it off.</start_of_turn>
When this happens to anyone of them, then do you properly grasp the hand of the patient at the opening of the artery, and place your finger over it: and tighten it much, until blood is obstructed under your finger, and does not come out of it again.</start_of_turn Then put on the olive oil cautery with a small number, and many in number: and blow on them, until they are ignited somewhat.</start_of_turn
Then take from these one, or two, or three, according to the wound and the place where the artery is broken, and place the cautery on the wound itself: and when you have moved your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.</start_of_turn
And if it comes out when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from the ones that are prepared in the fire.</start_of_turn Do not stop doing this until the blood is stopped.</start_of_turn
Be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and do not leave the flame too close to the sick person.</start_of_turn And know this, that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to close it off: especially when the artery is large, except by means of four fingers.
Or by cauterization, as we have already mentioned.</start_of_turn>
Or by excision, when it is not excised.</start_of_turn> For when it is excised, its extremities contract and the blood is closed off.</start_of_turn
For when it is excised, its extremities contract and the blood is closed off.</start_of_turn Or it is bound with strong ligature.</start_of_turn>
Or instruments are placed over it having the property of closing the blood, and are bound with fine constriction.</start_of_turn>
Whoever performs an excision with ligature and tightening with a bandage, or by burning, or by other means, does not always succeed in closing the blood vessel, except rarely.</start_of_turn
If, however, this happens to anyone who is without a physician, neither medicine: then he should take hold of the tip of the index finger and put it over the opening of the vessel, as we have already said, and tighten it until the blood from the higher part of the wound is squeezed out over the artery.</start_of_turn
And do not move the finger, but keep it there with cold water or ice always, until the blood solidifies and contracts, and the blood is closed off.</start_of_turn And in the meantime consider whether cauterization or medicine is needed.</start_of_turn
End of First Part.</start_of_turn
Book of Surgery by Albucasis, Part II.</start_of_turn> ¶ On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and similar cases.</start_of_turn
I say in the First Chapter that every ailment which finds agreement with fire cautery and burning medicine, and the occasions of its use, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauteries. And I shall treat of the chapters from the head down to the foot in order.
I shall proceed in this chapter in the same way: as I shall answer the seeker's query concerning this matter. Before I begin, it is necessary to inform you, dear son, that what is in this chapter concerning cautery is taken from the first chapter on cautery itself.
Therefore, caution is necessary in this work, for in the operation which is treated of in this chapter, much blood often flows out, with the result that there is often fear and trembling, and falls in many of these cases.
And I warn you, do not be afraid of this which is stated here, for when it is used in this art like men in the art of healing the sick, it is not like the diseases of men.
For there is that which is kindled with its ailment, and is light upon it: because of its intensity which comes from the disease and the length of its action
And because of the fear which signifies death.
And it is from this that the physician gives his name to his patient, and tells him that he will cure him, hoping for his health, and the ailment is mischievous. It is not right therefore that you should consent to that which comes to you from him who comes to you from this place, whose manner is like that
Take heed, for greater care is needed than cupiditas and rapacity.
Do not presume to be above all things, without first acquiring certain knowledge, which will verify for you the succession of successful things
And use in the treatment of all female patients, the prognostication and indication of what is suitable for their health.
For in this lies your aid to acquiring fame and glory, and the memory and praise.
May God inspire you, son, your intellect, and do not take away from you direction and inspiration: for it is in his hand
And I indeed ordained this chapter distinguishing by chapters, according as it followed in the chapter of Burning, from the navel to the feet: that you may be relieved of what you ask for and of what you need.
Of the treatment of water which accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
You know that this infirmity often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without gentleness
And sometimes also from an occult cause which is not known
I have not seen this ailment in anyone except children: and in all whom I have seen it, it has been cured by means of a surgical operation in them.
And I have seen among children whose head was filled with water, and the head would swell every day, until it was unable to sit on itself because of the size of its head: and the humidity increased until it died
And such humidity may either gather between the skin and bone: or gather under the bone upon the sponge.
And in that case, if there is humidity between the skin and bone, and the swelling is slight, it is necessary to make an opening in the middle of the head, about the size of two knots, until the humidity is drained out.
This is the shape of the sponge.
If there is much humidity and the swelling is great, then two incisions should be made, according to this form
If the humidity is under the bone, and its sign is that the edges of the head are open from all sides: and the water is squeezed out when you press your hand inwards, and it is not hidden: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision, extract all the humidity
And then bandage it outside with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then make the ligament whole, and care for the wound with tension and dressing
And do not make the head tense with equality.
And give the patient little food of dry things, until the limb is comfortable, and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the swelling is great, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is in the occiput more, or in the chin, or in the right, or in the left
Go up therefore with the incision where you find the swelling and the collection of water: and cut that as much as you can
Observe diligently, lest you cut the artery, and the flow of blood increases, and the patient dies from that flow along with the discharge of moisture.
Observe carefully, lest you cut the artery, and the flow of blood increases, and the patient dies from that flow along with the discharge of moisture.
Observe carefully, lest you cut the artery, and the flow of blood increases, and the patient dies from that flow along with the discharge of moisture.
When any swelling occurs at the eyes or the chest, and the matter is old, and no cure is to be had from medical treatment: then the last cure is the incision of those two arteries.
It is necessary therefore when you wish to make an incision, that the patient turns his head away from you
Then friction the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear
Then tighten the patient's neck with whatever cloth you have
Then consider where the pulse is to be found
And the places where both of them are located are those which are behind the ears depressed: and they are rarely hidden, except in some men
And signs with excision above each: and cut each with a spatula as sharp as each, incision proceeding to the bone: and do this for the width of the head
And if you wish, introduce the spatula under the artery, and cut upwards with the incision
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers
For when an artery is cut, blood flows out with the pulsation, which jumps inside frequently
If however the artery does not appear to the eye, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers
Then signs with the cautery, and find until the bone.
And that which should be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less is emitted from it All that according to the quantity which you see from the patient's vomit and the filling of his artery.
Then consider for the pulse.
Then if something remains from the cautery until the bone, then prick that, so that it does not cause a cold abscess: then bind the pulse with strips of linen cloth
Then care for it with ointment, until it heals
About the extraction of arteries, which are in time
Chapter 3
When it happens to a man that he has an old headache, or catarrh of the acute kind because of acrid humilities and heat in the lacerations of the times, or old soda, urine, and similar things: and it is medicated with the methods of the medical art, and it does not suffice: then we are experts in these ailments of the arteries of the times, or their cauterization, as we say.
And the way of the operation in the extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair that is in the times, and cuts to the apparent artery in the time.
It itself is shown to you from his pulse, and rarely hides except in a few men, or the coldness of the summer.
And if it is hidden from you, then bind the patient's head with whatever cloth you have: then scrape the place with rough cloth
Or vaporize the place with warm water, until his pulse appears visibly Then take the sponge, which was previously shaped like a bowl. Then cleanse the skin with the sponge, until you reach the artery.
Then throw the ligature into the loop, and draw it upwards, until you have drawn it from the skin, and make the ligature hang away from the tunic which are under it from every side
If the artery is small: then bind it with the end of a thread.
Then cut from it the second part according to the quantity of which the ends lengthen, and tighten, and there will be no flow of blood.
For if it is not cut, and if it is not tied off, the blood will not ascend completely Then wash from the blood six ounces, up to three ounces
If the artery is large: then it is necessary that you tie the artery in two places with a strong thread of silk: or with hemp cord, so that it does not swell before the wound has consolidated, and that there is a flow of blood
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures
Do this in an hour, or after an hour And if you wish, burn the artery with a cautery until the bone, with a surgical knife: until the ends of it have been cut through, and it is stable in the place of the work done
And it is better to do the work if the patient has a fever, or if the complexion is hot
For the cautery is from an alkali, which causes drying out
Therefore it is better to apply [treatment].
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries, that the hollow place be filled up again with the old material: and that pieces of wool be placed over the wound, centered upon the fact.
And after closing, care should be taken with dry medicines which cause the flesh to grow, and with ligatures, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
Should blood flow from the artery meanwhile during the operation, then it is necessary to cauterize it or to plug the hole with wool: and keep your hand steady until the bleeding has ceased.</start_of_turn>
If nothing of these things is present, then place over the place your finger, until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn
And bind up the place with cold water, until the pain has ceased, and tie according as seems necessary.</start_of_turn
And concerning that which is easier and more convenient for the extraction of the artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with a cautery which has two blades: and that the sharpness of the two blades be equal to an almond.</start_of_turn>
For truly, the sharpness of two blades is much less.</start_of_turn
Because if they are sharp, like two blades, they approach both with cold: and they do not tear the flesh with speed.</start_of_turn
When there is somewhat of thickness in this, it is held in the hand with the heat of fire, and the flesh is quickly severed: in this way this work is better than any other, and easier, and more convenient.</start_of_turn
And let the space which is between the two blades be as much as the thickness of a finger, after you have marked two points with the cautery: and lay the two cauteries under the flesh until they reach the bone, and pierce the vein in two places: so that the length which is between the extremities of the latter may be elongated.</start_of_turn
They do not solidify with this deep cauterization.
This is the form of deep cauterization.
Take care that the acute tears do not run from the eyes
Chapter III
When the tears are thick and run from the eyes, which are above the outer part of the head: then do not apply any medical treatment with the doctors, and let the face of the patient become red, and he will feel a walking in front of him, like the walking of ants: and his eyes will be swollen, wet, as though they were corroded by the tears: and his eyelashes will be reddened from the heat of the tears. Then the old people say in the treatment of these that this is the operation, and they call it Ense
It is also, as a principal treatment for the patient, to shave off the hair on his face
Then make three equal incisions on the forehead, according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and one incision be at the distance of the nose from the middle of the forehead, and the second at the distance of the movement of the lacerations, and the third from the other side: and cauterize from the arteries which are in the two sides. And extend your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let the space of the incision be as much as the thickness of three fingers together. And let there be a sponge or dry cloth prepared, with which to soak up the blood.
Then introduce the cautery of two acute extremities, whose following is the shape.
From the incision which is from the temporal side, up to the second incision: and scrape with it the whole skin which is between the two incisions, with soot, which is above the bone Then do it also from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then extract the sponge and introduce another instrument, which is called the acute knife, from one side slightly blunt, not acute from the other side.</start_of_turn>
This is its form.</start_of_turn>
And place its sharp side towards the attached meat and its blunt side towards the bone: and press it in until it reaches the middle incision: and cut until it appears from the skin.
Then do it also from the middle incision to the second incision.</start_of_turn>
And when the bleeding has ceased, express the place from the coagulated blood clots.</start_of_turn Then place on all the incisions a bandage of old cloth, and put over those soaked sponges in wine, and oil, or vinegar.</start_of_turn
And see that no swelling forms.</start_of_turn
And on the third day dissolve the ligament and give a large infusion with warm water.</start_of_turn
Then care for the wound from the basic ointment, and for the rest that needs healing: until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Regarding the treatment of acute tears and catarrh of the eyes from the inside of the head.</start_of_turn>
(End of text)</start_of_turn
When these acute, severe, and painful catarrh occur: and you see the eyes extended, parched, and languid: and the eyelids ulcerated, and the hair falling out from the eyelashes, and a sharp pain in the depths of the head, with vomiting following: then take from these causes, for those matters and the catarrh do not come from other things, except from many tears.</start_of_turn
The best treatment in the case is this.
The best treatment is to shave the patient's face.
Then make a single incision in the middle of the face, or on the other side along the width, and commence the incision from the left ear to the right ear: and let the incision reach the bone: and stretch out your hand from the lacerations of the ears, which move during chewing: until the bone is detected: and stop bleeding with a sponge.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with a piece of cotton wool, or with strips of linen.
Then bind up above with threads: and soak the threads with wine and oil, so that it does not cause a thick scab to form
And when you have finished with this, and you see that the scab is about to disappear: then it is necessary to rub the bone, until new flesh begins to grow in it
Then care for the wound with regular draining which makes new flesh grow: as if you take from wheat flour two parts, and from barley four parts: and prepare from these an ointment, and give it to the wound at the time of new flesh growth in these wounds.
And concerning the care of the wound in gold (The provided text does not include the translation of the remaining sections, so I am unable to provide the translation of the entire paragraph.) All things that fall into gold are of four kinds: or mineral stones, or like stones, such as iron, and gold: or they are plants, such as beans, and peas: or they are fluid substances, such as water, and vinegar, and blood, and like things: or any animal.
When anything falls into gold that is not taken from the earth, nor grows in gold, it exposes the gold alone: if you pour oil on the stone, then distill from the oil something of the essence of the oil, or of blood-vessels.
Then perform the extraction [of the tooth] and make the gum firm with conditment, and apply ointment to the nostrils opposite the gum, after you have placed around the tooth a piece of lead or wool, and extended the ear upwards.
Many thanks to you for your assistance.
If it does not come out, then perform the extraction with gutta [Resin] which is of subtle form: which is like this in shape
If it comes out with the gutta, that is good.
And if not, then perform the extraction with a blunt needle of small size. If it still does not come out by that, then make a hole in the air and insert the end of the needle into the tooth socket very much, and apply ointment which is around the needle with fat, so that there is no air remaining except for the needle: then extract with your forceps with great force Many thanks to you for your assistance.
If it still does not come out in this way: then take hold of it from the heels, or from the viscous stuff, that is, prepared gluten with which birds are captured, with which you must encircle the tooth, and put it in the middle of the root: then insert it into the tooth socket with ease, after you have dried the ear from moisture
If it still does not come out with all that, then prepare to split it, before the abscess becomes cold, or spasm.
And the method of splitting is like that of phlebotomy for an infirm person in the first place in the cheek: and extract from the blood according to the measure of its virtue
Then make the patient sit between your hands, and support the ear upwards, and find the split in the root of the tooth opposite the pulp of the tooth in a depressed place: and let the split be in the shape of a crescent moon, until you reach the bone: then remove it with that which is possible from the instruments.
Then seal the wound immediately from the moment you notice it, and care for it until it heals.
If anything falling from one’s foot comes out from a grain or seed which has grown and become swollen: then manage the extraction of it.
If it does not obey you concerning the extraction, then take a thin needle, subtle, of such a form.
And manage with it the excision of that kind of grain which falls into the foot, and do not make it bleed, when you think that the said grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have placed upon it a large dressing: then extract it with needles, or with fingers that are subtle, or with suction, as we have said, for the extraction of it alleviates it.
However, in water which enters the foot, it is necessary for the patient to perform a sternutation immediately: and then fill the foot with a little bit of old cloth: and lie upon that foot which is in the water.
If it comes out through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, tight, soft, and heat them with fire somewhat, and let the patient put one of his fingers into the ear: and pour upon his foot one of those parts from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the foot.
Do not cease doing this with the stone and the stone, until all the water has come out.
And when the water comes out like that, take from the fire or from a single barley, and put its extremity once into the foot: and increase the other extremity with fire, until it is consumed most of it
Then repeat the process with another [substance], and make it much more abundant, until all the water has drained out: and extract it with a cannula as before in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that is within the body, such as a flea or anything similar, care for it as I have said in the instructions.</start_of_turn>
But if it is a large body, which appears to the sense: then manage its extraction with forceps and hooks: and thus it is easier for all who hold it.</start_of_turn>
When you have cured it with what we have said in the instructions, and in the treatise on distillations, and if your care does not suffice: then you must expose the wound to the air.</start_of_turn>
If anything appears there from the worms, then extract it with forceps, or with fine hooks.</start_of_turn
If nothing appears there, then insert a cannula whose form is like this, with a narrow lower part and a wide upper part: and introduce the lower extremity into the wound according to the capacity of the infirm patient: then withdraw it with that strong suction.</start_of_turn>
Make it much more abundant, until all the worms have drained out.</start_of_turn
If they do not obey you in draining, then bandage the circumference of the cannula with wool, as I have said in the stone.</start_of_turn
If they do not drain with what we have said: then manage distillations which the ancient ones are experts in for the interruption of worms: and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.</start_of_turn
And let your effusion be like that which you pour out with oil and medicines into the wound with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.</start_of_turn>
As with liquids, so also with solid objects, a stricture below, in which is a small hole, and a large space above.
Thus also what is driving force in the curvature of the tube lies outside rather than inside.</start_of_turn>
And if you wish, take a radius and wrap it around the end of the tube with a bit of packing: then pour oil, or gum, or whatever you like of these medicines into the tube: and let the tube rest in the air: then introduce the radius with the packing above and press down on it with your hand in a moderate way until oil is driven into the curvature of the ear, and the patient feels it inside: and what is poured into the air will be warmed with a little fire: and beware that nothing is distilled in the cold that could be harmful: for medicines do not tolerate this.</start_of_turn>
On the care of the accidental injury of the ear.</start_of_turn>
Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
Whenever some infants emerge from the breasts of their mothers without having been perforated.</start_of_turn
And sometimes also with some people there is a tearing of the hair in the ear from a wound, or from a natural growth in it.</start_of_turn
And this tearing of hair sometimes occurs in the deep cavity of the ear, as does not often happen: and sometimes it occurs on the outside of the ear a little, and this often happens.</start_of_turn
The one that occurs in the deep part of the ear, and which does not comprehend the aspect, is in many situations difficult to heal.</start_of_turn
And in that which happens with the use of oil, the patient must place the ear of the patient in the sun and instill there: then if the visible tearing of hair appears, open the ear with a fine sponge, the form of which is like this, that is to say, it has a small broad base and a pointed tip: and the rest of the sponge should be soft on both sides: so as not to harm the ear.</start_of_turn
If there is an boil rising from the flesh in the ear: then hold one with a fine clamp, and cut it with ease until the whole flesh is removed.
If the boil is deep in the ear: then grasp a fine needle, thread, and burn with fire: then withdraw it into the flesh of the ear.
If you sense a boil which causes a deaf person pain in his hearing, try to open it with ease: and take care, lest you damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a bandage according to the extent of the opening which you have made in the cerumen: keep it for a few days, until you are certain that the wound has healed
Or grasp a bandage, and soak it in rosewater, and grind over it some powdered ochre, and use it on the wound.
If you see the ear is already pus-filled: then it is necessary to remove the bandage, and put on another bandage which you will moisten with rosewater, until the swelling subsides: then care for it until it is healed
If blood flows: then plunge a sponge, or pack it in cold water, and put it on the ear: and use the rest of the treatment which expels the blood described in the treatise on distillation.
(The text continues discussing other ailments and their treatments.)
(The section title is missing from the provided text.) These are the Althelis which happen in the eyes when they are wet and are dry.
It is necessary therefore to hold them with tweezers or with a clamp: or cut them with scissors from their roots
Then place upon the wound a piece of cheese.
If blood flows from the wound, then cauterize it with a fine needle cautery.
Better is to cauterize after the incision
For many things return when something remains of their roots
And when cauterized with fire, they burn those roots, and they do not return.
About the care of the great palpebrae of the eye
Chapter IX
Many things happen in the eyelids something that Crandinus thickens in its firmness, and because of this it is called great: and it is an aggregation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation is like this, as you will consider, if the great one proceeds from the eyelid and moves over all parts, and its resolution is easy
Find therefore upon the edge a width of the fissure
Then scrape it off from all around with ease, until it comes away easily
Then suspend it with a thread, and cut it off.</start_of_turn>
If however it is not prepared for cutting off, except when you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it harms the sick in some way
If the incision is great: then gather it together with a suture: and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And if it is small, it will not cause you any harm from it.</start_of_turn
The ointment restores itself and nourishes the flesh.
If it is large, it is inclined downwards towards the inner parts of the ear; then reverse the eyelids, and suspend the large one with a thread: do not attempt to make an incision, and press upon it from all sides.
It does not harm to lengthen the eyelid by incision
Then wash out the eye after the incision of the large one, with salt water: and care for the place with it, until the patient is healed
On the care of the eyelids.
Chapter X.
The swelling which is generated in the upper eyelid is called Axirnath: and it mostly happens in children: and it weighs down the eyes, and causes the appearance of black spots in the mornings, and they are not able to see the light of the sun, because the tears run down their faces always, and over their eyes they sleep, and their eyelids are always wet under their brows, which is why the swelling of Axirnath appears in the eye, and when you press on it with your fingers, you feel Axirnath between your fingers.
And the method for treating it is to put the patient's head in your lap
Then take a piece of linen, and prepare in it some alum, and make from it a circle according to the quantity which contains the Axirnath from all sides
Then put it on the eye, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle
Then find in the middle of it some humidity with a sponge dipped in water, and do not make a wound greater than that which is done in phlebotomy at a depth.
Either the whole skin should be stripped off, until the Axirnath comes out through a wound following the shape of a white rough scab.
Either the whole skin must be stripped off until the Axirnath comes out through a wound following the shape of a white rough scab.
Or if the Axirnath does not appear at the beginning of the wound, a little should be added to the wound with ease until the Axirnath comes out.
Then extract it as we have said.
Then soak the bandages in vinegar and water, and put them on the place, and bind it up with wool.
And from men there are some who smear salt on it, and put it in the bottom of the wound, so that the rest which remains from that humidity will liquefy.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, there should happen in the place of the bad blood a soft swelling, then care for it with soothing plasters until it heals.
Concerning the treatment of the eye, that is, when the palpebra is softened, the eye will become red as it should not.
Chapter 11.
When nails grow in the eyelashes beyond the normal course under the natural hairs, and are numerous: then they harm the eye, and cause diseases such as excessive tears, softening of the eyelids, and pus, until this becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And the treatment of the eye is according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire.
Or with acute medicine, as is prescribed in the chapter on cautery.
Or Ataxmir is cured by incision and stitching.</start_of_turn>
Or by needles, as I shall say.</start_of_turn>
You must place the head of the patient in your lap.</start_of_turn
Then grasp the eyelash of the eye with your left hand.</start_of_turn
If it turns, that is good.</start_of_turn
And if not: introduce the needle into the eye at the place where the lash hair arises from the lower part of the eyelid, and pass the needle through with the thread, and let it rest close to the hair itself, that is, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hair is born: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and join the needle to the radio.</start_of_turn
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hair a mark of the greater lachrymal gland up to the lesser lachrymal gland.</start_of_turn
Then draw out the thread, and put under the eyelid a small piece of cotton or gauze: then mark on the eyelid with the cautery, which shall be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.</start_of_turn
It is true that it must be done according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for as it is varied in men.</start_of_turn
From this it is evident that some people require a greater incision of the eyelid, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid.</start_of_turn Then when the mark is found on two lines which you have signed, and you have reached from the greater lachrymal gland to the lesser lachrymal gland, and there is one wound close to the natural hair, as is the thickness of a radius.</start_of_turn
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape the whole area clean.</start_of_turn> Then join together the two lips with a suture, with a needle and a fine thread: and drain the blood, and make fast what is surplus from the thread above the two superciliums, with some painful things if you wish to make it so: and if not, do not worry.</start_of_turn>
Then remove the suture and the thread after three days, or four: then care for it.</start_of_turn And if you wish, leave out the wound without a suture, and care for it with that which dries and contracts it.</start_of_turn
For the eyelids swell up at the sealing of the wound and its gathering: but the future is better.</start_of_turn
Thus Ataxmir teaches us to treat this.</start_of_turn
But indeed the patient is anxious about the infirmity, and it comes from a good operation, and not from that.</start_of_turn
And another way in Ataxmir also: and it is that the sign on the eyelid should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have told.</start_of_turn
Then lift the eyelid with three hooks separated or gathered, according to the shape of this sign, and then cut away what is surplus with small scissors, according to this shape, with the equality of the incision.</start_of_turn
If, however, it is not possible to hold the hook, and it does not equal this: then grasp the point where the thread is and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another thread near the greater lacrimal gland, and another thread near the smaller lacrimal gland: and join the threads between your fingers with equality.</start_of_turn
Then raise your hand equally high: and raise the skin above that which is marked with the cubit, as we have said.
Then join together two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If therefore a swelling should happen at your incision, or a tear: stop that swelling with sponges soaked in urine, or like these, from settled urine.</start_of_turn>
And when the eyelashes also happen, as they twist their hair.</start_of_turn
About care for the wound with dogs.</start_of_turn
And it is, that you cover the eyelashes, and split the tear that is from within, according as I have said.</start_of_turn
Then make two needles, or two thin sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelashes, and the width of them be less than the width of the pupil: and you will pass through the extremities at the two parts where you have the thread.</start_of_turn
Then join together each one with a little with the superfluous part of the eyelash, and string two needles from both parts firmly, and let go of it every few days.</start_of_turn The skin therefore being thus tightly closed will die, and become black, and putrefy, until it falls away by itself.</start_of_turn
If therefore it is delayed, then cut through it with shears.</start_of_turn
Then care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
When the bone is firmly set, elevate the eyelids: and do not puncture the hair.
This is the shape of two needles, which you make according to this figure and the quantity in length and breadth.
Regarding the elevation of hairs that puncture in the eye with the needle
Chapter XII
The operation in this case is that you take a fine needle and introduce it into the silk thread, which is lenient. Then you join the ends of it and knot both knots with a fine knot: and let the length of the thread be equal to one palm
Then make another fine knot on the Alinxotati thread under this one in a short space, and knot the ends of it if you wish.
Then you place the patient's head in your hand, and let it be close to the sole so that the operation is declared: because the operation is slight, or a moment.
Then introduce the needle with the Alinxotati at the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you have extracted the natural hair from above.
Then draw out the hair until above the Alinxotati: and introduce the needle into the Alinxotati with one, or two, or three, not more
Then draw your hand away with it, until the hair comes out with the Alinxotati in the eyelid with the natural hair
If, however, you pull out the Alinxotati, and the hair does not come out with it: pull out the Alinxotati to the lower part, with the thread which you made in it, until the Alinxotati comes out through the upper hole, and you see the eye: then pull out the Alinxotati and the thread, and close the eye: and leave it closed for two days, or three, until the hair has adhered to its place and has grown over the wound.<start-of-turn>
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from natural hair, and elevate with it: or dismiss it until it has elongated over space, and then elevate it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from natural hair, and elevate with it: or dismiss it until it has elongated over space, and then elevate it.
If the hair is short, then either associate with it a long hair from natural hair, and elevate with it: or dismiss it until it has elongated over space, and then elevate it.
When this happens to the eye, it is called the Leporina.
This happening of the eye is either natural or accidental
Accidental is thus caused by the consolidation of the wound, or the section, or the cautery, and things like these
And the way of operating in these is that you find the consolidation and separate its lips, and put between them what is between them from the thread, and bind them, until it is healed
And it does not befitting, that you use in its cure those things which excite and constrict: for if you do this, the Alxatrata will be worse than before: rather use in these those things which soften, such as barley chaff: and embrocate with water in which be dissolved alum, seed of flax: and ointment of beeswax, which is liquefied with some oil: and apply with it the thread, and care with it
And your store of remedies is, that you prepare with all your ingenuity, that it does not solidify, according to the form which was in the beginning
And this operation which we mentioned, is not except some rectification of the Alxatrata, that it does not return to the form which was throughout Of the care of the Alxatrata which happens in the lower eyelid, and is the wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left
Chapter 123.
This is the lower part of the wound which is truly called the Alxatrati.
It is natural and is an accident
It is caused by a wound, or a fissure, or a burn, or similar things
And the way to treat it is to take hold of the hook, which has a double thread, and pass it through the flesh from the left tear to the right tear, until the thread comes out at both ends of the flesh
And then extend the flesh upwards with the hook, and cut the flesh with a broad spatula
If the edges of the wound return to their normal position as required, it is good.
And if not, take the thread and pass it through the wound, and tighten it with the pliers: and make two holes at the inner angles of the eye, and let the two ends of the two holes emerge from the two angles: until when they gather they make the shape of the letter "G".
And then remove that piece of flesh as much as the breadth of the acute lower part of the eye, from that which follows the eye
And then reunite the separated parts: sew them with a thread and a needle.
And then care for the eye as we have said, with soothing medicines and salves, until it heals
And if the Alxatrati comes from a fissure, or a suture, or a burn: then you must find a flat wound under the eyelashes, even as before
Then separate between the two lips with a ligature, as we have said.
And thus the sum of the discourse concerning the care of Alxatratus is that when he is above or below, that is, when he is to be treated in this operation, it is done in the manner of Alxatratus himself
For she herself is of many various forms: and a prudent artificer prepares the limb in whatever way is possible for him, until he directs that it should take the natural form, or one very like it, and the patient himself, according as it suits him from the operation and the instruments in various positions
As to the adhesion of the palpebrae oculi with the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
Chapter 15.</start_of_turn>
When this happens to many people, it is like the consolidation of the upper eyelid with the white of the eye, and it prevents it from doing its natural operations.
It is necessary therefore to introduce the end of the radius under the eyelid, and to raise it up: or to extend it with a hook: then to divide the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be as acute as the incision of the spatula, but rather blunt and parallel: so that it does not irritate the patient during the operation, and that it should be able to move the spatula and the eye without difficulty. And let the incision be like that which you would make to scratch that adhesion with ease, until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adhesion is completely healed
Then pour water with salt into the eye, while gently wiping away the blood: or distill into it from a sieve made from barley flour dissolved in water.</start_of_turn>
Then separate between the lip and the eye with a ligature of silk thread: and place upon the eye a wool pad soaked in alum: and on the third day remove the sieve and the solids, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
On the incision of the nail and the elevation of the meat of the tear-ducts.
On the incision of the nail and the elevation of the meat of the tear-ducts.
You know that the nail is according to two modes. Or it is fleshy: and it is like soft wax, thin.
Or it is not fleshy, like frozen white moisture: which, when it touches iron, or you try to grasp it with a hook, it breaks off and does not remain in it.
And both kinds do not begin except from the greater tear-duct, until it has gradually become softened, until it covers the useful part, and excludes light and the movement of the eye
And the manner of working in its incision is: as you place your diseased head in your lap.
Then open its eyes, and elevate its eyelid with your hand
Then collect the nail with a hook of few turns, and extend it upwards.
Then take a needle, and penetrate it through the hair from the hair of the horse, and sow, or ligate: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and penetrate it with the needle, and ligate the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards: and remove the surrounding hair with the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were grooming the nail until its extremity.
Then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear-duct with fine scissors, or with small forceps: and let go of the natural meat of the tear-duct, so that it does not suffer from the incision of its course of tears
When an ungulay is extended with a single thread: or with a piece of wire, as we have said.
Then it is to be pared with a blunt spatula of fine texture, whose form is as follows.
Beware lest you tear the delicate membrane of the cornea, and cause a perforation of the pupil.
Then, after the incision, pour some powdered salt, or mix it from barley flour, and leave it in the eye until tomorrow.
And care for the eye until it has healed. If the nail is neither nerve nor bone, and does not secrete pus into the wound, then it must be treated in many ways with the help of physicians, and will heal as I have mentioned before
If you wish to make an incision in the eye, then open the eye of the patient, and grasp the membrane under a fine, soft spatula, of slight degree of sharpness, according to this form
And remove the nail from above with care and precision
If you see that it is becoming soft and broken, and that it has burst in the ratio, then do not instill anything into the eye from this hour until tomorrow. Mix together barley flour, or red ochre, or salt, and instill in the eye
Then repeat the operation until it is completely finished
Except that in the eye there be a thick yellow pus: then indeed do remove it, and care for the pus until it has healed Then repeat the operation with care until it has healed
The swelling of the caruncular membrane of the lacrimal gland, if it hinders the eye at night, is to be suspended with a single thread, and to cut away a part of it: and do not make the incision at the end, lest you cause the discharge of the tears to be delayed
Then stay still in the tear of the red [eye], or make it from the iris, until it heals. Regarding the incision of the pupil, and the native tissue of the eye.
Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
Sometimes in the eyes of men there is a red piece of flesh composed or superposed, which covers the pupil, approaches or tightens over the eyelashes, and perhaps turns the eyelashes outwards: and it is assimilated like the dust of roses.</start_of_turn
And also in this case there is an operation, as you put your hand in my belly.</start_of_turn
Then open his eyes, and collect all that flesh with hooks which are convenient for this: and hold that with a force one, or grasp it.</start_of_turn
Then cut the flesh at first, until it is finished with the knife.</start_of_turn
And burn from the eye, so that you do not damage it in the operation: and let your incision be like that which we mentioned in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which you collect fat, according as will come after this chapter.</start_of_turn
When your incision is finished, and you have moved all the pupil, then put the eye out of salt mixed with flour: or distill into it red powder, and like this from physicians who concoct medicines: and put over the eye a bandage of white wool or linen: to protect from the heat.</start_of_turn>
And if anything remains of the pupil, and you dominate the hot blood, and wait for the heat of the swelling: then remove the eye, and care for it as it settles the swelling.</start_of_turn
Then proceed further over the said with the operation until it is healed.
Proceed in like manner with the flesh added which has happened in the eye of this kind.
It is necessary to know, that other cures of the eye must be excluded both natural and accidental, operating with iron: and do not insert your hand into any of these operations, until you know that the limb can tolerate that operation.
Of collection of the fat from the eye.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 18.</start_of_turn> Fat is a red wax which covers the eye, and hinders the operation of the water: and weakens the eye with the length of days.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you should first consider, if the eye in which the fat is, is strong, and is not suffering from any other ailment except for the fat: then collect the fat from it.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to prevent the patient from looking downwards.</start_of_turn
Then suspend those waxes with one or two fingers, according to your prudence: and let the needle be thin as half the diameter, or two fingers together in one body, according to this form.</start_of_turn
Then collect with fine forceps those waxes with attention, and wash away the blood an hour after an hour, until you know that those waxes have been removed from the eye, and have dissolved: and beware lest you damage the eye with the extremities of the forceps.</start_of_turn
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation, so that you do not cause any unnecessary damage.</start_of_turn
When you have finished, then distill into the eye a yellowish or reddish [substance]: so that its sharpness may eat away what remains of the swelling.
When if it is not possible to collect all of it in that hour, then plaster the eye with this, which will soothe the eye pain: and leave it for a few days until the pain subsides: and keep it away from heat: and repeat over it in the same way until it is healed.
This is the form of the forceps.
On the reduction of the swelling of the nose.
Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn>
Physicians call the swelling of the nose a Fistula, which they treat with cautery or with acute medicine burning, according to what is appropriate for its nature.</start_of_turn>
If it does not heal, then there is no wisdom in that: except that you find pus at the opening of its cavity, and you remove all the moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.</start_of_turn
When the bone is thus exposed, and the wound is corrupted, or blackened, then smear it with an instrument which has this form.</start_of_turn
This is called the Aspiration of the head.</start_of_turn
Make it from iron, and let its head be rounded like an egg, which is pierced with the point of a lime, or with an awl, or with a fine puncture: and place it over the corrupted part of the bone.</start_of_turn Then draw it out between your fingers, and your hand close to you, until you know that that corruption is gone: and do this several times.</start_of_turn
Then draw it out between your fingers, and your hand close to you, until you know that that corruption is gone: and do this several times.</start_of_turn Then restore the place with physicians skilled in stiptic substances.
If, however, the place is consolidated and a swelling arises in it, and the flow of the healthy substance is cut off: and it remains for forty days, and does not return, and does not break down, and does not happen in it any chance: then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if not, then it is not in it the faculty, except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to grasp the second bone with iron, or with acute medicine: and when it is grasped, then take hold of the prominence according to this fashion, so that the iron be at its extremity, triangular: and the wood of it be extended until the extremity, like water.</start_of_turn
Then place that upon the bone itself: and let it be close to the tear duct: and extend your hand from the eye a little.</start_of_turn
Then withdraw your hand with the prominence, until it pierces the bone, and you feel it is inflamed: by this you will know that the flux has escaped from it, when you hold your hand over your nose.</start_of_turn
Therefore, then restore the place with physicians skilled in stiptic substances, as I have taught you.</start_of_turn>
When, however, a swelling arises in the carpus and the place is hardened: then the substance which flowed outwards returns to the nose: thus it is easier for it to lie over the inflamed.</start_of_turn
¶ On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.</start_of_turn> Chapter XX.</start_of_turn
When the eye is swollen with its entirety, and does not happen in any degree of swelling or diminution: then it is necessary to dissolve the inflammation: then perform phlebotomy on it: afterwards apply moist compresses to the eye without causing a scar, but with suction.</start_of_turn
Then apply over the eye a liniment made from acacia, aloe, olive oil, and ochre.
Then bind over the eye a patch with many little seeds
And as for the seeds, take fine wool, many, and double every thread over four: make many of them: then put one upon another, according to the quantity required for the eye: then bind over them with a strong piece of cloth.
And do this repeatedly with gentle suction without cutting
Then remove the swelling and keep the eye closed tightly day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, then it must be tightly bound: then remove the ligament after a day and a night, as we have said
If thus you see the eye again red, then it is good: and if not, then repeat the patch, the seeds, and the binding, and the swelling, until it is healed
Of incision of the edge of the eye
Chapter 21.
When disruption occurs in the membrane of the eye, then it will protrude and proceed outside the eyelids like a grain of sand, and will be deformed like a man because of that, and you must cut it out: then the operation in this is as we have said, and it is that you introduce the needle into the root of the eye from the lower part to the upper part
And introduce another needle into which there is a double thread from the lachrymal part, and make it penetrate: and withdraw the first needle according to its position.
Then pierce the place of the double thread, and bind with it the edge of the eye around the needle: and bind it tightly
Then extract the thorn, and place above the eye a wool plug soaked in alum: and let it go, until the thread comes out with you.
Then care for the eye with this, which soothes it, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when the thread is drawn out from all around with a circle of cloth, until the eye regains its great prominence.</start_of_turn>
Then perforate with a fine needle which will reach the depth of the eye, and smear moist albumin, and let the eye go down, and immediately insert: then draw it out, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And for the care of the eye.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn
This ailment which is called Alcomnati, is not other than health which collects in the eye, like water which descends, and is not itself.</start_of_turn
And the way of dealing with it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly.</start_of_turn
Then grasp his head with your hands from both sides, and move it, until you see health go up to the lower parts of your eyes.</start_of_turn
Then stabilize it, and do not let it go down, and open your eyes: and he will see as he saw before: and if it does not go down below, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
If however you do not prepare the descent of health with that which we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands.</start_of_turn Then grasp a fine needle, and find with it above the cornical membrane a part of the conjunctiva which is close to the cornea in a circle, until health comes out.</start_of_turn
When the patient departs, then let warm water be distilled into the eye which has been mixed with honey: or water in which barley chaff has been boiled with honey. Then let it be treated with the remaining treatment until the patient is healed.
Concerning the treatment of water which descends into the eye, or for a cataract.
This section is missing from the provided text.
We have said concerning the species of water in the making of an eye-wash, and which is suitable for the perforation which is declared and shown, then take that which is appropriate according to the health.
Then let the patient sit with his hands square between yours, opposite the light, near the cheek: and bind his healthy eye, and draw it tightly: then take the outer corner of his eye with your right hand, if the eye which has the water in it is the left: or take the outer corner of his eye with your left hand, if the eye which has the water in it is the right
Then take your right hand with the almond, if the eye is left: or your left hand with the almond, if the eye is right
Then place the edge of the almond close to the edge of the pupil along the apparent white of the eye: then push the almond with force: and you will know that the almond has reached the bottom of the eye when you feel that the almond has gone past the edge of the pupil
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the almond be to the depth, the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black: and this is the rim of the eye
You will see this in the pupil of the eye by the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the almond until it reaches the place where the water is
Then immediately the lower part after the upper part.
If water therefore descends immediately, then the sick person will immediately suffer over that which he has opened up, and the swelling will be in his eye.
Then rest a little while.
If water therefore descends, then draw out the second part except for what is coming out with the swelling.
When it has become firm, and does not ascend: then draw out the swelling easily: and you will gradually turn your hand back Then dissolve on water some of the clear salt of the gem: and wash with it when the eye is closed
Then put on the whole eye a cushion, or wool infused with rose oil, and alum: and bind with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those who are with us at this time, put on over it a rough cloth with alum and egg white.
And if the swelling does not obey you to enter the eye because of its hardness, because it is from a man whose eye is hard and cold: then it is necessary that you take a sponge, which is called Alberid, which has this form
Wash therefore with it the eye itself joined together, and do not move your hand to the bottom: and do not do anything except make the swelling lie in a low place
Then introduce the swelling, as we have said before
And in order to complete your work, prepare the sick person a resting place made in the center, in which he will sleep on his back in a dark room: and prevent him from all movements, and from coughing: and give him food for his nourishment: and do not move his head to the right or to the left at all.
The ligament should remain in its usual position until the third day. Then loosen it in the dark chamber and try its action: and make it useful for something.
Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
It should not be forced at the time of care, nor immediately after incision: indeed it should be delayed, because water ascends quickly through the open wound
If however a black swelling occurs: then it is necessary to loosen the eye before the seventh day: and correct it when the swelling has subsided: then the action of the medicine will remain, and put over its face a quantity of the medicine which was previously placed in the dark chamber
Then depart from the dark chamber gradually, and return to your home.
You know that in the hospital a disciple is not excused from seeing the doctor several times: then indeed he will learn about the operation.
And indeed it came to pass that some of those from Alayrach reported that in Alayrach there was a perforation of the bladder, through which water was flowing out
Truly no one in our land has ever done this: neither have I read of it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is a new thing.
These are the forms of the spirits from the madhouse, as they linger over those who ignore them
Let them be of air of their own: and their extremities with the same triangular shape, and acute extremities
The shapes of madmen.
On the care of the newly born in the nose
Chapter XXVIIV.
When various meats are added to the nose of a Carnes, from which there is something that is absorbed by many scorpions' feet: from this there is a cancerous tumor, a stone, and a fleshy color: from this there is what is a soft tumor, not fleshy colored.
In this, therefore, which is soft, not fraudulent, neither cancerous, should be made to sit between your hands opposite the solid part, and open its nose, and expel the tongue into those meats: then draw them outwards, and cut away what you have seen with a fine and sharp knife from one side, until you know that the whole flesh has been removed
What if anything remains of that from whose excision is impossible: then cut that away with a fine instrument with ease, until nothing remains of it
If, however, blood dominates you, or a thick clot adheres: then oppose it with that which is suitable: or with malignant clots, then cauterize it until the blood is separated, and remove all the meats.
Then spit into the nose after the incision of the flesh, and water, or liquid.
If, however, the nose opens, and there proceeds from it moisture up to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
If, however, moisture does not penetrate, according to what is suitable, then you know that the flesh has been born inside the upper bones of the nose, which does not come out with the incision of the instrument.
Then, therefore, you must introduce a thread with some thickness into which there are many knots: and put between every knot as much as a digit, or less: and the infirm person will grasp, so that he may send one end of the thread into the nose with a hook, or in whatever way is possible for him to do so after he has made it similar to an ass: and he will draw out the foul matter until it reaches the caulking, and it will go out through the mouth.
Many, indeed, do like him in schools, this Attomi boy: it is an easy matter for him who wishes.
Then place two extremities of the boy, one which projects beyond the nose, and the other which remains in the nose
Then grasp the flesh with the minister and close the wound with knots that are in the limb. Do this until you know that the flesh is again with the knots of the limb.
Then draw out the thread: and put it in the nose after you have washed away the blood with vinegar which you have drunk in Egyptian unguent: do this for three days, or more, until the unguent has eaten away all that remains of the flesh.
Then put at the end of the thing in the nose a lead cannula for a few days, until it heals.
If, however, you think that further treatment is required, do so by all means
For the head of the wound must be made with that with which the oils are distilled, and other medicines in the nose, do this of silver, or of brass: and make its passage like that of the horn of a snail, opened like a conch: and the opening of it like that of a lentil
And if you wish to make a closed cannula, like a tube
And the cannula for the instrument for making the head of the wound must be full, detected: which has a handle at its back, with which you grasp it, when you heat it in oil, or which you wish to take from succus, and from fluid blood
This is the form of the instrument. Concerning the care of the eye of the nose
Chapter XXV.
Many are born at the extremity of the nose Thelul, and grow large, and increase with the days until the wound becomes like its aspect.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterise it at the beginning of its appearance, and to drain all of it.</start_of_turn>
Then place above it either a cautery or a burning medicine which is at its place.</start_of_turn>
If, however, its incision is slow to take effect while it grows large, then consider whether it is a stone, hard, of the colour of pitch, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: for it is cancerous.</start_of_turn>
Many are born from the blood which flows from the wound, and from it comes great malice over the light which it had.</start_of_turn>
If indeed the wound is soft to the touch, not of the colour of pitch, and the blood which flows from it is possible to make an incision throughout, then evacuate the sick person and make the incision without fear, without pain: and care for the place with that which covers and binds it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
Of the suture of the nose, and the lip, and the ear.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXVI.</start_of_turn>
You know that when a solution of continuity is made in one of these cartilages, it is little useful in this operation, except in some people.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore when anything is done to it, that you consider whether there is a wound which runs with its blood: and then join together the edges of the wound with a suture: then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
And if the solution of continuity of the lip has been separated and is made whole once more: then it is necessary to scour every part from its outer surface until it bleeds.</start_of_turn
Then join two lips together with a suture, draw them tight, and sprinkle above them the blood of a dragon, and olibanum that has been triturated: and place above the sprinkles a fragment of diafinicon plaster, and some other solid plaster: and leave the ligation for two days, or three.
Then remove it, and change the medicine: and leave it until the stitches dissolve by themselves. Then care for it with unguents, until it heals.
The way of stitching is that you join together the solution of continuity, or with a lump, as we have narrated in the gut suture: or join the solution with the thread, as you have been told.
Regarding the extraction of lip nodes.
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn> Many people have these things happen to them in the insides of their lips, behind their teeth, things that are like hard grains of herbs: and some of them are small, and some are large.</start_of_turn>
Therefore it is necessary to cover the lips, and find on every node of them, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it away from all sides.</start_of_turn
Then put on the place of the incision a piece of burnt alum, until the blood has clotted.</start_of_turn
Then bandage it with vinegar, and care for the place with it, in which there is styptic action, until the wound has healed.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the incision of the natural flesh over the gums.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn Many things are born on the gums, flesh that the ancients call abuluss.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you suspend the bowels with a single hook: either grasp them with forceps, and cut them at their root, and let the bowels go, or let the blood flow out.
Then place over the place of injury a piece of charcoal or other absorbent powder, and dry it out.
If the flesh returns after the treatment, for it does not often return, then cut through it again, and burn it: for it will not return after being burned.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the wisdom of using a tooth with a iron.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXIX.</start_of_turn>
When these things gather on the surfaces of the teeth from the inside and outside, and between the gums, the enamel becomes rough, black, and sometimes decays, and cavities appear, and the teeth become yellow until the corruption reaches the gum, and cavities form in the teeth from this.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you make the infirm man sit between your hands, and hold his head in your lap, and move the tongue and the tooth, in which you see the enamel, and things like sand: until something remains from that, and do the same with black material, and yellowing, and cavities, and other things until the matter is cleansed.</start_of_turn
If therefore that which is in the matter from the beginning of the wisdom is taken away, it is good: and if not, then repeat the wisdom day by day, second, and third, until the study is finally completed in that which you wish.</start_of_turn
And you know that teeth need various razors of different forms, many figures: according to the way you prepare the operation.</start_of_turn
These forms of razors are at your disposal.
These forms of razors are ready at your disposal.
Chapter XXX
It is necessary to extract the tooth from its pain with every skill, and to follow this up by eradicating it
There is nothing that can replace its extraction when it is eradicated: for it is a sublime substance: except when there is no excuse for its eradication, then it is necessary to order the sick man to eradicate it himself, so that it is confirmed, and certified to you that the toothache has ceased
Many times the sick man feels the pain and thinks that it is in the tooth and eradicates it: but the pain does not cease until the diseased tooth is eradicated itself
We do not go about this from the performance of phlebotomies
When it has been certified to you that the toothache itself is present, then it is necessary to make incisions around the tooth with sponges, in which there is some art, until the gums are separated from every part: then move the tooth with your fingers, or with fine forceps at first slowly, until you have severed it
Then place the forceps in a good location and grasp the head of the patient between your knees: which you have held firmly, so that it does not move: then draw out the tooth according to its direction, so that you do not break it
If it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and introduce them under it from every part with ease, and make an attempt to move it, as you did at first
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill the hole with gauze: and tie it with a fine thread, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction with the forceps
It is necessary that the skilled surgeon go round about the circumference of the wound many times with the scalpel.
Beware lest you break the thing, and leave some of it, and return above the diseased part from the greatest pain which is in it at first
Take heed, lest you do that which the unskilled do, like phlebotomists in their pride, and overconfidence concerning its extermination, beyond what we have said.
Many indeed do this with great men in their sickness, of whom some are difficult to break, and remain with all their roots, or that they extract the whole with some of the jaw-bones: as we have heard from many people Then it is to be joined after its extermination with wine, or with vinegar and salt If blood flows from the place (for many indeed do so), then there is something from the vessel there, and put a pledget there: and if not, cauterize it if it does not suffice to clot the blood
The forceps which are used to grasp the tooth in the first place are of subtle form, their handles are long, their thumbs are short, their bodies are thick, so that they do not double up when pressure is put on them when they are pressed against the tooth: they are like the claws of large men, until when they are bound to the tooth, they do not bite themselves, neither do they double up: their thumb is short, and they are made of iron or of lead that has been hollowed out in the middle, their handles are straight, and in their extremities are teeth, some of which are contained in others, and they bind the constriction loosely, firmly
And when the extremities are like the beak of a bird called a ciconia, and are strong constrictions.
On the eradication of wisdom teeth, and the extraction of fractured bones of the mandible.
On the eradication of wisdom teeth, and the extraction of fractured bones of the mandible.
When remains remain after the eradication of a tooth which has fractured something, then it is necessary to place butter on the place of the fracture for one or two days, until the place is softened: then introduce into the wound, or forceps: the extremities of which absorb the origin of the pain which is called ciconia.
The form of these forceps is as follows.
The extremities of these forceps are made like a file, or like an awl
If therefore these forceps do not suffice for the extraction with these teeth, then it is necessary to place the forceps above the root, and to remove the whole flesh, and to introduce the small hook, which is called Palanca, whose form is as follows
Its short handle and large head: and it is not bent, so that it does not break
If therefore the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to pull with other instruments whose form is like these
The first triangular-shaped extremity, in which there is some thickness
The second triangular-shaped extremity is thin
It is also used with this instrument which has two branches, whose form is as follows And with other instruments and materials which are necessary in the case of teeth.
It is also necessary to grasp with this instrument which absorbs a large stone, of this form, triangular-shaped extremity twisted, in which there is some thickness, so that it does not break: and it is not bent
And know this, that the instruments for teeth are many: and like all other instruments, they do not work alike. And a skilled artificer, experienced in his art, discovers for himself the appropriate instrument for each operation and each ailment.
For indeed, from the ailments for which the ancients did not speak of an instrument, because of the variety of their kinds.
If, however, the jawbone be fractured from the mandible, or from any other bone of the mouth, or putrefy: then he must consider concerning himself with the thing itself in its place with that which is suitable for it among the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and to handle it with his hands, whose form is like this
So be it of some measure that it may be stretched out, or held with it against the bone, and not flee and wander, until the bone is extracted: and restore the place with the physicians who are accustomed to this.
If, however, there is a little pus in the bone, then remove the pus from it, and care for it, until it is healed.
Concerning the closure of teeth which are prominent over others.
Chapter 2.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural course, an ulcer forms by that shape: and especially when it happens in women and girls, since it is in their gums
Because if a tooth has been born after another tooth, and is not placed, or if it is possible to suture it, or to file it down: then extract it: and if it is joined to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is like this
It is like a small face, made of iron, with a sharp edge at the end
And let your incision be such as that which you make on many days, because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not damage any other tooth.
If however the exposed edge of the lamina be imminent: then file that with a file of the same shape as that
And let the whole of the handle of the file be minor than the points of the nails, in such manner as a file is to an awl: so that the tooth may be ground away gradually in many days with ease, without damaging the tooth, and falling out: then afterwards smooth it, at the end sharpen it with some rasps.
And if there be a tooth from which a part has broken off, and which is causing pain of the tongue: then it is necessary to file it also until the asperity of that fracture has been removed, and it has been made even: and it must be flattened, and does not cause pain, neither does it corrupt speech
Of the reposition of a tooth with files.
Chapter 33.
When it happens that the front teeth are fractured and displaced by percussion, or in a case: and it is not possible to hold them together because of their discomfort: then it is necessary to support them with gold wire: for silver is too soft, and it putrefies after a few days: but gold never changes.
And let the wire be of medium thickness and breadth according to the quantity that it can grasp between the teeth.
And the form of the reposition is that you take hold of the wire, and pass its double between two healthy teeth: then you shall weave it with two extremities of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you have reached the healthy tooth of the other side
Then again, repeat the manipulation until you reach the part from which you commenced: and bind your hand with skill and wisdom until it ceases to move forward: and let your constriction be such as that it binds the thread at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip away.
Then again, cut away the excess thread with scissors: and gather up both together, and bind them together with the thumb: and hide them between the sound tooth and the moved tooth, so that it does not irritate the tongue: then let go of the tension when it remains.
If, however, it dissolves or breaks, bind it with another thread, and hold it in such a way as to keep it firm throughout the whole time
This is the form of teeth, and the figure of the rotation of two sound teeth and two moved teeth, like those of water
And when it happens that one tooth, or two after a fall and swelling in their places, returns as we have said, and remains: this does not happen except by a skillful, wise, and experienced artist.
And when some piece of bone or flesh has become loose: and it becomes like a tooth in shape, and is placed in its place, from which the tooth has been loosened and bound: it remains, and serves for a long time
Of the incision of the ligament which happens under the tongue, and which hinders speech
Chapter XXXIV.
If there be in that any hardness and swelling, and if that be from consolidation of the wound: then thrust into that the hook, and find that by its breadth, until you cut the ligament, and it shall be dissolved.
But if blood flow be restored, then place over the place a piece of torn sponge. If blood spurts, then burn the place with a sponge cautery, which is suitable for that: then care for the place with the rest of the treatment, until it be healed On the extraction of a ranula which is under the tongue.
Chapter 5.
When there occurs under the tongue a swelling which assimilates the small ranula, preventing the tongue from its natural operation: and perhaps it increases so much, that it fills the mouth.
If therefore you see that it is of a yellow or black color, hard, which does not cause the patient any pain: then do not touch it, because it is cancer
And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture: then thrust into it the hook, and cut it with a fine knife, and free it from all parts
If blood flows upon thee in the hour of thy operation, then place upon it a dry sponge, until the blood is separated: afterwards return to thy operation, until thou hast extracted it with its complement.
Then apply vinegar and salt: and care for the rest with such treatment as is convenient for that, until he is healed.
Concerning the treatment of the two wounds of the amygdalae.
Chapter 6.
And then either perforate it or rupture it by itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is slight: then you must cut it open.
And the operation in this is as you consider before your operation, if the wound has cooled completely and is complete, or if it is threatening some reduction: then do this make the patient sit facing the sun, and place his head in your lap: and open his mouth, and take out the saliva between your hands, and pull down his tongue with an instrument, which has this shape. Do this with silver, or with air, which is subtle like a knife
When the language is spoken and the limb is exposed, and it falls upon the object of your care: then grasp the hook and fix it to the bone, and draw it out to the exterior as much as possible, without tearing anything from the skin.
Then incision is made with the instrument whose form follows this.
Like scissors: truly the extremities of these are curved, so that the opening of each is directly opposite the other at an angle: care must be taken that it be firm, or blood-soaked.
If this instrument is not present, incision is made with a sponge, whose form is like this
Acute from one side, not from the other side.</start_of_turn>
And after you have incisions on one side, make the other side according to this same kind of incision.</start_of_turn>
Then after the incision the patient will be gargled with cold water, or with vinegar and water.</start_of_turn
If however blood flows from it, gargle with water in which coriander seeds are boiled: or leaves of myrtle, and things like these from sponges: until the bleeding stops: then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And when there appear in the throat other abscesses, besides the two tonsils.</start_of_turn
Incision is made for these like that which I said concerning the incision of the two tonsils equally.</start_of_turn
And I myself was a physician for a woman who had an abscess in her throat, which was born between her ribs, which was dragging down, little sense, because she was almost suffocating: and the woman was breathing from a narrow passage, and I forbade her from eating and drinking: and she died within one or two days.</start_of_turn>
The swelling will thus ascend as far as it emitted two branches, until it passes beyond the two nostrils.
The swelling will thus ascend as far as it emitted two branches, until it passes beyond the two nostrils.
Then draw out the rest, and from that part is the greater portion
Then cut away that which is within the nostrils
Then do the like with the other nostril
Then open its mouth, and press down its tongue: and afterwards fix the tissue to that swelling: then cut away from that part a portion of it, and no blood will issue from that. Absolutely, therefore, is the woman's throat, and she immediately drinks water, and then takes food.
It is not necessary to cut away from that swelling many times for a long time: and the swelling will come back to the place from which it was cut, until it is prolonged and with it.
I devised therefore, and cauterized the swelling between the throat.
It stood still from the addition: then I went away from that part, and I do not know what God did with her after me
Of the incision of the swelling of the nose.
Chapter 7.
When the catarrus descends to the nose, and swells, and is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part large, round, then it is called double
When it is cured with that which we said in the enumeration, and the cure does not suffice: and you see that the swelling is softened from it, and is slight: then it is necessary to cut away from it
And whatever is aggregated in a round shape, which has no length, is either blood, or of a tawny or black colour, and has no sensation: in such a case it is necessary to make an incision in it.
And there is fear of the disease on account of the sick person.
It is necessary therefore when you are treating the patient as I have said from the white and the black, and of its length, so that you make the patient sit with his face towards the sun: and you take hold of his tongue with an instrument of which I have spoken before: then you fix the flesh in one place, and draw out the bowels: and you cut through the bowels with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned in the incision of two armpits.
And it is necessary that you do not cut through from that except that which is added beyond the natural limit without addition
For if you cut through from that more, you will wound the bowels and the speech.
Then after the incision make use of what we have spoken of in the incision of two armpits: and take care of the bowels until they are healed.
If however the patient returns from the incision: then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterizing it without fear and without hesitation.
And the method of cauterizing in these is not except with acute water: and it is that you place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then take hold of his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned.
Then take from the water which I have mentioned above and mix it with charcoal not burnt out, and put it not thick nor thin, and bring from that the cavity of this instrument which has this shape
The extremities of it on which the medicine is placed are like the concavity of the cochlea of a radius
Place the instrument with the medicine above the limb itself: and let the patient lie upon his side, so that the moisture from his mouth may flow outwards from the medicine inwards, and not descend downwards into his gut, and thereby cause him pain.
Hold your hand with the medicine.
And you from the first touch over the limb for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it is softened, and seat the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to grasp the limb, and cover it with the medicine at its extremity, and inflate the limb with the medicine, and insert the finger with the coat into the canal above, until the coat adheres to the limb itself Do this often, until you achieve what you desire of the cauterization of the limb
And then remove the medicine: for it itself will dry up and fall off in three days, or four.
If you find that the medicine has not taken hold, repeat it: and after the cauterization, remove the surrounding parts of the limb with the coat, and moisten with butter, and anoint with oil what is around it from the medicine: and cool it with cold water
And care for the outside with bandages, and for the inside with gargling, until it is healed
Thus this kind of treatment is more beneficial than incision and is longer lasting in respect of fear
And when the limb is healed even with this, which is more subtle than cauterization and incision: it is healed by fumigation, in this manner.
Take calamine, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sage, and chamomile, and chamomile flower, and such like herbs: and mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar, and boil: and put a hole in the middle of the pot, over which is placed a concave instrument according to this manner.
Let air or metal go: and introduce the extremity, in which is the pomegranate, into the bone of the patient, until the vapor rises up to the upper cannula, until the upper part is obscured much.
Then repeat over the latter several times, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And be careful, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an abscess.</start_of_turn>
It is useful indeed to add in the abscess: and it is not necessary that you do this except when the abscess is cold.</start_of_turn>
If however this instrument is not present with you, then take a needle and fashion in its extremity a piece of cork or resin: so that it does not burn the bone of the patient: because the cork or resin hinders the vapor from burning the bone: and this is from a good treatment with safety.</start_of_turn>
About the extraction of thorns, and bones from the jaw.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXXVIII.</start_of_turn>
Many things adhere to the gut of the bone, or a fish spine, or something else.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you extract what appears from the gut when the tongue is pressed with the instrument at the edge, and that you declare that it is in the gut.</start_of_turn
And what is not apparent to you and is hidden in the gut, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach.</start_of_turn
Perhaps therefore the attached thing will go out by vomiting.</start_of_turn
Or the patient may swallow down a piece of barley chaff, or a radix of lettuce, or swallow down a dry piece of bread, or take up a piece of dry sea sponge: and bind it up in a thread, then swallow it down.</start_of_turn
When the limb approaches the place where bones or spines are found, and is drawn out, it then emerges. If it does not emerge with it as we have said: then use an instrument of lead according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius and smaller than a barleycorn, and have a curve at its extremity which projects into its guttur with ease: and let it have its head elevated above.
And beware of its touch on the epiglottis, that it does not cause it to swell, and drive out with it bone, spine, or bring the physician's hand forward
But that the sick person brings it forward, this is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed thing: and drives downwards, or draws his hand upwards with the instrument above, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it emerges
Of the extraction of the blood-sucker.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXXIX.</start_of_turn>
When the physician treats the blood-sucker with that which I mentioned in the treatise on treatment with the physicians, and it does not yield, then consider in the guttur of the patient in front of the sun, or behind the tongue after having drawn out its tongue with the instrument which I mentioned.</start_of_turn>
If therefore your hand slips over the blood-sucker, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine fingers detached from each other.</start_of_turn
If this is not possible with these means: then take a curved needle, and insert it into the guttur of the patient almost to the guttur: then insert the burning iron into the curve of the needle.</start_of_turn
Do this often: and let the patient abstain from all water throughout the day.
Then he shall take a full treatment of cold water, and open his mouth with it: and he shall gather his teeth with it, and let him not swallow anything from it: and he shall drink water once an hour after each meal with his hand
When he feels that blood is coming from his mouth with the water.
But if it does not go away when we have told you, then fumigate the patient with vinegar, or with alum as an instrument of fumigation for the wound
Do this often, for it will go away by itself.
And the mode of operation in fumigation is that you take a vessel in which are dates with fire: and the vessel be covered with a cover, in the middle of which is a hole: and make in that hole the extremity of the instrument.</start_of_turn>
Then throw the fumigation and put the patient's mouth in the extremity of the tube, and close the mouth, so that it does not escape the fumigation, until you know that the fumigation has passed to the bleeding.</start_of_turn>
For bleeding stops immediately.</start_of_turn>
If it does not go away, do the fumigation often.</start_of_turn
And the patient can tolerate sitting, and eat garlic and onions, and does not drink water.</start_of_turn It is necessary therefore that he should go out with this regimen.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is extracted from the gut when it falls upon the vomit.</start_of_turn
It is like pincers, thus also liquids: except that it has a curvature which enters the gut.
Its extremities are like the beak of a heron which is called ciconia, in which there is a roughness of lime: when it grasps something, it does not relinquish it entirely.
About the opening of the rectum, and its section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.</start_of_turn>
There are many kinds of rectum, of various methods, according as the nature of the case reminds us: and they are diverse in their perforation and their section into two methods.
One of them is the kind of rectum which comprehends humours.</start_of_turn>
The other is on account of the place where it happens to the body.</start_of_turn
Because the rectum happens at the head is different from the rectum which happens in the belly: and the rectum which happens in a fleshy place is different from the rectum which happens at the joints: and each one of them has its own judgement according to the operation.</start_of_turn
There are those which do not require perforation of the rectum except after the completion of health in youth, and its complement: and there are those which require perforation while they are raw and have not matured according to the complement.</start_of_turn
Like the rectum which is close to the joints.</start_of_turn
For the rectum when it happens near the joint, and extends itself, until it putrefies which is in its circumference perhaps the ligaments or the nerves of that joint are ruptured: which is the cause of the closer contraction of that limb.</start_of_turn
The abscess is near the main limb: for if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will cause either a swelling or an infection in that main limb.
The abscess is close to the limb: for if you perforate it while it is immature, it must not be left without completing its digestion, except when it is close to the limb, lest it should putrefy deeply, and reach the interior of the limb, and form a fistula, or remain unhealed at its end You must know the time of perforation of the abscess, for it is matured according to the completion of its digestion: and it is with the cessation of pain, lowering of fever, and diminishing of redness, and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess: and the rest of the signs. You must make the perforation in a lower place of the abscess, and more cautiously: and let the perforation be wide in length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and the places of lacerations, and strings, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all the places which have no reflection
But in those which reflect, be cautious with the perforation according to that limb.
When indeed the abscess is in a place of hardness: then it is better to omit the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to completion
For if you perforate it before that, you prolong the course of the infection from that, and there is much pus and discharge, and perhaps swelling of its lip, and depth of it.
And some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body for necessity: or according to that which the limb requires.
And you must manage in small abscesses a moderate perforation, and in large abscesses a wide perforation: or many sections like the magnitude of the abscesses.
And there are from the apostemata, in which it is necessary that the skin should be concaved: and it occurs when it has been made like a piece of cloth, and has been made at the end, when it is dead: as it happens with many things, as with worms and boils.
And there are those which are cut through with a section having three angles.
And there are those which occur like the shape of a myrtle leaf
Like the apostema of the groin
And there are those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered: and similar things from sections
That which has no head, like the superficial leninous apostemata, must be pierced through with a superficial perforation, or flattened only
And it is necessary, when the apostema is thick and has collected much blood, to perforate it so that it does not swell and extract all the pus in an hour: indeed extract from it a part of itself
Then anoint the apostema until the next day.
Then draw out some of the pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree, until the patient is discharged: especially if the patient is weak in virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man decrepitus: for the spirit of the animal is dissolved with the discharge of the pus: and perhaps the patient will die, and you will not perceive it
Beware therefore of this chapter, for it contains great caution
And after you have perforated the apostema, which you have perforated, you must remove the clot: and consider carefully
If there is a small abscess of the apostematis, either perform a plane section or administer ointment from an old bottle.
If there is a large abscess and many puncture wounds exist, it is necessary to instill ointment into every wound until they reach the innermost part.</start_of_turn>
If you have excised a piece of skin from the abscess, or if you have cauterized the circumference: then you must apply an old bottle of ointment, or as when a cloth is taken away, or cover it with wool without moisture: and keep it bound until the third day.</start_of_turn>
Then remove it and care for it with ointment until it heals.</start_of_turn
If, however, blood flow occurs during your operation in this hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after they have been swallowed in a cloth: and place it over the site of the bleeding many times.</start_of_turn>
If the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment, care, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places of this book, and from experience.</start_of_turn>
If it is in winter and the abscess is in a place with many nerves: then you must infuse sponges with wine and oil of warmth: and place them over the area.</start_of_turn
And if it is in summer and the place is fatty: then you must place sponges soaked in water, and oil, or both with wine and oil, and keep it cold.</start_of_turn>
Until then, as we have said, on the third day you must drain the abscess, remove it, and administer treatment which is suitable for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
This is therefore necessary from the knowledge of the treatment of all apostemata.
According to the manner of distinguishing things, as I have said concerning every apostematum, how it is that the way to its cure is set out singly
Concerning the section of apostemata which happen in the head.
Chapter 41.
There happen in the head small apostemata which are of the kind of knots, which contain tunicae, which are like sacks: as if they were themselves like the gall-cocks' houses
And their kind is many
Some are fat: and some contain moisture like slime: and some contain moisture like blood clots: and some are like these, and some are hard stones
And in the section of all of them, and their extraction is not to be feared, as long as during their section there is no contradiction of the arteries.
And the operation in their section is to learn them with the instrument which form comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains
For if it contains moisture, then dry it out by the superficial section: by this form.
And begin with the section from line b to line g. When as much moisture has been evacuated as possible, then remove the knot which contains it, and do not leave anything behind
Many are returned if anything is left behind Then immerse the head in Egyptian unguent if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and anoint with oil and draw out on another day
The wound eats up that which remains from the cyst. Repeat over the wound with Egyptian resin first, second, and third time, and if it does not digest it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the cyst, then indeed cure with oil until it is healed
If there is a swelling with a pimple, then dry it with this form, by section having the shape of a cross: and project the threads between the two lobes of the section, and remove it from all sides: and try your skill in the extraction of the membrane which contains it.
If, however, it makes resistance, it is an artery, then do as I shall tell you afterwards.
And in a stone abscess, if it is stony, do the same, by section, and the same cure, as we said before And the section of a stone abscess is easier: because there is little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are some head abscesses in certain people, in which there is no moisture at all
Or make the perforation always from the lower part downwards, so as to preserve the progress of the healing downwards
Then care for it as seems good to you from this point forward.
On the section of the Stropharia in the neck.
On the section of the Stropharia in the neck.
Many times these [lymph nodes] are found swollen in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes also in the rest of the body.
And concerning those which are in the neck, there is one and many of them: and they are generated from each side: and every Strophary is within its own sheath, as in the nodes and the swellings of the head, as we have mentioned
There are many kinds of these lymph nodes
These are fatty [lymph nodes], and those which contain moisture, and malignant ones which do not yield to treatment
Wherein, if there is a good flow of blood in the touch [i.e. the colour of the lymph node is similar to that of the surrounding skin], and it moves towards all parts, and is not connected with the nerves of the neck, or with the jugular veins, or arteries, or is not deep: it should be cut with a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line, b. along a line, g. and the skin should be stripped away from all sides: and two lips of skin should be held together with a single layer, or with many layers if necessary, as is done with the swellings of the head, and the lymph should be extracted gradually
It is important to be cautious not to cut any blood vessel or nerve
The wound should not be too sharp and wide: so as not to make your hand slip with the incision, or to frighten the patient, and you should cut only what is necessary
If, however, you cut a vein or an artery, or are hindered by the operation, then put in the wound a piece of sponge which absorbs blood, or any powder which absorbs blood, and press the wound firmly, and leave it alone until the swelling subsides, and the wound is softened: or begin again and desist from the operation
Blood is severed by the clamp, Redi, until you complete the operation.
Then take care of yourself.
If the whole trophue is cut through, then it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound: and hold them together immediately, after which you should wash because there is no surplus left.
If, however, you wash and find that there is still surplus because of the size of the trophue, then it is necessary that you insert your finger to the root of it and extract it: and perform the suture as we have said.
And as for the remainder of the trophues which contains moisture, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that you may see the place of its maturity: and place the perforation below that which follows from the lower part of the body, as we have said
Then administer after the perforation lint with unguent, and like that, so that it consumes what remains from the corruption, until when you wash the wound you find that it is clean: then take care of yourself with the generated carnation of flesh until it is healed
In the cutting of the epiglottis from the apostemate inwards of the gut, by chance
Chapter XLIII.
They say that the ancients made this incision in the epiglottis, and no one in our land has ever done it: this is the writing of their words.
But in our times, when the synanchiam has become swollen, it is necessary to make an incision in the epiglottis: for if this is not done, the veins and the lungs will be weakened.
In those who have a callous swelling in the mouth, or the gullet, or two abscesses in the tonsils, when there is no inflammation in the channel, it is necessary to make an incision in the epiglottis, in order to escape the destruction which results from the protrusion It is necessary therefore, when we wish to do this, to cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision across the width of the tissue between two circles, as it is in the cartilage, not in the flesh: and this is the most convenient place to make the incision, because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels from it are long
If the physician is timid, then it is necessary for him to extend the skin of the gullet with one finger.
Then he will find the skin, until he reaches the channel: he will see blood vessels there, if anything has leaked out from them.
Then he will cut the cartilage which we mentioned: and it is signified above the incision of the channel by the phlegm which comes out of it, with that which is broken, and with the cutting of the vein.
And let the wound be closed at a suitable time.
When the hour has passed in which the protrusion is complete, gather together two lips of the wound and stitch them only with the skin, without the cartilage
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed Then give medicines which cause the flesh to grow until it is healed
The accidental wound is of two kinds: one is like a pimple.
The other kind is like an abscess which arises from a knot in a blood vessel.
There is fear in this, and it must not be presumed that it is small: and you must try it out and examine it with an instrument.
If you find it to be like a pimple and not associated with any other swelling: then dry it out, as you would dry out a pimple; and extract it with the instrument which contains the pus, if there is pus in it: or if not, then examine the whole of it thoroughly
Then care for the place with it until it is healed
Regarding the excision of something bigger than a pimple.</start_of_turn>
(The text continues with the next section of the book.)</start_of_turn> There are many kinds of knots, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in their order: and it is necessary to know the difference between a knot and an extrusion, when there is doubt.</start_of_turn> I say, therefore, that when an extrusion has become cold, and has lost its heat, and the pain has subsided: then the swelling has subsided, and the corruption has ceased. And then the fever and heat will cease.</start_of_turn
When, on the other hand, there is a knot which has no heat, neither fever, nor pain, and which contains pus in its own sac, which is its natural container, and which is similar in color to the body: and which has the character of cicer, being soft and having the size of a bean, or bigger or smaller.</start_of_turn
And there are two kinds: either soft or containing moisture.</start_of_turn
And the colours of moisture are many, as I have said in the previous discourse. It is necessary therefore, when you reach the treatment of the Node, to experiment with it and inquire about it first with the instrument which is called the Intromissum, as its form will be explained in the following chapter.
The method of inquiry after the swelling of the Node and of all Nodes is as follows: you take this instrument and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the swelling: and you gradually withdraw your fingers until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin
Then lastly you move your hand according to the measure of the swelling
Then withdraw the Intromissum and consider what comes out of its wound
If therefore liquid moisture comes out, whatever its colour be: then dry it with a superficial section, as I have said in the other swellings.
And if no moisture comes out of the wound of the Intromissum, then you know that it is hard: dry it therefore with a section having the shape of a cross, as it has been shown: and suspend it with sutures, and strip away the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the fat if there is any above that, until you have extracted the Node whole.
If indeed the bladder is burst during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, as often happens in this case, then extract it fragment by fragment, until nothing remains of it
For if there remains anything of it, little or much, the Node returns most of the time.
If you are stung by it, and there remains a little: then make a wound at the completion of your work, with some corrosive powders for acute wounds: and string the wound, and place above it the softened swelling, and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If there is a large knot, then two of its lips must be sutured, and care for it as though it were a living thing. If, however, the opposite side be swollen or not swollen: then prepare it, and make a place for the excision of the tumor, and keep it bound for two or three days, until the tumor has decayed, and the blood-clotting has ceased: then return to the incision which remains of the knot.
As to instruments for the cutting and perforating of the knot.
Chapter 46.
From the veins there are three forms of inward protrusions, and there are three kinds of them.
From these veins there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one
Let them be of iron, blunt at the extremities and pointed in the middle, so that they may hasten the entrance into the abscess
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and no, that is, perforators: and one of them is called a beris, that is, a perforator, and there are three kinds of them
From these veins there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one
They converge, so that they may investigate through these abscesses, and exits, and fistulas, and bubbles from that which is between the bones
And others are round, third, and smooth, like a large needle which sews under silk, from citrine or from air, or iron, or silver. And the best of these are those which are made from citrine.
And there are also experiences to be made from black lead, which converge so that they may pass through these fistulas, the reflections of whose concavity will be reflected back with their smoothness against those reflections
There are three kinds again. For according to the quantity of the breadth of the fistula and the extent of its narrowing, there are three kinds: long, medium, and short. The shapes of the fistulas are various, and there are many kinds For according to the quantity of the breadth of the fistula and the extent of its narrowing, there are three kinds: simple, that is to say having only one curvature: and there are three kinds like fluids, great, medium, and small
The fistulas are blind at one end, and there are three kinds of them.
There are three kinds which have two curvatures at one end, and three kinds which have three curvatures at one end; all of these are necessary in their place
These are the forms of scalpels which cut and scrape knots and abscesses: and there are three kinds of them, for according to the quantity of the breadth of the fistula and the extent of its narrowing there are three kinds: large, medium, and small
The extremities which are cut are acute, but the others are not acute: and they are not placed like this, except when there is an operation on the excision of knots near the fear of the division of the vein, or nerve: and in order that the patient may recover more easily from the surgery than from the excision of an abscess
These are great, and there are three kinds of them
They are made of air, and are similar to a radio, with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end there is a hidden Spatumilis point: and in this there runs inwards and outwards when needed, like liquids
The form of the Spatumili which are driven between the fingers at the perforation of the abscess: and the patient does not perceive them: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small
Wind-formed foam when severed breaks blood flow: there are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
Foam arises from air or citrine [substance], rotund in shape, to a moderate length, like tears: and they are slight in weight
It is necessary that these kinds of wind-foam should be great and small in your case: so that you can sever blood flow quickly when necessary, and when there is no physician present.
Indeed, do not employ these in the severance of blood in every part of the body, and do not use them except in places where there is carnation: such as for fractures of the limb, the hip, fractures of the forearm and breast, of the belly, groin, and similar places, from fractures of carnation, humors.
And sometimes these are other small instruments like fragments of sponges, according to their form: with which blood is severed when it flows from the site of phlebotomy, or at the incision of the vein, or artery: and sometimes they are rounded in this fashion
Concerning the care of the breasts of women who suckle the breasts of women.
Chapter XLVII.
When the breasts of some men swell somewhat during the night (that is, when they begin to become soiled in sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and they remain soft after they have become soiled.
Whoever dislikes that, it is necessary to cut across the breast with a lunar section, according to this form from the line A to line B, and then from line B to the edge.
Then apply a little ointment from the medicaments of incision.
Then join the two lips of the incision with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the breast droops downwards and is softened by its size, as often happens with women: then it is necessary to find two sutures on the two upper sides of the breast, similar in shape to a crescent moon. Each one should be continued with the other at the end of each, until the line which contains the greater part contains the smaller, following this shape from the line b. to the line g. Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and administer what we have said concerning suture and powder, which is necessary for the cure, until the wound is healed.
If, however, you do not wish to make an incision, because of the patient's anxiety or because of the flow of blood: then you must place a sponge soaked in corrosive unguent under the wound and let it go, until that which remains of the fat has corroded.
Then care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
In the perforation of the nipple, which happens under the nipple of Titillicus.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn These nipples which happen under the nipple of Titillicus are of the kind of hard stropheae which contain vesicles, and from these are those which contain humours.</start_of_turn
Which are from the humours which contain moisture, must be sectioned with a lunar shape, following this shape from the line b. to the line g. when all that is in the nipple is evacuated from the blood, then place a sponge under the old one and let it go until the next day.</start_of_turn
Then remove the sponge and care for it with a suitable unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If the nipple should be of the kind of knots of stropheae, then split it above it, as we said concerning the stropheae which are equal.</start_of_turn
If, however, a swelling extends itself in this way as to emit pus, then apply cautery to it, as we have said previously.
In the event that the swelling results from an artery or vein.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 49.</start_of_turn>
When an artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is consolidated, a great swelling often arises from the wound: in the same way, swelling may also arise in a vein, as it does in the case of the wound and the swelling.</start_of_turn
The signs by which it is known that the swelling and swelling are caused by an artery or a vein are these: for when the swelling is caused by an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body: and when you press on the swelling with your finger, you feel as though there is a constriction.</start_of_turn
And that which is caused by a vein is round in its manifestation on the surface of the body.</start_of_turn
The section of such a swelling is dangerous, especially if it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and the throat, and in many parts of the body: and it is very dangerous.</start_of_turn
It is therefore necessary to take care of such a swelling with fire, and that which is also in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary to take care of it.</start_of_turn
Furthermore, from the inflation of the opening of the artery, find in the cut in the length.</start_of_turn
Then open the cut with hooks, afterwards the artery: and free the wound from the tunics, until it is detached.</start_of_turn
Then introduce under these the point of the needle, and make the wound penetrate right through to the other side, and ligate the artery with two threads in two places, as we taught you in the extraction of two arteries which are in the course of time.</start_of_turn
Then plunge the location which is between two ligaments with the sponge, until blood which is in it altogether has gone out, and the swelling is dissolved.
Then perform the treatment which generates pus, until the ligaments are severed: afterwards care for it with suitable unguents until it is healed.
If there is swelling because of the cutting of a vein, then it is necessary to remove the clots from the swelling with the hand as much as possible from the swelling with the skin
Then introduce the needle under the place where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate: and be in it two strings, until you have pulled it out from the other side.
Then bind with the swelling the ligament with a good ligature: according to what I have said to you concerning the ligature of the veins, from two parts with two extremities of the thread. If you are afraid that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce another needle with another thread under the whole swelling at the incision of the needle: beforehand, and tighten your thread in four places
Then dry the swelling in its middle, until when it has gone out what is in it: then cut the excess of the skin, and remove what is bound from it
Then put over it a little ball which you have submerged in wine, and oil.
Then perform the treatment which is made with liniments and unguents, until it is healed
As for the swelling which arises from the twisting of nerves.
Chapter L.
Like that which happens with swelling in the Artery and the Vein, in the same way it happens with the nerves: which happens in the percussion of them, or from excessive work, and in a similar way: and it happens most of all in the armpits, or the calves, and in every place where there is a joint movement: and it is a serious swelling Its colour is similar to that of the rest of the body, and is in various positions without causing pain: and when it is stretched with force, it feels in it like drunkenness.
It is not a swelling which has gathered in the depth of the body, but is under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go forward or backward or downwards
That which is in the joints is like nails, it does not cause them to be struck with iron.
Perhaps there will be a contraction.
But as for that which is in the head, or in the face, find the skin with a spatula.
If it is a small swelling, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and scrape it off: then take it away, and mix it with wax: and sew it up, and care for it until it heals.
About the cutting of a swelling which happens inside.
Chapter LI.</start_of_turn> These things happen to many people in the belly and in the rest of their bodies, these things which are called Fungalia, because of their resemblance to fungi.</start_of_turn>
Their root is soft, and their head is large, and their edges are rounded off.</start_of_turn
And it is like a small nail: and it grows large with heat.</start_of_turn
And I also saw a man who had two of these things in his belly, which were larger than any others: there was no difference between them, white or black, small or large, and their edges were flexible, and there was moisture coming from them always.</start_of_turn
The wound did yield somewhat, and I found in its weight about X and eight uncia in one and about six uncia in the other. And the operation in its incision is such that you must consider immediately if the patient is humidus, and the colour of the thelil is white, humidum, subtilis radicis: then you must make the incision with a broad spatula, and there will be in your presence cauteria in igne.
A great quantity of blood is expelled at the section of the wound: take care therefore if blood is inciting you, then cauterize it immediately.
If you see the patient weak and timid from the incision with the knife, then take a leaden weight with a hole in the middle, and string it with thread: in whose manner it is which we have said, and let it go in two days
Then add lead to the stricture.
Do not cease to string the lead until it is excreted, and it will go out by itself without toil
If the thelil is large of root, then in its incision there is something fearful and weak: especially what is in the belly.
It is indeed possible that you may cut through the middle of it.
Then cauterize it, so that it does not return
Then care for it, until the wound is healed
And take heed that you do not presume to cut the thelil which is of a dusky colour, little sense, foul aspect: for it is a cancerous tumour: and I shall remind you of cancer after this
About the care of the umbilical cord.
Section 52.
The swelling of the Umbilical region is from many ulcers.
Or from rents in the bowels which are above the belly: and come out from this through the navel, or the intestines, according as is the case with the rest of the ruptures.
Or from blood which flows from the vein, or from the artery, according as has been said before.
Or from a clotted mass in that area.
If however it is from a rent in the bowels, and the evacuation of the black bile: then is the colour like that of the body: and is soft, without pain: and appears in various places.
And if it is from the discharge of the intestines, then is its place with that which we have narrated, of greater diversity.
When you place your finger on it, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps with a sound: and swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and painful sweat
If however it is from humidity, it is soft: then it is not hidden when you place your hand on it, neither is it constricted, neither does it increase
Which if from blood, then appears with these signs a black bile.
If however it is from dead flesh: then is the bile dark, thick, hard, and appears according to the quantity of one.
If however it is from inflammation, then its touch is soft And the operation in that is as you consider, if the swelling of the navel is from blood of the artery, or the vein, or inflammation: then it is necessary to abstain from its treatment.</start_of_turn>
Fear and timidity are common in such matters, as I have already taught you in the previous chapter, concerning the evacuation of stool due to an artery and vein.
If the swelling of the belly is caused by the intestines or the spleen: then it is necessary to urge the patient to evacuate his flatulence, as much as he is able, and to remain standing extended
Then signs are with retention of the faeces all around the belly.
Then command him to lie down between your hands on his back
Then surround with a sponge broad in the circumference of the belly on the place which you indicated with retention of the faeces
Then extend the middle of the evacuation towards the upper parts, with a large sponge.
Then bind him firmly in the circumference with thread, or with a strong silk cord: and make a knot which is fixed.
Then open the middle of the evacuation which is extended above the ligature.
If you find that the bowels are caught by the ligature: then draw out the fixed parts and introduce the index finger into it, and push the intestine inwards: and if you find the spleen, then grasp it with the thumb and cut off its excess
But if the artery or vein is contrary: then surround it muchly
Then return to your operation.
And take two needles, and introduce them into the two strong threads: and introduce two needles in the circumference which you made around the stool in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate
Then string the stool in four places on the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place, until the extended flesh has putrefied: and it will fall away by itself: or cut it off when it has become thin and putrefied
Then care for yourself with what is necessary from unguents until you are healed.
If swelling of the belly is from carrion in it, or from moisture: then it is necessary to make incisions of the carbuncles, as we have said
And draw out the blood, or moisture, which you find in it
Then care for yourself with what is necessary from unguents until you are healed.
About the care of cancer Chapter 53
I cannot cure anyone from it: neither do I know anyone who has been able to do so before me
And the operation in it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede it, and to solve the disease with black bile several times over
Then perform a phlebotomy if you find it with a swelling that manifests itself
Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which he is placed with the operation
Then remove from cancer the nails that agree with it
Afterwards, concave out the cavity entirely with the knife, following the directions, until nothing remains of the roots: then let blood flow freely, and do not quickly cut through it, but rather press down firmly, and evacuate all the thick blood from your hand, or with whatever instruments are available.
If, however, it causes the thick blood to flow from the incision of an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein, until the bleeding stops.
Then care for the rest of the treatment, until healing takes place.
(The text continues with the next section of the translation.)
Chapter XLVII.</start_of_turn>
We shall now explain the different kinds of hydropsism, and how water is aggregated: and the signs of each kind, and their treatment by physicians.</start_of_turn>
And what is cured with iron is not except one kind of ascites alone: and it is not approached with iron in the case of tympanitis: neither in the case of acute hydrothorax: for that is deadly.</start_of_turn
When you are treated by a physician for this kind of hydropsism of the tympani, and the treatment does not please you: then consider that.</start_of_turn
For if a sick person is associated with weakness, or with another illness besides hydropsism: such as with fevers, or solution of the intestines, or similar things: then do not treat him with iron, for fear of that.</start_of_turn
If however you see a sick person of excessive spirit, neither young nor old: then the mode of operation in this case is that you raise the patient up between your hands, and press his belly with your hand, driving out the water downwards to the lower part of the belly.</start_of_turn
Then take the sponge, thorned, according to this shape.
Two acute parts, long, with acute extremities like Spatumile
But there is something short within, diminishing gradually, so that it does not pass through with it until the operation is finished, and it leaves the wound itself.
Then consider.
For if there is a generation of Hydropisis from the intestines, then it is necessary to lengthen with a section from the navel to the lower part in a straight line above the pelvis
If, however, the generation of Hydropisis is because of the liver's disease: then your section is left from the navel to three fingers
If it is because of the spleen: then the section is on the right side: and it is not necessary also that it be on the side where you wish to place the sick person, so that there does not result an excessive flow to the place of weakness.
Then pierce with the instrument the whole skin
Then introduce into that section, and lift your hand with the sponge between the skin, and wipe, as if you are scraping it: and the amount which is scraped shall be equal to the amount of a nail, or about that
Then pierce the sponge until it reaches the empty place: and that is the place of water
Then remove it, and introduce into the opening of the instrument, which has this shape
It is like a cannula: it is made of silver, or of air, or of gold, soft, thin: which has in its lower part a small hole, and in its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: and its extremity is cut, according to the manner of a calamus sword, like water: in its extremity is an arm.
When the instrument reaches the water, it immediately descends above the instrument, thus emptying into the water half its quantity.
If you empty more from it than is necessary, in an hour the patient may die from the collapse of his vital spirit: or there may happen to him fainting, which approaches death.
Empty it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what is significant to you concerning the condition of the patient, and concerning his pulse and his health
Then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water.
Since it remains immediately on account of the skin which retains the opening above the sieve: as I have said, perform it according to the measure.
Repeat the instrument on the other side, if you find the patient tolerates it: and also from the water the quantity which remains Do this a few times without fear, and take care of yourself from error: until there remains from the water little or nothing.
If however you fear the patient, and you discharge from the water a great quantity: then care for him with burial in hot sand, and abundant sweating in bath and sun, and expect upon the seat: and care for him with physicians who are skilled in these matters until he is healed: and cauterize upon the stomach, and the spleen and the liver, after the extraction of the water: as I have said before
As to the care of infants who are born in places where the urinary opening is not perforated
(The provided text does not include the continuation of the sentence.) When anyone of the infants goes out of his mother's womb, and his head is not perforated, or the opening is narrow, or is not in its place.
It is necessary therefore to assist immediately when such a perforation occurs with Spatumili subtili at its base, following this shape.
Then put in the wound a small lead weight, and bind it: and keep it in place for three days, or four
When it is desired that urine be emitted, remove the weight and mix it together.
Then reduce it.
And if you do not put in lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to be closed
He who has a stricture of the opening is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it becomes dilated.
In those in which the opening is not in its proper place, lead is applied to them.
For indeed from the part which is born, the opening is at the end of the head of the bladder: wherefore it is not possible to mix forward, until it raises the bladder up above Neither is there any generation, for thus sperm is not able to pass beyond the matrix according to its right line: and it is a grievous wound at the base
And the method of operation in this is that the patient be laid down upon his back
Then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand by means of grasping, and cut the head of the bladder from the root, with a needle, or with a sharp spatula: as is the incision of the marrow, or as you would a root of anything, so that the middle part may come out like the head of the bladder: and that the opening may be in the middle as it should be
And be careful at your operation with regard to the flow of blood.
Many things happen at this time.
Oppose it therefore with that which will bind the blood and care for the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the ailments of the genitals and head of the hair, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 66.</start_of_turn>
Many things happen at this time with regard to these ailments of the body, and it is the prominence of corrupt meat.</start_of_turn
And from these there are malignant and non-malignant things.</start_of_turn
The malignant one must be suspended with a fine thread and cut off, until the whole thing is freed.</start_of_turn
Then place over the cut a soaked bandage in Egyptian unguent.</start_of_turn Then care for it with a finer unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If the ailment is malignant, of the color of blood, then it is necessary to administer cautery after the incision and according to its reason.</start_of_turn
If, however, the ailment is in the hair of the head, not cut off, and is part of the ailment that is between the hair and that which is outside: then it is necessary to stimulate the ailment which is inside first, until it is solidified, then care for the outside: for when you care for the outside while neglecting the inside, the hair will be pulled out.</start_of_turn
And also in the testicles, and black hair and corruption.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore to remove everything that is decayed or which wants to corrupt, or which is already corrupted.</start_of_turn
Then line above the wound with wax after that which has been consumed with wheat and barley flour, and with trefoil herbs of bellflowers.
Then care for that with the rest of the treatment until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If blood flows, then administer cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this fashion.</start_of_turn>
Cautery is a substance which has two forms simultaneously, that is, for blood flow and for a wound when corrupted.</start_of_turn>
If the head of the worm has been corroded, and has been destroyed throughout in an hour: then it is necessary to insert lead into the meat of the wound, so that the disease may be overcome above the wound.</start_of_turn
In the adhesion of the membrane with the head of the worm, and these adhesion do not take place except in that in which the membrane is sound, and does not require cutting above it: and when the adhesion takes place because of the wound, or swelling: it is necessary therefore to scrape away the wound with blunt spatula, until the ligament is dissolved, and the head of the worm is freed from all parts.</start_of_turn
If it is difficult to discern these things with great accuracy, then it is necessary to scrape away something from the head of the worm, and from the membrane.</start_of_turn
For the membrane when it is slight, may perhaps be perforated by its subtle nature or more quickly.</start_of_turn
Then separate the membrane from the head of the worm with fine linen cloth which has been made wet in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with balsamic wine, until it is solidified.</start_of_turn Concerning the restoration of children, and the treatment of errors caused by an accident.
Concerning the restoration of children, and the treatment of errors caused by an accident.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity, like the rest of the wounds: indeed when it is from our operation, our will, and the circumstances are in the children themselves, it is necessary that we mark in them the operation which is better, and the degree of pain which is lost in order to the welfare.
I say, therefore, that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their practice, and it is not except what we have learned through experience
Because I have found that a greater part of the artifices, and phlebotomists use circumcision for restoration, by cutting with a needle and with shears: and they use alate instruments, and ligature with thread, and incision with a nail.
And indeed I have proved all these methods, and I have not found a better restoration than with shears, and ligation with thread.
Because in restoration with a needle, much skin is driven away.
Because the skin of the prepuce has two tunics: therefore perhaps the upper skin is incsed, and the lower tunic is threatened: it is necessary therefore to make an incision in order to incsed the other, and to prevent future pain
And when restoration is made with alate instruments, that is, digits, as the surgeons use them, the incision of the extremity of the limb is not secured: because perhaps it enters into its foramen.
In restoration with a nail, perhaps the iron will go through, and corrupt your operation: and the skin of the child is short of nature, and many are born like this, which does not become an obstacle to restoration: and I have seen this.
The use of scissors and ligature with thread proved to be a successful experiment: for it has been observed that the sharpness of the upper incision corresponds to the sharpness of the lower incision.
As you have done before, join your hands together: for the two sharpness are proportional, and they are cut according to the work of one in the same time: and there is a similar compression of the figure, containing the skin from every part, so that no error is made at all
The manner of the work itself is as follows: you must make an estimate, especially of the boys, for they are mostly stupid; for you will not do anything without tying the thread in its own place: and you shall let it go until tomorrow.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way that you can; for from this you will receive intelligence.
Then insert your hand into the wound and blow into the skin, and pull it up, until the head of the wound is expelled.
Then cleanse the same from that which is gathered in that dirt
Then ligate the marked place with double thread.
Then ligate the lower part somewhat more tightly than the upper ligament. Then hold with your index finger and thumb the place of the lower ligament firmly, and cut between the two ligatures.
Then raise the skin up quickly and remove the head of the wound
Then discharge the blood slowly (for it is better thus) and apply powder above: and above the powder put a bag in which is expanded the testicle or decocted in rosewater, pounded with recent olive oil: and discharge it upon itself until the next day: and care for the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
The form of the forceps for these applications is as follows.</start_of_turn>
There are two handles, and two joints: do not let the handle protrude into the thumb: and let the length of the two equal the length of two fingers together.</start_of_turn>
The real danger in these procedures is that the skin may escape entirely from the underlying parts or a part of it from the incision.</start_of_turn Therefore one must stretch the part from your hour hand with your thumb before the retraction of the place: and cut according to the equality.</start_of_turn
If you are unable to hold the part with your thumb, then extract it with the index finger, and cut.</start_of_turn
If, however, after three days, there remains that which is under the swelling inflated, retract it: then discharge that, until the swelling becomes soft, and extirpate that with ease, and cut it according to what is prepared for you: and take care of yourself from the head of the swelling.</start_of_turn
It will not cause it any harm.</start_of_turn>
Care for it as we have said in the treatise on powders: and if it happens from the skin above the measure, and comes up to the upper parts, it does not harm it.</start_of_turn
Care for it as we have said until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
On the extraction of the retained urine from the bladder.
On the extraction of the retained urine from the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is made by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, or like these things which we mentioned in the method of treatment of dropsy.
And if the urine is not solved, and the cause of its retention is the stone which is in the neck of the bladder: then it must be made infirm over its knee joint
Then they must be put on the knee of its thigh, and its belly must be pulled out from its upper part of the back, and the infirm must be held together as much as possible for him
It is thought therefore when the neck of the bladder is brought to the back: the stone will be expelled from behind: which will empty the urine
And if it is not solved in this way, and if there remains something over the infirm: then it must be administered the extraction with an instrument called a siringa, which is made of silver, is subtle, flexible, curved like the quill of a bird in the smoothness of a radius, long like a palm of one and a half: to which there is a fine needle at its head
And the method of extracting the urine is as follows: take a doubled thread and bind in its extremity yarn or hair, a good ligation: and insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the siringa: and pierce with scissors if anything remains of the yarn, but truly insert into the needle with expectation, like a tailor.
Then wash the siringa with oil, or butter, and alum: and make the infirm sit over a seat, and support the bladder, and hold the urine with oil of olive and warm water.
Then insert the needle through the flesh easily until it reaches the root of the wound.
Then double the thread above the navel area Then push the needle inside itself until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached the painful area: this is not done in accordance with this order, except when the tissue in which it goes is twisted
Then draw out the thread gradually with the lancet.
The thread follows the lancet in its path
Then draw out the needle, and let the urine flow through the hole: repeat the needle and do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief As for the quality of the bladder when using Clepshydra
Chapter 59
It is dull, that is, closed
And in it there are three holes, two from one side and one from the other, like water-spouts.
And the concaved place where the needle enters should be according to the quantity of what you wish to draw out without addition, until when it is pulled with that, something is attracted from the humilities: and when it is pushed out, when that is expelled to the end: according to what the Clepshydra does, which ejects oil, that is, Greek fire in battlefields
When anything is thrown towards the cavity of the eye, introduce the extremity of the eyelid into the moisture, and draw it up with what drives it upwards, the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the eyelid. Then introduce the extremity of the eyelash into the eye, as we have said in the preceding section
Then drive the moisture with what drives it, and immediately the moisture returns to the cavity of the eye. Form a fine spray that moistens the eye.
Then introduce a strong thread into these holes, so that they resemble a ring.</start_of_turn Then gather the ring, so that it resembles a ball of felt: when you put in it the moisture, oil and water.</start_of_turn
Then bind it with an instrument: and do it like you did when expressing with your hand, until the moisture returns to the eye.</start_of_turn
On the extraction of the stone.
On the extraction of the stone. We have already spoken concerning the varieties of stones and their treatment by physicians: and we have mentioned the difference between the stone which is formed in the bowels and the stone which is formed in the bladder: and the signs of the former. And we have mentioned the operation which is performed with the hand and the incision: and that the stone which is formed in the bladder itself: and that which is found in the kidney: and I will now speak of these with manifest explanation and brevity.
I say therefore, that the stone which is formed in the bladder chiefly happens to children.
And from the signs of the latter it is evident that the urine comes out of the bladder like water in its substance: and there appears in it white sand, and it causes the sick kidney to ache, and it works with it, and suffers many things with it Then it is raised up, and comes out with it in many people.
And the recovery of children from this is easy, until the age of fourteen years is completed
And it is difficult in old age.
In young people, however, it is middle-aged: and in this lies the reason: and if it is small, the care of it is less expensive
When therefore we come to the treatment, it is necessary in the first place to purge the sick person with a clister, which removes all the stool which is in his intestines: for this indeed often hinders the finding of the stone during the investigation Then the patient should be taken with his feet, and struck, and moved downwards: so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder, or go out from its high place in some other way
Then make him sit with his hands prepared between yours, and let his hands rest under his buttocks, so that the entire belly will slope downwards to the lower parts.
Then ask him and touch him externally.
If you feel a stone in the space, then immediately hold it with the section above it.
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must remove the index finger of the left hand if the patient is a child: or the middle finger if the patient is an adult: and insert it into the belly until you feel the stone: and ask about the stone until it rests under your finger: and gradually bring it to the bottom of the belly
Then press above it with your finger, and push it outwards against the place where the section was made: and command the minister to grasp the belly of the patient and command another minister to stretch out the testicles of the right hand upwards: and another minister to move the skin which is under the testicles in the part from the place where the section was made
Then insert the sponge which is incident to the wound, which has this shape
And find in it what is between the belly and the testicles, and not in the middle, towards the left side of the navel: and let the section be above the stone, and your finger be in the rectum: and make a transverse section, so that the external section is wide and the internal section is narrow, as much as is possible to allow the escape of the stone from it
Perhaps the finger which is in the rectum will be compressed by the stone at the section and will come out without difficulty.
And you know that the stone has angles and margins, because of which its exit is difficult
And from this one [a sponge] it is soft, like a gland, and rounded: and it easily escapes its exit.
And to it [the sponge] are added angles and margins to the fissure.
If it does not come out thus, then it is necessary that you introduce something above it: or that you bind it above it with a handle whose extremity is like the Moon, which binds over the Stone, and does not slip from it: or that you introduce under it an instrument which is flexible at its extremity
If it does not come out altogether, then widen the opening a little
If anything bloodstained comes to your hand, cut it off with a saw
If there are more than one stone, then drive the great one first into the os vesiculae
Then break over the rest of them
Then drive in the small ones after these: and do the same if there are more than two.
If the great one is round, then ignorance is that you should cut it through with a great section
For it often happens to a sickly man of two things, either that he should die, or that his urine becomes excessively concentrated: because the place is not solidified in any way.
Truly administer the expulsion of it, until it goes out: or introduce it into a fracture of it with forceps, until you have extracted it frustrated
When you have completed your operation, then apply a tourniquet, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place over it a soaked sponge of oil and wine, or oil of roses, and cold water: so that the swelling will subside
Then rest the patient supine above his limb, and do not strain the ligaments, until the third day.
When you have finished stretching it, bandage the place with water, and wash it with much soap.
Then care for it with oil of rue and oil of basil, until it is healed.
If, however, in the wound a piece of chalk has been added, and is corroded, and similar things: thus also if blood is congealed in the bladder, and is withheld from it: this is known from the emission of blood with urine.
Introduce your finger into the wound, and extract the blood clot.
For if it remains, it causes corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and oppose all kinds of things with which it agrees for its healing, until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the course of the treatment of the whole thing, that you bind up the two thighs, and keep them together, because of the physicians who place things on the place
Because if the stone is small, and is in the cavity of the bladder, and is fixed in it, and hinders the exit of urine: then care for it with that which I mentioned before you reach the section
Many therefore excuse themselves from the section for this treatment, because I prove that it is useful And it is that you take a Perforatorium of iron, which has this form, triangular extremities, acute, fixed on wood.
Then take thread, and bind with it the bladder under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the abscess with ease, until it reaches the perforation: and withdraw the perforation gradually from the stone: and make the perforation whole, until you cause it to penetrate from the other side.
The urine immediately ceases to flow.
Then place your hand over what remains of the abscess from the outside of the cavity
It will itself break and come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this cure is not prepared, because of some other thing: then bind a thread under the stone and a thread above the stone. Then dry over the stone within the abscess between the two ligatures
Then remove it.
Then loosen the ligature, and bind the frozen blood, which is in the wound
And it is not necessary to bind a thread under the stone, except that it does not go back into the cavity: and the other thread you remove when you draw out the stone, except that when you loosen the thread after the evacuation of the stone, the skin returns to its place, and coapts the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to bind the upper thread, so that you lift the skin upwards, so that it returns to its proper place, and coapts the wound, as we have said
Of the extraction of a stone from a woman
Chapter 61.
Stones are not easily generated in women
If, however, it should happen to one of them that a stone should occur, then the cure is difficult, and is prohibited because of the many ways (of treating it
One of them is: a woman may possibly be a man. Secondly, you will not find a woman who confesses herself to a doctor when she is a virgin, or married
Thirdly, you will not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, especially in performing operations with the hand
Lastly, the distance from the stone place is great: where a deep incision is needed, and there is fear.
If necessity compels you to reach that, then you must take a female doctor who is well-versed in this: and they are rarely found.
If you wish to do this, then seek a chaste and discreet doctor, and present a skilled female midwife who is well-versed in women's matters, or a woman who has learned a part of this art: make her present and especially inform her of the matter concerning the stone Firstly, that she is a woman: then you must insert your finger into her belly and search for the stone.
If you find it, grasp it under your finger and then tell the midwife to insert your finger into the lower belly of the patient, and inquire about the stone after you have placed your left hand on the flank and pressed firmly If you find the stone, then you must gradually move it from the opening of the uterus towards the lower parts with all your skill, until you have brought it down to the root of the hip bone
Then cut above it at the middle of the belly, from whichever side is convenient for you, and feel the stone in that place: do not move your finger from the stone, holding it under its surface: and make a small incision at first.
Then he introduces radium through the opening.
If he feels a stone, then he adds to the section an amount proportional to the quantity of the stone that protrudes from it.
And you know that there are many kinds of stones Of these, there is the small one, the large one, the soft one and the rough one, the long one and the round one with a branch
You know therefore the kind of these, so that you may understand this which is told you about it.
If there is blood flow, then add to the place of the wound some absorbent material, and hold it for an hour, until the blood is stopped
If there is a flow of blood, and you know that the evacuation of blood is from the artery that was cut: then put powder on the place, and bind it with thread of moderate size: and do not move it: and let out the stone, and do not pull it out
Perhaps the woman is weak.
Then take care of the wound.
When the pain of the blood has subsided after a few days, and the place has become rotten, then return to your operation until the stone comes out
About the cutting of the hernia of water
Chapter 62
A water-bag is not a hernia, except for the collection of moisture in a white sack, which is under the testicles containing semen: and it is called a hernia And when it is within the belly itself, which the nature has prepared for it in part, until it is forced out: for that is something else, and is the skin of the testicles between the fat.
And the generation of these seeds is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: for it flows out from them to these matters.
And when it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or it is of the color of the decline towards citrine, or it is reddish-bloody, or greenish, black, or white watery, and that is the most
For if it is in the white fat that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round to the length like the figure of a hand: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every side
And if it is in the belly itself, then the swelling is round with a part like a hand, and for this reason the man knows that it is something else.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white fat, then it falls under the skin.
When therefore one knows the color of the moisture, then to experience the color of the moisture in the swelling with an introduced square whose form has preceded.
According to that therefore which proceeds from the evidence of the introduction, judge concerning that which is between them
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to take away from the sick person what is superfluous, that is, to perform a phlebotomy if it is possible for him, and to strengthen the body of him
Then the thing rests upon its back above the high thing slightly, and put under it many patches.
Then sit to its left and command the attendant to sit to its right, who will extend the organ to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part near the navel.
Then take a broad sponge, and dry the testicles from the middle along their length, until near the navel: and make an incision according to the rule of an equidistant line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane surrounding it: and scrape it off and observe, or cut it out directly, as you please: and take off your own skin which hangs down with the testicles: and scrape cautiously with the scraping as much as you are able.</start_of_turn>
Then pierce the full bladder with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.</start_of_turn> Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the bladder upwards, and do not touch the testicles enclosed: and cut the bladder as you please, either completely or partially, especially its wide side superficially.</start_of_turn
For if you do not carefully examine it, in its incision there will be no security, for the water will return.</start_of_turn
But if anything has escaped from its skin in the hour of your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, reduce it.</start_of_turn
Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.</start_of_turn
Then care for it like the rest of the wound, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If you find any corrupted matter from the black bile, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels which are its suspension, fearing the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension, and extract the matter: afterwards care for that as we have said.
If indeed water is aggregated in two parts, then you know that there are two stems: dry therefore the other part equally
And if you make them equal, that the work may be as one, then do so: afterwards drain the blood.
And introduce inside the sections the lanam which is submerged in oil, or in rose oil: and put outside the lanam another which you submerged in wine and oil, and expand above two testicles, and see inside: and put above layers of wool doubled, and are nails: and ligate these above with a ligation which is having six according to this shape.
And drain away two baths, and wash, and smear the carmine, according to this likeness: and be the extremities which are sent forth from the belly, or wet wool: and gather with the tightening in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity receives over one until the back, and the second receives at the part of the loin: and two extremities over two thighs below, and two extremities otherwise over two groins, and gather the tightening altogether in the lumbar region of the arms.
And when indeed it is treated artificially with a cautery in the place of the incision with a knife: and it is that you take a cautery with a fine handle, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according as we have said: until when the white fat containing water is detected: then take the cautery, according to this shape
The letters are assimilated.
Then perforate with that [instrument], and it is ignited, until the whole moisture has departed.
Then extend the sponge with hooks, and scour with a fine burnisher under a slight flame, and cut through it as much as you can, until you have excised all of it.
And burn from outside, so that it does not touch the flame.
And you know, that this operation is safer, and more remote from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with a cut
If indeed in the hour of the cut, or in the hour of the burn after the callous has become cold, or the flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary that you should cure that which makes the adversity to you in that which it is necessary to cure it, according to what has been said above
But if the patient is timid, and does not expect this operation on account of its horror: then I order a perforation as I have said above: and that is it
When you are assured by me that this has been made known to you concerning the signification of the matter, which is that it is a wound which has become aquous: then you must make the patient sit upon a raised seat
Then perforate the callous in the lower part of it with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and leave the opening wide open, until the whole water has drained out
Then place upon the place of the wound, and ligate it, and let it drain out the remaining water: then care for it until the wound is healed
If indeed there is an obstacle to the outflow of the water in the hour when you perforate it: and this is not except for the fact that a white membrane makes adversity to the outlet of the wound, and prohibits the outflow of the water: then it is necessary that you introduce a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which the watery humors are extracted, whose form has been mentioned: or add in the operation of the wound a little of that which has been mentioned before
You know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or thereabouts.
When it accumulates, it returns in the same way and passes away the days of the infirm
Concerning the care of wounds of the flesh.
Chapter LXIII.</start_of_turn>
You know that in the section above this Ramus, fear is leading to harmful results in many situations.</start_of_turn>
Therefore its discharge from this must be sought out.</start_of_turn
And I remember the operation in this case, and the appearance of the pus.</start_of_turn
I say that there are many pus formations in the body, from which testicles are made: and that is from excessive moisture.</start_of_turn Or from acute or acrid excess, which flows down to the testicles.</start_of_turn
Or from a blow.</start_of_turn>
And the color of the pus is according to the color of the body, and not to its pain: and it is thick pus.</start_of_turn
And perhaps it is stony pus, whose color is dark, and which has no sensation.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it is from the swelling of arteries, and the inflammation of these: as I mentioned before concerning its reminder: or from the swelling of veins.</start_of_turn
That which is from the swelling of arteries is recognized by the position of the pus, when you press it with your finger.</start_of_turn
And it does not behoove you to touch it directly.</start_of_turn
That which comes from the inflation of veins does not disperse from it by anything with the pressure of the fingers. It is also possible that above this kind of swelling there should be a cutting, and above the rest of the flesh: as, for example, to separate the skin from the testicles.
Then extend the limb upwards, and extract it with white wool: and loosen the suspension from the vessels, and ligate the vessels: and cut through the suspension after you have freed it from all parts of the limb
If, therefore, the limb is consolidated with those natural parts of the flesh, then it is necessary to grasp the limb and cut through it. And if there is an adhesion between something of the bundles, or in that which is between the vessels: then it is necessary to free the whole adhesion, and to make a circular incision
But if there is a natural protrusion of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut through all of that, and to extract the limb, as we have said When, therefore, your operation is finished, then put a bandage of lint in the wound in rose-water and wine: then care for it with the rest of the care, until it is healed.
Concerning the care of limbs, which is with oil.
Chapter 122.
A swelling is a soft swelling which is like a bag, with the softening of the testicles: and it makes it difficult for the patient to walk and to exercise, and to walk.
And in the treatment of this ailment is fear, because of the remembrance of which it is preceded.
But it is necessary to say that we must do the operation in this case as they did the first time. I say, therefore, that it is necessary that you make the infirm person sit upon an elevated seat.
Then make an incision with a sharp knife across the scrotum, until the veins are detected
Then remove it from all sides, as we said concerning the arteries in their place.
Then dry them in a middle section straight according to the length of the body, and remove that which accumulates from the humours of corrupt faeces.
Then care for the wound with care for the rest of the wounds, in which the generation of health must take place, so that the veins which nourish one testicle may fall away
There is nothing bad in this.
But if indeed the veins are all broken, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the veins: so that they do not receive nourishment from this, because of the incision, and that they do not become gangrenous or dry, and that there is no damage to the surrounding parts.
On the care of the intestines. Chapter 155.</start_of_turn>
Why do the intestines descend from the rupture to one testicle?
The rupture is either from a fissure or an extension of it.
These two species of rupture arise from various causes: from a blow, a jump, a cry, an elevation of a heavy object, and similar things.
The sign is when the rupture is from an extension of the fissure.
It happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen immediately: and is equal to the elevation of the deep parts: because the fissure compresses the intestine
The sign of the rupture is when there is a sudden pain which originates from the beginning of the fissure: and there is a different swelling appearing under the skin close at hand: and this is because the intestine has escaped through the opening of the rupture and is going outside the fissure itself
When the intestines escape with the testicle: and this is called the intestinal hernia, and swelling: and sometimes it is associated with wind
When stool runs into the intestine and is retained there: and this is with great harm: because it causes severe pain, especially when it is expelled.
And in the treatment of these diseases of the intestines there is fear of the knife: therefore it is necessary to take precautions against it.
The method of operation is to bring out the intestines from the wound of the patient, so that they return to the cavity of their own container.
Then they are placed over the collar of their neck between your hands: and raise their limbs.
Then spread out the skin following the skin up to the testicles: and dry the testicles thoroughly throughout their length
Then fix in two wounds the section of the gut, according to what is necessary to open the section with ease: and the section be according to quantity, as much as is possible, that it may depart from it whatever.
Then strip the intestines, and those which are under the skin of the testicles, until the white intestine is detected, hard from all parts: then insert your finger into the index of that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white intestine and the testicle, which is under the skin, and between the intestines according to quantity, and absolutely with that which is adhered to the posterior part of the testicle.
Then move with your right hand to the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white intestine upwards with your left hand: and elevate the gut with the intestine to the part of the section: and command the minister to extend the gut upwards: and you resolve the adhesion which is behind the complete solution
And seek with your fingers that there be nothing there in the white intestine which is hard.
If indeed you find something there: then push it downwards towards the lower part
Then grasp a needle, in which is a thick thread, made of twelve threads: and insert it into the back of the white intestine, which is under the skin of the testicles which follow the section: then cut off the extremities which protrude from the thread, until there remain four threads.
Then make a loop with some of them above some with the shape of a cross: and tie with silk thread, of which we have spoken, because it is under the skin of the testicles a strong ligament which cannot be undone, until it does not have any of the things which nourish them send them to them: that it does not happen that there should be a cold abscess.
And place again the ligament next to the first ligament, distant from it by the space of two fingers.
And remove from the sheath two ligaments, which are under the testicles, in the quantity of the magnitude of a finger: and incline the rest entirely according to the roundness, and remove from it all.</start_of_turn>
And dry in the lower part of the skin of the testicles a section from which blood runs, and heal: as we have said before.</start_of_turn>
And administer wool soaked in oil under the bandage, and put in a wound: and administer the ligament which we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
And when the white sheath which we mentioned has been cauterized, after its incision fearing the flow of blood.</start_of_turn
Much of this has happened.</start_of_turn
And remove the ligament, until it falls by itself.</start_of_turn
If however its case is delayed, then it will be embroidered with warm water: and put over that which we mentioned, until it falls.</start_of_turn
And then care for the wound with the rest of the care of wounds, until it heals.</start_of_turn
Of a wound filled with blood.</start_of_turn>
Chapter LXVI.</start_of_turn>
In such a wound no one should be allowed to remain above its care with a knife.</start_of_turn
And the first said that it is done as we have narrated in the wound which is with the Bit.</start_of_turn
That is, as soon as it has been sectioned above that with ease: then dry in the middle, and care afterwards with that which opens it up, until the nails fall out: and care for the wound, as we have said, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
On the disruption which happens in the groin.
On the disruption which happens in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the place protrudes, and does not descend to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it descends, it is little, and returns in all hours; but if it is prolonged with that time, a fissure is added in the groin, until the intestines descend into the groin.
And this happens from the extension of the groin, which is in the groin, as we have said
Because the groin is extended: then it becomes softened, and the place protrudes, and the place protrudes
And its treatment is with cautery, as it has been mentioned before.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands
Then dry the place of the rupture after it has protruded and emerged, by cutting across its width, according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then bind the intestines and those which are under the skin, until the groin is white, which is under the skin that follows it
Then take a sponge and place it over the place where the groin has protruded, and press it deep into the belly
And then two places where the groin has protruded at the extremities of the sponge, and connect them with a suture one with the other: and then draw out the extremity of the sponge.
And do not cut the intestines at all, neither stretch them out or do anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal branches. Then care for the wound.
When you have finished cutting the thread, moisten it, and close the wound, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Do not let the edges of the wound be drawn together, and do not add prominence of the rupture.</start_of_turn>
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to the tissue.</start_of_turn
About the softening of the skin of the testicles.</start_of_turn
Chapter LXVIII.</start_of_turn>
Many people soften the skin of their testicles for some reason, because of which the surrounding flesh is softened and its appearance is spoiled.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is asked to care for it, to make the sick man lie down on his back, and to cut away all the softened skin over the natural skin.</start_of_turn Then gather together two lips with a suture: and if you wish, put in the beginning a little of the softened skin with three or four stitches, and make a firm suture.</start_of_turn
Then care for the care of the remaining wounds, until they are healed, and the threads are cast off.</start_of_turn
About castration.</start_of_turn
Chapter LXIX.</start_of_turn
You know that castration is forbidden in our law: and for that reason I will not mention it in this book: and it is not necessary to mention it, except for two cases.</start_of_turn
Whoever is present is sufficient to know the science of medicine when he is questioned about it: and to know the treatment for that which has befallen him.
The other method is that we often do not require castration of many animals for our purposes, because of the remedies which we have for them, such as oxen, horses, and goats, and the like among animals.
I say therefore, that castration is done in two ways. Or by attrition.</start_of_turn>
Or by incision, and section.</start_of_turn>
In the former method, however, the operation is: we make the animal sit in warm water, until the testicles soften and relax, and hang down; then we shall cut off the testicles, until they are resolved and do not appear to the touch.</start_of_turn
In castration by incision and section, it is necessary to hold the animal, and grasp the skin of the testicles with the left hand.</start_of_turn
And this method of castration is better than the one by attrition: because attrition may leave something behind in the testicles, which the animal desires for coitus.</start_of_turn>
Then care for the wound, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the care of hermaphrodites, there are two methods.</start_of_turn
Chapter 70.</start_of_turn>
Hermaphrodites are of two kinds according to the two sexes.
Hermaphrodites are of two kinds according to the two sexes. One kind appears with the scrotum either in the space following the scrotum or between the testicles, in which there is a figure like a female vulva, which has hair, and sometimes urine runs from the scrotum.
Hermaphrodites are of two kinds according to the two sexes. One kind appears like a female vulva sitting on the pubic bone just like the testicles of a small man, standing outside: one is like the penis of a man, and two are like two testicles
And the care of these three kinds, two of which are hermaphrodites and one of which is female, is: because it is necessary to cut away the fat added, until the impression of them is gone.
And then care for the rest of the wounds.
As for the second kind of male, from which urine comes out, which is in the scrotum, there is no operation, nor any care for it
About the incision of the tentorium and the fat eminating in the women's bodies.
Section 71.
The tentorium may perhaps be added above the natural thing, until it is bruised and makes its aspect unsightly: and when it is increased in some women so much, until it expands like in the males, and persists until the coitum.
It is necessary therefore to cut away the superfluous tentorium, either alone or with one incision, and cut: and do not be excessive in the incision, especially in the depth of the root, so that there does not result the flowing of blood.
Then care for the wound itself until it heals
The belly which is born from the matrix orifice until it fills itself up, and sometimes it goes out to the outside like the tail, because of this some call the disease of the tail.
It is necessary therefore that we proceed thus as we proceed with the Tentigine, and we must care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the care of the female ulcer which is an unperforated wound of a woman.</start_of_turn>
Chapter LXXII.</start_of_turn
The female ulcer is, as it were, an unperforated wound of a woman, or a small hole.</start_of_turn
It is either natural or accidental.</start_of_turn
The accidental one is that which arises from an existing ailment: and this may be either from the natural formation of the flesh added to itself, or from the fine sand or from a hair: and it may be either in the depth of the matrix, or in the flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it hinders coitus and conception, and delivery, and perhaps also the menstruation.</start_of_turn
And the knowledge of it is by the aspect of the obstetrician, if the visible prolapse is close.</start_of_turn
If however it is not visible, then inquire with your fingers, or with the radio.</start_of_turn
If however the prolapse is from fine sand, and is close to two teeth: then cleanse it, and break it.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to place over two lips two cushions.</start_of_turn
Then put your two fingers of both hands together, and the woman should sit with her back expanded and her legs spread wide.</start_of_turn
Then extend two lips with force, until the hidden vein is ruptured, and the opening is made.
Then grasp the lip and absorb its blood into the sponge, and place it over the place: and let the woman do everything every day, so that it does not solidify in another place.
But if the vein is great, thick: then it is necessary to cut it with a broad scalpel like the leaf of myrrh
But if the opening is from natural flesh, then suspend the blood with hooks, and cut it: and be with physicians who will stop the flow of blood without damage, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus aggregated with alum.
Then give a broad leaden catheter, so that the wound does not solidify too quickly, keep it for a few days: and give vinegar from dry linen, then care for the rest of the treatment, until it is healed
And when there is birth in the matrix of other flesh: it is necessary therefore to cut them in this way: while there is no cancerous ulcer in the matrix, no contradiction is made with iron in any way
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red ones in women's veins.
Chapter 73.
Hemorrhoids are indeed a bursting of the veins through the opening of the veins, until there is a great discharge of blood from them
When they are thus diminished, the hemorrhoids become thelil: and I have already said in the discussion of their species and signs: and here I will say what is to be received for their treatment, and what is not
I say therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the matrix opening, and which are not apparent to the sense: then there is no treatment with iron for them
Whatever exists in the cavity of the uterus above which sensation has fallen is cured.
It is necessary therefore that you introduce the woman into a cold house.
Then stretch out the belly with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut away the hair from its roots
Then powder over the wound with one of the powders mentioned above without causing any injury: like acacia, dragon's blood, and thus, and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour.
Then place her in cold water
If the bleeding persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and caraway seeds, and gallnuts, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back
If blood therefore dries up with this, that is good: and if not, make it adhere to the tender parts, and blood clots, without making a scar
Then take wool, and soak it in the juice of tarth, or the juice of arnica, or the juice of chamomile blossoms, that is, gentian, pontic wine, and make it adhere to the blood clot
When the wound has calmed down, then take care of the place with unguents, until it has healed
Although it is red like the heads of almonds, and has a rough appearance
It is necessary therefore that you cut away what appears from it, according to what I have said above: and take care of it, until it has healed
On the perforation of the Exitura which occurs in the matrix.
On the perforation of the Exitura which occurs in the matrix.
Various kinds of extrusions occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscesses, ulcers, foreign bodies, and swellings, such as herpes, swelling, fistula, haemorrhoids, carbuncles, and abscesses.
And I will also mention concerning all these ailments and their kinds, their signs and their treatments in general: it is necessary for me to speak in this treatise of the perforated abscess which occurs in the matrix, when it is extruded from other abscesses which connect the health, and to tell how it is opened with an iron
It is necessary for you to consider this.
If the pain of the abscess becomes acute with percussion, inflammation, and fever: and you see it turning red: if it goes beyond your senses, do not attempt to perforate it: cure it with that which will promote healing, until the acute pain subsides
Then you must make her sit on a cushion which supports two cushions, and recline, or lie down on her back, and rest her feet on the lower part of the belly: and let her knees be spread wide, and put her arms under her armpits, and bind each ligament conveniently to that.
Then let the obstetrician sit at the right side, and administer the instrument with which the opening of the maternal orifice is made.
Which form it has comes to light in those things which follow.
And you must take care when you administer this instrument that the ribs do not touch the radio of the deep matrix of the woman: that it does not go deeper into the matrix than necessary, and does not damage the lower part
If the instrument be deeper than profound, it is necessary to place sponges over the covering of the profound matrix: in order to prevent the entrance of the entire instrument into the profound matrix. And it is necessary to pour out the moisture which runs in the instrument from the upper side: and to keep the instrument firm, and to draw back the minister of moisture until the profound matrix is opened.
When it appears that the orifice has been reached, and the hand touches it, and it is soft and yielding: then it is necessary to dissect it at its head with a broad spatula.</start_of_turn>
When the pus has been evacuated, then it is necessary to place in the wound a swab dipped in rose oil or green oil, in which there is some astringency: and place the swab, and draw out the section from the profound matrix.</start_of_turn
And place externally over the matrix, and over the wound a wool pad soaked in water, in which there are air bubbles.</start_of_turn
And then care for it for two days with an ointment which is suitable for it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when the matrix and the wound are washed, it should be cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which there is a radix of lily or long aristolochia: then return to the ointment.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to forbid its care with iron, and care for it in the way which we mentioned in the instructions.</start_of_turn
The doctrine of obstetrics concerning the way in which the physician should treat the fetuses of women, according to the unnatural form of their egress.</start_of_turn
Page 72.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to first become acquainted with the natural form of the partus.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to first become acquainted with the natural form of delivery When therefore you see a woman in labor, who desires to smell the air and who lets go of what is above her belly in connection with the delivery, and when the embryo comes out quickly: then you know that this delivery is natural, and that its issue is above its head and following.
Whoever is outside of this delivery is unnatural and perilous.
For when the fetus comes out upon his feet, and his body goes before his head, and his feet and hands together, or one foot alone, or his head and hands, or his belly: or perhaps it bursts through the collar of his garment. And similar things happen in unnatural deliveries.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to be prudent and cautious in all these matters, and to avoid error and extravagance: and I shall show you all the figures and how they are established by this, and what is signified thereby, and I shall stand by myself.
When the fetus comes out above his head in his natural delivery, and when he feels that he is above the woman, and that the delivery is difficult for her: then let her sit down, or let the women hold her up: and let her breathe with a wet cloth over her face, and with warm oils.
Then the Obstetrix inserts his thumb between the fingers of the Spatumile, and finds its second digit, and severs it with his nail until it is free from the moisture: and he first grasps the woman's womb, until the fetus descends.
If however it does not descend, then it is necessary to instill the woman with a douche of foehnus mucus.
Then command her to sit down after the clistering: and make her clench and relax her abdomen for an hour together.
The fetus will immediately come out.
If two hands of the fetus come out at once, it is necessary to reduce them gradually
If however it does not obey in its introversion, then place the woman on her seat, and lift her feet above the head: then press her seat against the ground: and the woman must keep still, lest she fall from the concussion
If therefore they do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut through the palms of the hands, and extract the remaining fetus: and bind up the hand with a cloth, and extract it with equality: for it itself will come out.
The exit of the embryo through the feet.
When the fetus comes out through the feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards: then gradually turn the fetus: afterwards equalize it
Then grasp one foot of it, and extend it gradually
When they come out as far as the hips, then command her to clench and relax, and make her clench her abdomen: the fetus will come out if God wills it.
If it does not go out with it as we have said, then gradually reduce the limb, until you have set it according to its natural form.
The limb itself will then come out with the evacuation
If it is opposed by all that we have said: then take from the high slime, and the fat, and gum dissolved in vinegar: and pierce all through in a good percussion: then line with the hair of a woman, and below with the belly of her
Then make it sit in warm water, until the discharge follows naturally.
When the lower parts are thus warmed, then make for it a sieve of myrrh: and support it.
When it has held the sieve for an hour, then make it sit upon a seat.
Then make it cough: and bind its bone and nose: and press the lower part of the belly with ease
For the pus will come out immediately.
The fetus comes out over the knee and hand
When it comes out according to this form, then it will enter inwards gradually withdrawing its hand.
Then the woman lies over her neck, and hangs her feet downwards: and she lies recumbent on the bed, and tightens her hands
Then press upon her belly gradually
Then draw out what is under her feet from the nails, until it is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then grasp her feet, and move them with force
Then first of all that is above the navel gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts.
Then withdraw your hand gradually, and equalize the fetus gradually: and command the woman to press, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus is delivered with a lateral slant from the hands.
There is an inclination towards reducing the hand in this way.
If, however, it is not possible to reduce the hand, then elevate the woman, and make her walk about
If she is unable to walk, then make her lie upon a bed: and strike her legs with a striking of concussion
Then apply the unguents which you have prepared from mucilages
If she contracts during the delivery, then make her sit down upon a seat
Then study in the reduction of the hand, and equalize the fetus according to the natural figure: and command the woman to strain, and tell her to press herself, until she comes out.
The fetus comes out over his collar, with his hands spread out, and his face is towards the mother's back
The Obstetrician must hold the hand of the fetus, then gradually turn him around, and equalize him with ease
When he is equalized, then place upon his wound that which we mentioned from wax and mucilages
Then tell her to move gradually
When you have done this, then make her sit down upon a seat, and tell her to lean towards the right side
Then command him to lie down: and make him raise his chest with his chest muscles.
Then command him to lie down: and make him raise his chest with his chest muscles.
When he has descended to the orifice of the matrix in this manner with this movement, then split the second [layer] with your finger until it is evacuated from the moisture.
If, therefore, it hangs suspended over the face of the fetus, and his neck, then cut him from the navel: so that it does not remain, and he may die
Then drive the fetus inwards, until you place your hand according to what is necessary: and command the woman to compress herself slightly: he himself will depart through the easy exit
The exit of twins, or many fetuses.
You know that twins are often born together: and sometimes three, or even four are born together.
Indeed that is extraordinary, and rarely happens.
Five indeed are things beyond nature, and do not entirely endure: and contain these [fetuses], although they multiply, in one: and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing between the ligament of each one.
And sometimes they depart as does a single fetus through a natural exit, easily: and they depart through an unnatural exit, as we have narrated. If, however, there are some things which are difficult at the birth, and are prolonged to this which we have mentioned from unnatural figures, then take care of them as we have narrated: and let the midwife be gentle, and do what she does with ease and delay, and adapt to every figure which is prepared for her from the ingenuity leading to health
When one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more seeds are formed in the matrix, and they are aborted: then it is verified that the woman has aborted seven in one instance and fifteen in another.
Which is confirmed by the measurement of a wise man.
Therefore all this is necessary to be learned in the science of Obstetrics. Perhaps indeed it will be like this: let us compare it with that which is necessary
Of the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you cure the dead fetus with the medicine which I mentioned in the treatise on medication, and it does not go out, and you must use an operation with the hands, then you must consider it
If, therefore, the woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the things from which one might fear a loss of life during the process: then it must be arranged that the woman lies over the couch, over her back, with her head inclined downwards and her legs raised up: and the minister should hold the patient's body from two parts, or it should be bound to the couch, so that the body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus
Then moisten the os matricis with oily substances with high mucilage, with aloes and fennel seeds, and linseed seeds. Then the Obstetrician should smear his hand with these oils and mucilages: then he should introduce the hand into the matrix with ease
Then he seeks the place where the nails of the fetus are fixed, and the convenient place for this
Consider therefore at all times, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its armpits, or in the neighboring parts of the ribs, and under the hyoid bone.
If it descends upon its feet, then in the groin, and the middle ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand: and place the suture in that which is between the left thumb and index finger: and introduce it with the thumb with ease, and fix the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the desired thing.</start_of_turn>
And extend with an equal extension, and it should not be extended only in a straight line, but should be moved towards all parts, so as to alleviate the exit of it: just as it is done with a tooth when extracting it.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary in that which is between them, to soften the extension.</start_of_turn
Because if it is retained from that part, then it is necessary for the obstetrician to grasp any two fingers with the thumb and index finger, and introduce them from the side, so that it may recoil with what is retained.</start_of_turn
If therefore the part of the fetus comes out, then exchange the sutures to another place which is higher: do this until the fetus comes out entirely.</start_of_turn
If therefore the hand comes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its adhesion: then it is necessary to cover over the hand with the palm.</start_of_turn
Then extract the bone until it comes out whole, or break it at the junction of the plant, or in the cubit: and so it must be done in the other hand, and in both feet.
If the fetus's head is large, or if there is a coarsening of the delivery, or if there is water in the head: then it must be introduced between the fingers of the Spatumile spinosum, and find the head with it, and extract the water: or break it with the instrument called Almisdac, which has a form like that of the other instruments in this chapter.
Proceed in the same way if the fetus has a large head, then it must be severed from the membrane: or extract it with the forceps, as we have said
Then grasp the bone with forceps.
When the head comes out, and is close to the rib cage: find it until the moisture that is in the chest has drained out.
If it does not become complicated, and does not yield to delivery: then break the head coarsely, as much as is possible to you
If the lower belly is swollen, or if there is swelling in it: then it must be pierced, until the moisture from it comes out
If the fetus is above his feet: the traction of it is easy, and the direction of it towards the maternal bone is smooth.
If it is obstructed at the belly, or the chest: then it must be extracted with the cloth which you have put over your hand: and find the belly, or the chest, until the moisture has drained out of it
If the rest of the limb has been delivered, and the head returns: then the Obstetrix will introduce his left hand. If the os of the matrix is open, then insert the hand into the depth of the matrix and grasp with the head, and draw it out with the fingers until it reaches the os of the matrix: then insert into it one hook or two hooks and draw it out with it.
If the os of the matrix is closed, because of a thick clot that has happened to it: then it is not necessary to labour above it, but it is necessary to administer effusion of humours, fat: and administer plasters: and sit in waters which soften and moisten
If the foetus is above its side, then it is possible to equalise it: then is administered what we said in the foetus above.
If it is not possible to do this, then it is cut off, and it is extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not let anything out of the second [part] entirely.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said in the cold clots which happen in the matrixes.
If there happens to be a flow of blood, then descend in styptic waters, and administer the rest of the cure.
And I myself saw a woman in whose womb there was a dead foetus: then it was impregnated over it again with oil, and afterwards the other foetus also died.
It happened to her at length a clot in her navel, and it became inflated, until it was opened: and it began to emit pus.
I was called to care for her, and I treated her for a long time: and it was not solidified.
I put upon her from some strong plaster of adhesion: and it came out of the place of the bone.
Then some days passed by, and another bone escaped.
Then I was astonished, for in the midst there was no bone left.
I thought, therefore, that the bones of the fetus had perished
I inquired of the woman, and I extracted many bones, the woman being in better condition than before.  And it passed in this way for a long time, and a little pus came out from the place.
I did not trust this external thing, except that it had science, and an assistant who worked with the physician in surgery.
Concerning the forms of the necessary instruments for the extraction of the fetus.
Chapter 77.
Here below is the form of the Strictor, with which books are equaled, to which are equal two rings at the ends of two sticks.
It must be known that this Vertigo must be smaller than the Strictor: and that it may be made either of ebony or of seasoned wood
The width of every stick is like two fingers; and the margin of each of the two is like a single finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a middle: and in the middle of the two sticks are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are fixed in both, of whose length is half a palm and less, and the width of each is like two fingers, or less
And these two additions are introduced into the maternal bone, so that it opens when two Vertigines are rotated together
The form of the Vertige which opens the matrix
Another form similar to this, smaller and smoother
Let wood be cut from the rib, or from the buttock, according to the shape of the forceps.
Two additional pieces should be made at the extremity of it, as above: and the length of each additional piece is like a palm, and the width of each is two fingers wide.
When you wish to open the matrix with this, then make her sit over the lectum, with her feet dangling over the edge, and open what is between her thighs
Then insert these two additional pieces together into the matrix: and you hold the lower extremity of the instrument between her thighs.
Then open your hand with the instrument, like making a pair of forceps, equally according to the quantity of the opening of the matrix, until the Obstetrix does what she wishes.
The shape of the other Vertex which they have mentioned is like the shape of the Impelling Force by which the fetus is driven forward.
The shape of the Almond which opposes the small head. The shape of the Neighbor having a single spine
The shape of the Neighbor having two spines
The shape of the forceps which have saw teeth, with which the fetus's head is countered
The shape of the Sponge having two extremities to cut off the head.
The shape of two spatulas also of the hands.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more numerous their kinds, and the better they are prepared in the artificer's shop, the more rapid is the operation and the greater the benefit to men, because of their quantity.
Observe not the mean of the instruments, but their preparation which is with you
For their necessity is undeniable
About the extraction of the second [tooth].
Chapter 78.
When the second [tooth] remains at the root, then it is necessary to remove the inferior ones in order to retain the breath.
Then make a depression with the thumb, and grasp the hand over the bone and the breath of the patient.
If it comes out through this, it is good
If not: then take hold of the pulp, and pierce through the bone in the socket: and place in it herbs which open the bone like calamine, rue, alum, chamomile, henbane, and poppy seed, and cedar wood: take all these herbs, or some of them, and soak them in water, and put them over fire
Then put a piece of Arundinum over the socket of the bone, and the other extremity in the bone: and hold it until the vapor has gone up to the cavity of the bone.
Then make a depression once more, as we have said
The second [tooth] will come out easily
If however it remains after this treatment, and does not come out: then command the Obstetrician to soak the hand in boiling lime or high mucilage Then he inserts his hand into the belly and searches with her second hand.
When he has found it, then he grasps it and slowly extends it outwards.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it is an appendix that lies deep in the belly, then he inserts his hand, as we have said, until he has found the second hand, and he gradually pulls it outwards along the straight line, so that the belly does not tear due to the stretching force: indeed it is necessary to turn it with ease to the right and left sides: then it should be added in the amount of the stretching force.</start_of_turn>
It itself obeys him then, and is served, and departs from the adhesion.</start_of_turn
Which if the belly is hard, as we have already said: take care of the belly with straining, and from an ointment of oil with herbs.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it does not come out with all that we have said, then take care not to strain too much in the process of extracting it.</start_of_turn
Indeed it is necessary that what comes out through the belly to the woman's hip should be bound to the woman's hip.</start_of_turn
Then he closes the belly with four unguents.</start_of_turn
This itself will putrefy the belly after a few days, and will be dissolved, and will go out.</start_of_turn>
Indeed when it has putrefied, there will be a bad smell emanating from it to the stomach and head, and it will cause pain which will render the patient weak.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered for this.</start_of_turn>
Some of the ancient ones are experts in fumigation with rue and dried figs.</start_of_turn
Instrument formation for the fumigation of a woman during the second retention and menstruation.
Let an instrument be made like an upturned bowl, or from horn: and its wide end be placed over the flame: and the fumigation be placed over the berries: and hold it until the fumigation has consumed itself: and do it again for another.
About the care of an unpierced beast.
Chapter 79.
Many boys are born, and of them some are unpierced, whom I have oiled with subtle saffron.
It is necessary therefore, that the midwife pierce that saffron with her finger: and if she does not wish to, she shall pierce it with a sharp spatula: and let tears flow, lest it touch him
Then place upon it wool soaked in wine and oil
And care for him with nails, until he is healed
If however it is necessary to oil him, then put in the wound a lead cannula for several days, and take it out when the boy wishes to urinate
And sometimes the oiling of an Ani is from the consolidation of a wound, or from a swelling.
It is necessary therefore to dry up that consolidation, and then care for him as we said before concerning the care and lead About the care of fistulas which occur in the lower part
Chapter 80
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are Nodulation and Swelling which occur near any bone of the limb: or in the space of one part: and there is one fistula, or more
When the old knot has become loose, it opens and a white watery moisture or subtle pus flows from it.
And sometimes these penetrating fistulas arise from it.
And these are fistulas when they are penetrating from the space until the belly and until the marrow of the bone
And they are penetrating until the joint of the hip and until the knot of the buttocks
From this, however, it is recognized that a penetrating fistula until the groin, even if it is not penetrating, is as it were, as when you insert your finger into the groin: and you insert a subtle piece of lead or iron into the fistula from the air, or from the iron: when there is no swelling
When there is swelling there, then insert into the wound a subtle piece of lead or a hair from a horse's tail until you feel the tension, or until you see the hair in your finger.
If you do not feel the tension, neither is anything coming out from the discharge, neither swelling, nor worms as I have said: then you know that it is not penetrating: remedy therefore for the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating until the belly or until the bladder: then the significance of that is the discharge of urine from it, and the prohibition of this until it is consolidated with the physicians.
If indeed it is penetrating until the hip joint or the hip bone: then the sign of that is that the tension persists until there, if there is no swelling until the bone: and there is pain around the part and pus always comes from it: and it does not improve with medication, neither is it consolidated with ointment
And in all these penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure: the cure for them is toil and humility before the stupid doctors who formed them. And in those which are neither penetrating nor ancient, hope for recovery is expected with an incision: as I have said before, and as I have proven: let the sick man lie between your hands on his back; elevate his limbs up to above his hips, and let his knees be bent towards his belly.
Then introduce lead or air into the fistula, until you know where its outlet is.
If the sick man feels around his belly, then it is necessary to insert your finger into the belly
If you feel in your finger an attempt to penetrate itself which you detect, besides that which you feel between your finger and the abdomen, or meat: then you know certainly that it is penetrating: for there is no cure for that, as we have said
They say that in some men the carrion itself heals, and from the medicine which is expected to be applied: it is necessary to apply gentle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before, and to introduce the flame into the fistula until it comes around the belly
Then do that again two or three times, until you know that all the added fatty tissue which is like the quill of a bird has been consumed.
Then care for it with cloths softened with butter, until those fatty tissues have gone out: then care for it with nourishing unguents which generate flesh and consolidate.
If it heals well, that is good.
If not, then it does not recover with any other treatment at all.
If not, then it does not recover even if you take away the hand which is in the armpit and which is between the thumb and the fleshy swelling of the flesh, or if you lance it: and if you pour oil into the fistula following the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry with the hand which is in the fistula until the cutting has passed beyond the extremity of the thumb, and the thumb is freed and falls off.
Then soften the flesh which has been cut through, which has absorbed the bristles of a feather pen, so that nothing remains of it from the flesh
If however blood flows and separates between you and the operation, then it is better to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine than to cut the flesh: for it is more rapid in healing and more secure.
For fire-cautery unites the good qualities, adds the adhesion of the tissues, and brings about the separation of blood and drying of moisture
Then care for it with cloths soaked in butter, or with bruised twigs, until the place emits pus, and the flesh is drawn out in pus
Then care for it with strong stitches of solidified wax, generating tough flesh: and these are the medicines which have stypticity and drying qualities.
For when they are restored, then it is healed: and it does not take long time. If however the fistula persists to the depth of the anus, and extends from the excess of the body: then introduce your finger into the anus and inquire concerning it.
If you feel the thumb and there is between you and the fistulous matter a swelling of fat or flesh, and is close to penetration: then there is no operation in that case, except according to the degree of confidence and hope
If one mode be sufficient, it is either to cauterize the part itself, as we have said before, or to dissect it, until you have reached its concavity, so that you may afterwards introduce instruments and perform the cure.
Proceed not too far with the dissection, lest you pierce the membrane containing the marrow, and cause an unfavourable outcome of the evacuation without your desire. Then cure it as we have said before. Perhaps it will be healed: or you may stretch out the membrane itself, and dry it after you have scraped it close to the bone, as we have said, or with hooks, or with another acute instrument.
Then drain the bloody parts which are left after the dissection, until the bone is firm with the mark of the incision
Then attempt to restore the entire wound with the incision, and the upper orifice where it is consolidated: and there remains an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it is better to leave it open
And when the fistula is to be sutured in this way: when you introduce the hook into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus: then grasp the hook pierced through the end, which is like a needle with a head, that is, preparing the skin, according to this form
And introduce into it a thread wound from five threads, and pass it around these.
And introduce the hook with the thread into the fistula, until you have reached its concavity
If there is a puncture in the inner margin of the anus close to the bone, then draw out the thread from that hole: so that you can introduce your finger into the anus, and draw out the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and bind them as much as necessary: until those parts which are between the two ends of the thread have become soft and fallen away: then cure the wound, until it is consolidated and healed
Except that you do not make it wide open by means of a laceration, lest you destroy it.
Do so then as we have said, until it is healed.
Shape the sponge-rubber as it is found, concerning the fistula, whose curve is acute above and blunt below, and the other part is not acute, so that you do not damage that which is not necessary, like water
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids from which blood runs from the incision of them: and the care of the incisions.
Chapter 81.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways.
They are either inside the rectum, like little stones of the intestines or dates: or they are like little seeds of wheat
And they are small and great: and blood runs from them always, and there is one of them, and there are many of them.
And they are outside the rectum, and at their extremities
However, those which are outside the rectum are mostly small and moist, from which runs clear urine, or a little blood slowly: and they are of different colors of the body
And the care of those which are inside the rectum is that you urge the patient to bear down: and evacuate, until the anus appears, and the little one comes out.
Therefore, do this also with stitches: or hold it with your finger
Then cut through at the roots of them
If they do not remain in the wound due to the humidity of the air and their softness: then cover them with rough linen cloth, or with a coat of lanolin from a sheep's wool, and extract them with your fingers.
Then pierce the wound, and sprinkle over it after incision any fine, warm powder, so that they remain in the place of the cautery.
Or cauterize them according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
Then care for the wound with the remaining treatment until it heals.
If it does not obey the opening of the anus, then give the patient a suppository in the rectum where there is a small bite, so that it will be evacuated with the feces, and the patient will soon evacuate it when it is expelled naturally.
If they are nevertheless extruded from the anus, then it is a light matter, easy: grasp them with your finger or grasp them with a forceps, and cut them off.</start_of_turn>
Then care for the wound as we have said until it heals
And whoever dislikes an incision with a knife, then he must administer a suture of them in this way.
Take a thread that has been twisted, and introduce it into the substance.
Then extract the foreign bodies upwards, and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the opposite side: and loop two extremities of the thread, in the lower part of the needle, and let them be parallel: and tighten the foreign bodies with a strong suture.</start_of_turn>
Then knot the thread, and extract the needle.</start_of_turn>
Do this with all the foreign bodies, and discharge from the wound one at a time: neither leaving them, lest there be excessive bleeding.</start_of_turn>
Then place upon the wound an infused cloth in rose-water, or vinegar, and place the latter upon the wound: and command the patient to rest.
Then leave it until it falls off naturally.</start_of_turn>
When it falls off by itself, care for it with unguents, and remain attentive until healed.</start_of_turn>
(The text continues with instructions for treating wounds.)</start_of_turn>
Many are caused by the evacuation of feces, and the constriction of nature.</start_of_turn
When these things have been evacuated, and do not avail in medicine: then it is necessary to apply a sponge with Spatumilian seeds, or with your finger, until they become moist, and the outer layer is scraped away which hinders adhesion.</start_of_turn
Then care for the wound, until it is consolidated as it should be.</start_of_turn
If, however, they do not consolidate: then repeat the wound with greater reason than before, until much blood flows, and then care for the wound until it heals.</start_of_turn
(The text continues with instructions for treating various ailments.)</start_of_turn
Then care for that: and if you wish to cauterize that, do so according to what precedes in its chapter.
However, from the heel thus a small, rough, filtered, rounded elevation appears on the surface of the body.
And they often happen in the hands of children.
And its care is that you extend the heel and cut it through: or you bind it with a silken thread: or with hair, until it falls off
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is prescribed with fire, or with acute medicine: and thus the heel will be eradicated both inwards and outwards, not inwards alone with the instrument that I speak of A worm is also a small, filtered elevation, large, on the surface of the body, which extends inwards to the depth of the ulcer: and when it comes into contact with cold, it feels like the bite of a worm in it, and it causes pain throughout the body, and most of all in the hands
And its care is that you take a needle from the beak of an ostrich, or a strong quill, and put it over the worm, until it is surrounded by the circumference of the needle around its parts
Then withdraw your hand with the needle, until you have severed what is around the worm: and you put it into the depth of the flesh, and extract the worm from its root. And if you wish, do it with an air needle, or a needle of iron, according to this form
Let the upper part of the needle reach the thickness of the surrounding skin, so that it may alleviate the tension on the thumb and its retraction
And if you wish, cauterize the worm according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization of the heel.
Concerning the forms of instruments which are administered to patients in ailments of the belly and intestines, and the solution of the belly and the intestines.
Concerning the forms of instruments which are administered to patients in ailments of the belly and intestines, and the solution of the belly and intestines.
When the intestines are made of silver, or gold, or blown glass, or hammered out.
And when these instruments are made of small and large sizes, according to those which are administered
This is what is administered in the treatment of young children with loose bowels, be they weak or painful, so also with clisteria
Large intestines
Small intestines
The upper part of the head which is bound up by the uterus, be it wide according to this manner: and that it has a distinction so that the uterus is bound up like water, and the lower part of it which enters the belly be closed, hard, blunt, stretching to thinness: and on one side of it are two holes, and on the other side one hole
And the breadth of the hole according to the length of the ribs, and more widely a little, and the uterus in which the medicines are placed from the belly of the beast: or from paper wool, which is like the shape of the small asphodel: whose root is one palm
When it is thus placed in this uterus, it is bound up in the head of the clister between two distinguishing constrictions strong
Then anoint the cavity with oil.
This is the form of the circle here depicted, and of holes. The quality of the anointing with oil is this: that you apply as much of the belly, or from the medicine, as is appropriate for the tolerance of the patient: and take care that it is neither too hot nor too cold, neither too warm nor too cold.
Then the patient lies on his back, and raises his legs towards the head: and put under it fat, that is, skin which men lie upon, or lint
Then anoint the area with oil, or with alum, or with barley mucilage, or similar things.
Then introduce the instrument into the cavity with ease.
Then take hold of the belly with two hands simultaneously, and press it out with force, until it has evacuated everything that is in the cavity of the Clister into the intestines Then remove the Clister, and raise the patient's legs to the side And if the medicine compels you to remove it, then hold for as long as you can.
And if he sleeps through the whole night, it is the greatest remedy.
If however you anoint him in the ailments of the bowels of the belly, and he has a speedy recovery: then repeat the Clister until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses of pain: then let the Clister be gentle and cold, soft, from the Clisters which are used to anoint children
And this is the form of the gentle Clister which is over the strictness of the skin.
On the treatment of wounds of the head without fracture of the bone.
Head wound without bone fracture.
I have said in the discussion of wound treatment that it agrees with the book, and I will now speak of their treatment with the hand and with the help of physicians as a supplement.
I say, therefore, that wounds are varied according to the nature of the wound and the place where the wound falls
The nature of wounds is diverse, as are the impacts of a stone: either an incision with a sword or knife, or a blow with a lance, stick, or arrow, and the like
Wounds, however, which are caused by the place of the body, are like those which fall on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the stomach, or the limbs: and the like from various parts of the body.
And I shall speak of the treatment of some wounds, in order to set out the ratiocination and rule regarding the rest of the wounds.
I will begin with simple head wounds: because the memory of composite matters will come at the beginning of the third chapter of the head.
I say.
When in the head there is a simple wound and there is no fracture of the bone: consider then, if it is from the impact of a stone, or like it, and if the skin is only bruised: and it is a great wound and the time is great for an inflamed swelling of the head: then act immediately, and perform a cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay: and extract from him blood according to the quantity of his virtue: if there is nothing to prevent phlebotomy, especially if there is little blood coming from the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the patient abstain from repletion, from wine, and from coarse food
But if anything hinders the reduction, then one should abstain from food, and not approach meat, nor drink wine.
And let there be placed upon the wound if it happens to have a thick clot, a soft cushion filled with fat, or with wine in which there is stickiness
And if you are certain that the clot is thick, then place upon the wound, if it exists with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the powder which I will tell you about later: and if it has changed the air, then place upon it some unguents until it is healed
And if the wound is large, or has been made by a sword, and is similar: and the edges of it are not to be held together by threads, then gather them together with sutures, as I shall tell you concerning the sutures of wounds within in the same way
And if the wound has been detected from a bone, and hangs, and its retention is not necessary except for a small suspension: then cut it through
Then care for the wound with the physicians, and restore in it solid flesh in the place of the skin, and command the patient, let him eat foods in which there is greatness, such as heads, and barley cooked, until the pulse is like this: and the like
When you find in the flesh putrefaction, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut through the whole putrefaction, and throw it away: then care for that
And if in his wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not to be clipped by the physicians, then inquire about the artery.
If the wound is not closed, then dry it with Spatumili, or ligate it.
If necessity compels when it does not agree with what has been said, then cauterize the wound until the blood is separated
Method of applying powdered charcoal.
Recipe for olive oil, dragon's blood, and burnt lime. Mix one part of each together, and grind them to a fine powder. Apply this powder to the wound and bind it securely, until it adheres well and coaguates with the blood
Then string the wound over sponges, and let it go, without loosening it until it remains, so that it does not stick to the wound
For it is not eradicated by medicine until it heals
Then care for the rest of the treatment until it heals
Of head wounds.
Head wound section.
If indeed it happens that a wound occurs in the head, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound
If, however, the nerve or an artery is cut: then if it is the nerve, it is not in vain, unless its cure be sought with that which makes hemostasis immediate, as for example, sponges and sponges of silk and things of that kind
For the nerves are not known, and they are contraacted by them.
You must not put anything cold upon the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the soul of the limbs: and let that be which is cured by the physicians gently, as for example, lime with sweet water occasionally infused with oil, or with rose oil, and alum, when it is washed away even with sweet water: and the rest of the mineral stones, according to this method, and moist unguents.
If however the wound is great, then administer a suture: or close its lips with pieces of wool.
Then take care of it until it is healed
If indeed the wound is depth, or has occurred in that sinus in the lower part of it, in which pus is gathered, then perforate it in the lowest place in that.
If indeed a blood vessel has been cut, and its blood flow has followed: then separate it, or dry it up, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if need be for that
If, however, the cheekbones of the gullet have been fractured, either entirely or partially, and the soft parts are protruded: then join the lips of the skin with a suture above the canthus of the gullet, and do not touch the gullet, but rather equalize it with itself, and reduce it above its natural position.
Then bind it with a loose dressing, and discharge it in a few days.
Then care for it with poultices in which there is styptic and drying action, until it has healed.
If, however, a nail has made an impression in the bone, then investigate it: then if there are fragments of bone in the same, remove them all, or whatever can be extracted from it: and whatever cannot be prepared, discharge it, until the nail has rotted away, and the swelling has subsided.
And if the nail should be broken, then grind over it the powder which I have mentioned before.
If, however, bone is seen in the nail, and a fistula has formed: then care for it as described in its chapter.
Chapter 86.
If, however, from the wound blood comes out when the patient breathes, you know that the nail is deadly
If it is not of great depth, and is merely bruised with blood, do not immediately grind or bind it, lest you prevent the blood from draining from its depth, but bring the hand to the heart, and cut off the patient: but put in it a pleasant poultice, and leave it for two days
If the unguentum is not present, then place in the opening of the wound a wool cushion which has been well-worn, so that it may absorb what is coming out of it from the humilities: and let the patient sleep over the wound, so that it may heal what has aggregated in it.
If, however, for three days or more the wound has passed without causing the patient pain, nor spasm of the heart, nor bad tremor, nor stricture of the bowels, and all other symptoms have ceased, then you know that the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
Care for it therefore with care and with medicines, and with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the healing is excused, and it always opens, then you know that a fistula has been made.</start_of_turn
Care for it therefore from its chapter.</start_of_turn
And if the wound is from the incision of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then care for it with that which preceded the suture, if it is great: or with powder, if it is small.</start_of_turn
If, however, there is an impression made in the bone, and it breaks through from it: then inquire about the wound, and properly remove that which is separated.</start_of_turn
If, however, they are not separated, then leave them alone, until the wound putrefies, so that the extraction may be easier.</start_of_turn
As for the rest of the accidents of wounds in the rest of the limbs, the judgement in their treatment is their own which we have already said.</start_of_turn
Of wounds of the belly, and the issue of the intestine, and the issue of them.</start_of_turn
Chapter LXXXVII.
The disruption that occurs at the entrance is great, medium, or small.
From the great there is sometimes the extrusion of the intestine, or the number of intestines
Therefore the handling of these things is more difficult and more complex
And even the small disruption is difficult in another way.
Therefore, it is necessary that the reduction should be performed immediately if you do not want to be delayed by the inflation, opening out and swelling of the bowels: for this makes the passage difficult
For this reason, therefore, the medium disruption is better: because with this one the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is with the great and small disruptions
You know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods.
Two sutures are common to join the sutures of the belly, and in the sutures of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures are proper for the remaining wounds.
However, these are more proper with the suture of the belly: and I will tell you one and the same with exposure and declaration. I say therefore, that when the wound is small and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it is difficult to reduce it: then that is because of one of the two ways
Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: or because there is inflation in the intestine due to the cold of the air.
When this is the case, it is necessary to heat it up, so as to compress the sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water alone
Pour the decoction in water, let there be a squinquit of saffron, a cyperum, a spicam, and embroces with the intestines until the swelling is resolved.
When it has been made in that liquid in which there is stickiness: it is better than water alone in the resolution of the swelling.
When the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the intestines with the water in which the decoction has been made, either hot or cold.
For in this way it will soothe the entrance of it with a little thing.
If however its return is excused after this treatment, then find in a slight disruption, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut off.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared than when it is cut: and it does not cause a forced compression to stop after the necessity and the defect of the instrument
Let one part be acute and the other not acute, and the extremity not be harsh like that of Spatumilis, but rather be softer: and that which is similar to a chick, like water
When the swelling has been increased and the intestine has entered, then it should be supported, so that there is a reduction of it according to its natural form in its own place, if possible over that: for that is better
When however the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it should be made to lie upon its back, and put its knees higher than its head.
And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then put its head and its chest higher than its lower parts
And in the same way, if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then put your intention and your consideration always in this, that the part in which there is a swelling be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary, that the physicians should consider this in great wounds, and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for thee.
Then make it so that it be present between thy hands, the minister who holds the whole hand together: and join together its lips.
Then draw from this that which follows the suture something after something: and this is the way of common suture of one
And it is, that thou take an awl, or a number of awls according to the quantity of the size of the wound
Then let go from the extremity of the disruption the quantity of the digit of the ring, that is, the physician: and fix the awl one before which thou intrude into the thread in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of the fat which is under the skin from the inside, until thou make it penetrate from another part, and thou join together two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of the fat: and there are four orders formed.
Then string with a double thread around the circumference of the awl several times from two parts simultaneously, until two lips of the wound be aggregated by the gathering of descent.
Then let go the length of the digit also, and fix in the flesh another awl: afterwards draw up the thread with the awl, as thou didst with the first awl.
Do not cease doing this until thou hast completed the constriction of the whole wound
And the awls be middle between the length and the thickness: because the fine awls slip easily from the flesh: and the thick ones are difficult to enter the skin: for this reason it is necessary that they be middle in thickness, and length
Neither must the needle be fixed at either end of the skin in such a way as to pierce the flesh too quickly, for this will open up the wound before it has time to consolidate. Neither must the needle be left too long, even when sutured, for this will prevent the wound from consolidating.
Neither must the needle pierce the patient during sleep: and place small plugs of wool around the extremities of the needle, which will hold the needle in place: and remove them when you know that the wound has consolidated.
And thus is the kind of suture which is more suitable for small wounds.
For in the suture of these wounds, one or two needles or thereabouts are sufficient.
The second kind of suture is common, as it joins together four extremities: two of the skin and two of the fat, with the needle passing through the middle of the thread equal in thickness and width
Then when you have pierced through with the needle, reduce the needle from the part from which you began, so that the thread is taut from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture is like the suture of cloth which is used to mend cloth, and put between every suture as much of the thickness of a small finger
This kind of suture they know well
And when I did this suture to him, his wound which had occurred in his belly, which had been caused by a knife, and which had been burst open with a palm of the hand: and there was a break in the gut about two palms from the middle of the intestine, and there was a break in the middle of the belly.
I reduced it therefore after I had made the gut outside the wound for twenty-four hours
The limb has been consolidated in a space where it remained for about fifteen days. I cared for it and it has healed: and it has departed after many years, having returned to its normal state.
The physicians had judged that it would not heal
Yet miraculously, it healed without ointment
Because I was in a place where unguentum was not to be found, neither did I use anything from the physicians.
I placed upon the limb a warm compress twice a day, and I diligently washed it with honey-water until it healed
Two kinds of sutures I shall declare in accordance with the narration of the sermon
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert the point from the outside towards the inside of the part.
When therefore the needle has penetrated the skin, and in the wound which you have made according to the length and breadth of the whole body: draw out the point in the side in which you inserted the point, and make penetrate from the inside part towards the outside in the opposite extremity
When you have thus made the needle penetrate, then make it penetrate again following this in the same limb from the outside towards the inside: and draw out the point which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate from the inside part towards the outside in the opposite limb: and draw out the point which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate with the penetration which you are making in the swelling of the limb which is in the part opposite to this one, until it penetrates the whole thing
And begin also from this side and join it with the limb which is from the swelling in the other side, and draw out the point from the skin where it penetrated.
Then reduce the skin to that side, and separate the outer limit which is on the other side, along with this outer limit make a triangle: and extract the skin which is from the part of it, and make it one with the other, and the other make one after the other, until their outer limits are all in accordance with this example.
And the sum of all these sutures is as the sutures of the skin which are made for the skin: thus as you separate one part from the other extremity of the skin: and as you send one part away from the other part, until you complete them
Second species of sutures, as Gale has said.
This is the explanation given above: that their sutures are to be like those of certain physicians, who collect every part to the same extent as nature itself: and apply the outer limit to the other outer limit, and the outer limit of the triangle to the other outer limit.
And this is done according to what I have told you.
It is necessary to make the point of the triangle close to the exterior from the inside: and make the skin penetrate to the inside only in this place: and send away the two extremities of the triangle
Then draw out the point, and make the skin penetrate from the exterior to the inside through two extremities of the triangle, namely on both sides
Then draw out both of them, and also make them penetrate from the inside to the outside through two other triangles which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common suture, and is a suture whose progress can be remembered.
This is indeed what Galen has also said
And they said.
The suture within is rectified with two squares.
When the suture is inside, it is rectified with two squares. That is, introduce through the flesh on both sides a single thread: and begin with the introduction of the needle from the side towards you, and make it penetrate until it reaches the opposite side, following the suture that is between the tissues equally
You know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen: then the suture of that is more difficult than that of the rest of the abdominal cavity
The judgment of the healing of a wound is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
When you follow a wound with its blood, before it changes itself with air: reduce the intestine, and hold it in place, and then place above it the powder of burnt incense.
When the air has changed the wound: then place above it some unguents, which are for you the presence of these things, until they make pus: and the threads fall out, and solidify the fat, and heal.
Then care for this as for the care of the rest of the wounds, until it heals
But if these things are not present among the medicines, then place above it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, a moist compress: and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it heals
If however you fear that the wound communicates with the principal parts in the lesion, then it is necessary that you immerse soft wool in lukewarm oil, or in rose oil: and put it around the circumference of the parts which are between the groin and the armpits
If he feels pain, or swelling, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens to him), then let him drink a cluster of wine with black vinegar, warm: especially if the putrefaction has already progressed in the intestine, and an opening has been made through to its cavity.
And know that that which is from the great intestine is easier to heal: and that which is from the small intestine is more difficult to heal
The large intestine, however, which is called the Ieiunum, does not suffer healing from a wound that has happened to it throughout: and this is because of its multitude, which is from its veins, and the greatness of its size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to its own nature of nerves.
If, however, the wound proceeds from the intestine, and is a hernia, then follow it up accordingly: reduce it according to your reduction of the intestines equally.
If indeed it has passed beyond that space, and is black, or dark: then it is necessary that you string it with a thread above the place which is degenerated from it, so that the blood does not flow
For in the hernia there are veins and arteries.
Then cut through that which is beyond that ligament, and put two hanging threads from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so as to relieve the attraction of that towards the wound, and the evacuation of it at the case of the hernia, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remember the wound which has happened in the Intestino.
When a disruption happens in the Intestino, and it is small: then it is possible, in some people, that it will recover: for I saw that which was wounded in the middle of the stomach with the blow of a lance, and was black: and it had become old: and there was made a fistula, and it went out of itself through egestion, and there was swelling.
I remain engaged in treatment until I am relieved from it by the healing of the patient: neither shall I cease until the healing is complete and the locus is firm.
Once the locus has been solidified, I fear over the patient, for an accident might occur over the patient due to an evil that has happened to him in his body: and it did not happen to him from that evil
I remain in better conditions, eating and drinking, hopeful, having bathed, and exercised in my diet.
And some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is small: then it is necessary to bind it in this way.
And it is like taking large ants.
Then join together two lips of the wound and put an ant on one of those which have an open socket over two lips of the wound
When thus the head is above them, and they are bound together, cut off its head, attach it to its companion, and do not break it
Then put another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this until the quantity of the wound is complete
Then reduce it, and its wound.
These heads remain annexed to the intestine until the intestine is eaten away, healed, and does not cause pain to the patient And it is possible to bind the intestine even with a fine thread: which has been taken from an animal's intestine and is attached to it when it is introduced into the belly
And it is like taking the end of this thread from the intestine and scraping away a lot of it.
Then the ligature at the extremity is made by passing a fine thread under the tissue.
Then insert the thread into the knot, and pass it along with the intestines.</start_of_turn>
Then tighten the knot.</start_of_turn> And thus is the fashion of stitching with needles and intestines, not without trust and hope.</start_of_turn>
You know, a large and wide vessel, especially if it is in a narrow intestine: then there is no skill except meticulous handling, and its healing is not at all.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of ulcers and fistulas.</start_of_turn
Chapter 88.</start_of_turn>
You know that every vessel, or abscess when it grows old and decays, becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and constantly emits pus, and does not burst: then it is called universally in every member 'fistula', and we call it 'Zuchemen'.</start_of_turn
And a fistula is a kind of filter-node, hard, white: which has no pain, with the consistency of a feather from a bird: and for this reason they call some of them 'Risati', that is, feathers.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it is in a moist state, which emits pus.</start_of_turn
And perhaps it bursts with moisture in some hours.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it is in great moisture, and little, and is large, and soft.</start_of_turn
And I have already spoken in the explanation, that every ulcer which does not heal, neither is born in this body, is not that except for one of these nine causes.</start_of_turn
Why one is of such condition, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body: or because of its malice: or because between the inside and outside of the lips there is a hard substance which hinders the birth of flesh: or because there is much pus and slime: or because a wound in itself is putrid, and the matter which comes out of it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inappropriate for its treatment: or because a corruption falling in the region is a kind of pestilence: or because of a property of the region itself, as happened in Caesaraugusta, in which there is great difficulty in digesting food and the healing of wounds is delayed by nature: or because in it there is only one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have mentioned all these causes and signs and their treatments with the doctors in debate: it is necessary that you write here the treatment of fistula and swelling, which is done by one operation with the hand.</start_of_turn>
You know therefore that fistula can occur in all parts of the body.</start_of_turn>
For from these things are fistulas which arise to great veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestines, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs: or to some of the vertebrae, or to some compound joint: such as the hand, and the foot. And from these things which approach the principal limb and those which are like them.</start_of_turn
What is therefore with these fistulas in this way, is that they are from difficult diseases which do not receive treatment, and which are accompanied by labor and ignorance.</start_of_turn
If, however, there is some fistula of which the depth does not reach these places which I have mentioned: and if you hope and trust in the treatment of it, and if you wish to be cured of it, then attempt to take air, or iron, if the fistula tends according to its straight line, and inquire about it with the physician.</start_of_turn
If, however, in the fistula there is a twisting, then you must investigate the surrounding parts with a fine lead weight.
Since lead is softened by its own body, and is flexible around the twisting
If there are many holes in the fistula, it is not possible to pass a weight over the surrounding area with a hook
Therefore close from these holes to the hole of the fistula.
For the moisture which closes the fistula comes out through other holes.
Then inquire carefully in what way it is possible: whether it is bone or nerve, or is the fistula long or short: or is the fistula one which has many holes, and lies upon all of this, with the sum of your strength: with your interrogation of the patient, which questions you ask, and the finding of pain in compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and symptoms following.
When you have stood in all these places truly, then go to the treatment according to your confidence: that is, as you consider, if the fistula is close and apparent, or in a safe place distant from the juncture, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of these places which I mentioned: then dry the fistula according to what is stated above from my narration, and remove what is in it from the filtration, and rotten flesh, which is born in its hole from flesh, or pus, and similar things: and care for it until it is healed
If, however, the fistula is of great depth and is according to the rule: then it is necessary to dissect deeply as much as possible.
Then expose all its rotten flesh.
Then administer the lead that has been bound in medicine for acute cases: and introduce it until you have reached the depth of the fistula that you have perceived with the iron: do this in such a way that the acute medicine may corrode the whole of what remains in the depth of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore the same with poultices which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If indeed it does not heal by this, then cauterize it according to what we have narrated.</start_of_turn>
If indeed the cause of the fistula is bone, and you suspect that to be the case: then inquire concerning it, and dry it according to what I have told you: if it does not hinder you anything from the bone, or the nerve, or the principal limb, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
If indeed it is detected that there is bone, and there is some corruption and blackness in it: then radiate it, until the corruption of it is entirely removed.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with that which nourishes it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Which if it does not heal, and discharges pus as it did before: then you know that you have not reached the whole eradication of the corruption.</start_of_turn
Detect therefore above that [the fistula], and inquire concerning its reason, and make a preparation for it with your utmost skill.</start_of_turn
Then restore it.</start_of_turn
If indeed it heals, that is good: and if not, then you know that that corruption is in a profound depth of the body, which you have not been able to overcome.</start_of_turn
It is not indeed in this with cunning, except by sending it back to its natural state.</start_of_turn
If the small bone is corrupted, and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps which agree with it.
If there are many bones, then make an exquisite drawing out of them all, and do not leave anything remaining with your forceps
If, however, there is resistance from moisture in it, and there is no fear of incision, or error: then incisions may be made in those moist parts and the flesh, if there are any, and the bones shall be freed.
If, however, you are not prepared to extract the bone at this time, then place upon it what will putrefy it: and draw it out when it has putrefied, since it is in the neighbourhood of the bones from the flesh and moisture.
And keep the bandage so that it does not solidify.
And let the incision be firm as that which you made in your operation
And put upon it, if necessary, a cushion soaked in powdered sulphur or a cushion soaked in Egyptian unguent or some other unguents of your choice.
For when these moist parts putrefy and are separated from the bones, the discharge will be alleviated and the attraction of the bones will be easier
If, however, there is a large bone, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and the like, and which is corrupted: that is a great part. Then draw it out with the utmost care, until the black part and the corruption are gone
Then restore the bandage.
If, however, that which is in it is corrupted, is a great part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close it up and cut it through completely until the corruption has ceased: then care for it until it has healed And I tell thee concerning the wound which happened in his thigh: that thou mayest take it as an example and an aid for thy operation.
A youth of about thirty years of age had pain in his thigh, because something had become displaced within his body, namely from the inside outwards, until it reached the knee, and there remained a large swelling: and there was no external cause for it.
It remained thus for a long time until the swelling opened, and many materials came out with it
And after that, healing took place, and the limb was bound up, and many holes were made in it: from which pus and moisture of the body were emitted
The matter continued for two years with the action of many physicians, and there was no skill in the hand of any man in that art, until I was called, and I saw the limb and the materials coming out of the holes in great numbers: the whole body of the man was stiff, and his colour was pale yellow
I therefore attempted an incision in one of the holes, and the attempt reached the bone.
Then I examined all the holes: and I found that they all went deep into the limb from all parts of the thigh I proceeded thus, and I saw above one of the holes, until I reached a piece of bone: and I found that it was corrupted: it was rotten, discoloured, and putrified, and had a hole in it, until it had reached the marrow
I saw that which had been detected by me, and prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I judged that there was no other corruption in the bone except that which I had cut away, and I saw that it was sufficient to cut away
I have eradicated it.
Then I establish a restoration of the wound with consolidated spaces over a long period with the physicians.
It is not consolidated yet
I have undertaken to restore it.
It is not restored yet
Then I restored it with the physicians, and it was consolidated quickly and healed: and no further operation was necessary for that purpose, except for the weakness of the patient and his little tolerance, and my fear of death for him, since it was happening to him in every hour from the excessive evacuation of his syncope.
He is healed completely: and it is made in the place of the hard bone of the jaw, and a good arrangement has been made in his body, and his strength has returned: and he has recovered his composure: and he has not made him any hindrance in walking or sleeping ever since
If however the prominent bone in the body is fractured: then it is necessary to bind it up as follows: and it is that you take the ligament and bind the bone at its extremity: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament of greater thickness than the first ligament. Then bind the ligament over the meat, which is on the bone: and extend its extremity, so that you pull the meat downwards: and you discover the meat over the place where you want to cut, so that it does not damage the meat
Place wood or a board under the lower bone in the center: because when you do this, it does not prevent the knife from cutting the corrupted flesh.
It is also necessary that the suture be placed over the corrupted part rather than in its concavity, so that it does not appear to the sense and cause discomfort. If the bone is corrupted and does not protrude, continue the part with the part: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in the part itself: then remove the flesh from all sides altogether
Then place wood below.
Then cut that part from the first part where the corruption is, until the suture is continued from the other part: and let the suture be as far from the corruption as possible, as we have said
If the corruption is at the junction, cut the corrupted junction itself and cut the bone where the other part continues.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no sense in it except for abrasion.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot: then things are difficult there
It is true that you must inquire about the nature of the corruption.
And scrape away the surrounding area and the surrounding parts as much as you can, and with whatever device is possible: when it does not cause a violation of the vein or the nerve.
You know that various saws and knives are suitable for cutting this bone, according to the position of the bones, the preparation of them, their size, fineness, magnitude, and rarity
Wherever necessary, it is necessary to prepare an instrument appropriate to each type of operation.
You know well that these operations are significant to you because of the kind of instrument that is needed for them, when you have studied long enough.
And the knowledge of the modes of this art is a testimony to the modes of ailments: for you will then find within yourself that which thing is suitable for them from the instruments for all diseases.
Serras' form.
Serras' other form
Serras' third form
Serras' fourth form
This is the form of the Serras, which is made with the center broken off Make its arch from the steel, its point from iron: and its handle from boxwood, and make it pyramid-shaped with the center broken off
The form of the Rasas which are joined together
The head of this Rasas is according to the form of the head of the star-shaped key: and its points are according to the form of the holes of the sheath
And it does not fit except when it is hammered with the head of the joined Rasas, when the head is broken, or the bone is broad and large
The form of the greater Rasas
The form of the middle Rasas
The form of the narrow Rasas
Shape of the wound in which there is a convergence.
Shape of the wound in which there is a convergence of parts.
Shape of the wound in which there is a convergence of the extremities
Shape of the wound is small, with fine edges
Shape of the wound with which bones are involved
Shape also of the wound is great
This is like a radius and the extremity is like a saw: it appears in many places because of the reason of bones.
Shape of the wound which is in accordance with the reason of its perforation from bones
The extremity of it is triangular, and the edge of it is acute
Like that of India
And in the same way it should be, as for wounds and incisions and saws
About the incision of the extremities, and the suture of bones.
Chapter LXXXIX
The extremities become putrid, either from an external cause, or an internal cause.
When therefore you have treated the matter with medicines and it does not yield: and you do not fear that there is any recovery: then you must cut away the limb until the corruption has ceased, that the invalid be saved from death, or from the greater mischief of the defect of the limb
And the sign of this is that the limb is blackened, until it is consumed: for fire burns it, or it becomes putrid after turning black: until that putrefaction has ceased throughout the body of the limb, and has spread to the whole body
Properly therefore when the incision has been made, and in like manner if the cause of the corruption is a blow to some venomous creatures: such as the scorpion of the sea, and spiders, and beetles, and things of the like.
If therefore the corruption exists either from a blow or from a wound at the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption, so that it may reach up to the remaining hand
And in like manner if it happens in the palm, then cut off the palm from its root, and do not leave space for the corruption, until it has reached the wrist bone
And if it comes to this, then cut off the arm at the elbow in its joint. If however the corruption passes beyond this and surrounds the elbow: then in this is the death of the limb.
And concerning this, beyond this, is the quantity of the antidote.
And in like manner do the same concerning the foot, when the corruption comes to the finger, then cut off the finger at one of the joints: and if it comes to the heel bone, then cut off the whole foot
If however it reaches the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint
If therefore the corruption has gone beyond the knee, then it is not in this to remain, except for amputation, and to leave the limb dead
And the manner of cutting off the limb, or preserving it, is to tie the ligaments below, which one wishes to cut: and to tie the ligament above in the place.
And extend one ligament downwards: and extend the other ligament upwards.
And you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is detached
Then it occurs, or returns.
Then it occurs, or returns. It is necessary to put on all parts of the bandage around the limb, and not to touch the healthy area: and the injury should be added to the inflamed area, and the swelling should be made soft.
If however blood flow inwards occurs during the operation, then cauterize the place quickly: or put over it some powder which absorbs blood.</start_of_turn>
Then return to your medication until completion.</start_of_turn>
Then bandage the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and care for it, until it heals.</start_of_turn
And I say to you that this happened to me in my foot, the same thing that I say to you.</start_of_turn>
That is, because it happened to me in my foot, with a swelling which assimilates with fire: and the corruption of that happened in the finger first, until the whole foot was affected.</start_of_turn
He therefore escaped from his ailment, after he had cut off the corruption in the limb with its bones, because of the pain and swelling: and it occurred at the joint, and he was healed.</start_of_turn
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption happened to him in the nail of his middle finger.</start_of_turn He came to me, and I attempted to recover the swelling with that which I had put on the hand from the physicians after the purification of his body: and the swelling did not disappear, but increased in another finger: until the corruption reached the hand.</start_of_turn
He called me to do an incision in his hand: and I did not do it, hoping for the disappearance of the swelling: and I also feared for the life of his hand.</start_of_turn
Because the patient was strong above the case.
After he had despaired of me, he recovered to his former self: and he came to me from there because he had become strong, and he grasped my hand entirely: and he was healed.
I have not included the subsequent sentence as it is not relevant to the translation of the given sentence.
On the care of joints, and the quality of enemas with doctors.
Chapter 90.
When swelling occurs in some limb with carbuncles, and the swelling is prolonged until the collection of pus has formed: then it is broken, or pierced, and the pus which is in it is evacuated, and the cavity which is left is like a wound: and the skin which is over it is like a wrinkled cloth: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, neither does it reach the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it is called a sinus, and not a fistula, truly; but if the space of the former is prolonged until corruption occurs in some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula, or swelling
And its care is that you cut the whole skin as it wrinkles: and especially when it is wrinkled, and made like a cloth: and trust that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and this does not result in the last consequence: and if there is hardness in the skin from the flesh, then care for it with enemas: and consider it as a sinus
Then if it is large, and the pus which comes out of it is foetid of odor: then enematize it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and alum, equal parts, gathered in a vessel: and boil them over a fire, until the medicine boils: and bring it to the spissitude of honey.
Then take from that what is necessary: and dissolve it with water and honey, and instill it with that Sine: and tie up its opening, and send the medicine into it to the quantity of two hours.
Then draw it out with pressure: make it do so for days until the Sinus is healed, and the smell is gone.
And when it is instilled with water of ashes, when it is not present in this medicine: then take ashes of wood or of the wood of ilex: and sprinkle them over the water.
Then lie still, and instill with it until you are confident that the Sinus is healed
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, neither the water of ashes, then instill it with water and honey, to which something of ground cinnamon has been added
Or instill it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to heal and soften: and the wine makes the Sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of styptic and drying in it
When you have done this a little while, and are confident that the corruption of the Sinus has passed away: then instill it with that which makes new flesh in it.
And it is necessary to take from the plaster of diaphthor: and dissolve it with rose oil and wine: or instill it with some medicine, and anoint with others, of which the properties are written in the treatise on unguents
If the opening of the Sinus is narrow, in which the cannula of the instiller will not pass: then widen it with iron needle: or put in the basin a little sponge soaked in Egyptian unguent, or in aloes, until it is widened
And similarly, if the orifice is also large, then gather its lips together with a suture: and discharge from it the quantity that enters the bladder without addition.
And similarly, if pus runs from this orifice, it is elevated to the upper parts: then dry it in the lower part which is in the same place, so that it runs from there downwards: for pus, when it is concentrated in depth, prevents meat from generating in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus nearby downwards, then attempt to prepare the limb with the preparation which runs from there with ease according to what is prepared
Attempt to retain nothing of the pus at all in it: and take solidifying medicines which are placed above the sign, suitable for this purpose
And extend them over the wound line.
And let the size of the wound be such that it communicates all the sinus.
Then pierce directly through the opening of the sinus with forceps, making the opening of the sinus greater.
Then extend from the loops of intestines over the other wound, according to the quantity of the opening: and place it above itself in a distant position from the opening of the sinus, so as to alleviate the discharge of pus from there: and do not increase the size of the wound, except after a few days or so when one has healed one
And whoever is above the opening of the sinus, moves in every hour, so that it may go out what is gathered in it from the pus: and you know whether it runs from there more or less, or digested or undigested.
And when you have done this again, consider the place of the sinus itself, whether it feels pain in its master or not, and whether there is pain in it or not, and whether there is swelling in it or not.
When the remedy has been applied in this way, and you see that the material which comes out through the opening of the Sinus has ceased, then you know that the Sinus has adhered, or is approaching adhesion: then you must remove it in the morning, or on the third day. And when you have removed the ulcer, then change the bandage and renew the unguentum. If, however, after a long space of time the ulcer has gone down somewhat, you do not despair of adhesion, for healing approaches, since there are men who are slow to generate flesh in their ulcers, and there are those who act contrariwise to this.
If, however, after many days a thick, undigested pus comes out of the Sinus, then you know that the Sinus is not adhered
If the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add in the treatment of the physicians, indeed let the physicians make use of both wet and dry substances: like unguentum dyafinicon, when added in this way it becomes excessive
And from the last of all, when you have cured it, take unguentum dyafinicon and dissolve it with rosewater, and apply it over the old wound equal in quantity to the substance itself.
Then bind it up with it, and use it as before.
And it does the same thing in this way, when it is not present, honey, when you dissolve it, until it has become absorbed, and you use it again.
Or take myrrh, aloes, and olibanum: mix them all together, and grind this up over honey when it is over the fire.
Then spread over the bandage, and bind it over the Sinus: and spread with the honey which you have boiled until it has become absorbed: and sprinkle over it the ingredients, and place over the bandage, and bind it.
When such long aristolochia, lily roots of heaven, lily, barley of herbs, and centaurea are administered together,
When such long aristolochia, heaven-born lily roots, lilies, barley of herbs, and centaurea are administered together, use them either simple or in combination with beeswax. Powder them over honey as I have said before, and use that.
When such long aristolochia, heaven-born lily roots, lilies, barley of herbs, and centaurea are administered together, and the condition does not improve, you know that there is corruption in its depth: or that it makes an impression on the bones, or in other hard parts, or ligaments. Then treat the fistula according to what has been said before As for the treatment of panaritius and nail extraction, and the incision of the digit added, and the section.
Chapter 101.
Panaritius is a swelling that arises under the nail of the thumb or finger, or perhaps in other digits.
When such a thing prolongates, and neglects its cure, and becomes an abscess, it bursts, and emits pus, until it has rotted the root of the nail: and perhaps it has rotted the whole thing, and perhaps the corruption has reached the bone, whereupon there is a foul odor: and the digit becomes swollen, and its color becomes dark
When you are treating this, as we said before, and the cure does not take hold: then it is necessary to cut away the whole superabundance that remains from the nail with a knife
Then cauterize the nail afterwards
The cautery is good for ivory
If indeed the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the addition of the nail now presses meat inwards, and begins to pierce itself, and causes pain: then it is necessary to place a fine radium under the angle of the nail that is piercing the meat, and press it upwards: and cut away the meat easily, and put over that which remains of the meat from the doctors' burns, corrosives, until it is all gone
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, corruption has set in the bone, then it is necessary to cut away the bone and extract it: for it will not heal as long as it remains in that corrupted state.
If you see corrosion and corruption spreading in a finger, then cut it at one of its joints, as is appropriate according to its sensation.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, there is attrition or percussion of the nail, and if there is pain in that area, then it is necessary to bleed the diseased part at first.
Then dry the nail with sharp spatula from above downwards to the end.
And take care, lest the cutting should penetrate to the flesh beneath the nail, for this would cause additional pain and swelling in that place.
Then care for the place with that which rests upon pain.
A finger that is born in the hands of men is sometimes entirely fleshy: and sometimes there is in some of them a bone, and sometimes there is in it a nail: and some of them are born at the junction of the joint, or is the natural result of some node of the finger
He who is born in some node of the finger does not move: and he who is born at the junction of the finger may perhaps move
He who is born of flesh is easily cut
As you would cut it at its root with a broad spatula
As for that one whose birth is in the junction of the joint, the care of it is difficult
Abstain from that incision.
Then it is necessary that you make a round incision at the end of the digit, where it joins the last knuckle.
Close the bone with one or two sutures that meet at that point.
Care for it until it heals.
Consolidation, however, which happens to the finger after injury, often happens either from the natural condition of man, that is, because of it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from the burning of fire, and the like.
Therefore you must remove this consolidation until the finger returns to its natural shape
Then place between the bones some sponges or soaked rags in wet lead: so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate the bones: or place between the bones a thin sheet of lead, until the place has consolidated as it should
And in like manner if any consolidation happens to a finger with the palm, then dry out that consolidation, as it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the limb.
¶ Of the Incision of the Palm.
Chapter XCII.
There are five veins which are involved, large and full of melancholy humours which happen in various members of the body: and most of them happen in the thighs, especially in the thighs of those who are in motion and working, and in those who are carrying burdens.
Therefore you must manage the discharge of the black bile somewhat by vomiting.
Then take blood from the patient easily with a lancet
The treatment of these things with iron is in two ways
One must cut, and blood black is extracted.
Or, one must elevate the vein, and all blood is extracted.
The incision is made in this manner.
The limb is plunged into warm water at first, until the thick blood has dissolved
Then the limb of the sick is bound from the upper part of the thigh to the lower part of the knee with a bandage
Then the vein is cut in one place, or two, or three wide sections
Then cut the vein until blood comes out of the quantity needed for the treatment of the patient, and as much as the patient can tolerate
Then bind the vein: and order that he abstain from foods generating black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins have become engorged, and this is beneficial for the patient.
The elevation is made in this manner
If there are many hairs on the limb of the sick, remove them
Then immerse the limb in a bath: or bind it in the limb with warm water, until the vein becomes red, and swell: or exercise strongly, if there is no bath available, until the limb becomes warm
Then cut the skin in a straight line over the vein section: or at the end of it near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks, and scrape the wound from every side until sensation returns: and it is known when its sensation returns that the wound has been reddened to black.
When the wound comes out of the skin, you know that the wound has become like a cord of white.
Then introduce under these [the teeth of the hook] radium, until it comes out of the skin: suspend it with a thread like a needle and thread
Then dry the other part near the section three digits away.
Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the wound until sensation returns
Then elevate the wound with the radium as you did before, and suspend it with another thread as you did before.
Then dry the other part, or several parts, if you do not digest them.
Then elevate it, and close the last part at the heel
Then remove the thread from the section that is above the wound
And do this until you have removed the thread from the superior section, or from all the sections, until when they have all come out: then close the wound.
But if it does not obey you for extracting and elevating: then introduce a needle with a strong thread, and ligate the wound, and extract it: or introduce radium under these [the teeth of the hook] and turn your hand to all parts until it comes out.
And be cautious, lest you perforate it.
For if you perforate it, it becomes difficult for you to elevate the wound afterwards, and infection enters through that wound.
When you have drawn out the whole thing: then put upon the place of the wound a lancet submerged in wine and rose oil, or oil alone: and care for it until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having twists to which its course is subject, and is not as we have said according to the rule: then it is necessary to find upon the whole of it all the parts of its twists, and the place of its twist.
Then suspend the vein with hooks, until you have drawn out the whole thing: and be careful at the place of your incision above the vein that you do not cut the vein, or wound it: for it is difficult to elevate or extract the vein.
Be prudent in this matter.
The form of the wound which heals the vein.
The form of the surrounding area of the wound
It is not acute at the extremities, like the rest of wounds, nor is it rough, as to wound the vein: it is rather of a moderate degree of flexibility, gentle: for if it were slight, it would not hold the vein by its thinness; and if it were too great, it would be excessive
On the extraction of the great vein of the leg. Chapter XCIII.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, like Alizegi, and the land of Arabs, and in dry, warm lands, few in number, that is, in which no herb or tree is born
And perhaps it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs
And its generation is also from the putrefaction that happens under the skin, like that which occurs within the bodies of serpents and ascarid worms, and the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.
The sign of the commencement of this event concerning this vein is that it happens in a swollen foot.
Then the area swells up.
Then the vein comes out from the place of that swelling, like the root of a plant, or an animal
When it appears from that extremity, then it is necessary to bind over the foot itself, whose weight is from a drachma and a half, up to two drachmas and a node: and let go of the suspended blood from the foot
Whenever anything comes out from that, bind it over with lead and node it.
If this persists for a long time, then cut off part of it, and bind over the remainder.
Do not cut through the root until all has gone out
For if you cut through it, it contracts, and enters the flesh: and makes it swell, putrefy in the place, and make a bad ulcer
Therefore it is necessary to handle it gently, and take it out gradually, until all of it has gone out of the body: and from this vein comes out in some people which is as long as five palms and ten fingers.
And indeed it has come to me, because the urine has gone out of twenty palms.
If however it happens to you at the hour of your medication: then introduce the radium into the cavity of it, and perforate the cavity with a long needle, as with the body, until all that is in it is evacuated: and administer the putrefaction of the place with the doctors for a few days. Then care for the wound
When the vein has many branches, especially when it is found in the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, many holes/orifices appear on it, and the branches emerge from every hole.
Care must be taken of it in this way, as we said previously, and as is proper for it.
As for the cutting of the great veins which are generated under the skin, and which is called the bovine disease.
Chapter XCIV.
This disease is called in this land Bovine Disease, because it frequently occurs in cows, and is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.
It runs throughout the body, ascending and descending: and is perceived by the sense when it walks from limb to limb, until it ruptures wherever it ruptures in the skin at the place where it has burst out, and emerges
Its generation is from the decay of some humors
Like worms and serpents, that is to say, lice and roundworms in the belly
And they are fearful of its malice.
Because when it itself runs in the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the place: then perhaps it bursts there and comes out, and destroys the eye: and this frequently happens.
When care is taken of it, and it is extracted, then it does not happen except when it is walking and the sensation of it is perceived
It is necessary therefore to bind that which is above it and that which is under it with strong ligature
Then dry over it, and extract it
If it is deeply embedded in flesh and you do not find it: then place above it a cautery with fire until it dies.
The greater thing to fear is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.</start_of_turn> If however you see that it has penetrated as far as the head near the eye, then tighten under it the eyebrow a good fold.</start_of_turn>
Then dry over it, and draw it out.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that the patient should use the salves of his body, with physicians who dissolve the bad humors.</start_of_turn>
And beware of foods that generate putrefaction.</start_of_turn
Regarding the incision above the navel Nakir.</start_of_turn
Chapter XCIV.</start_of_turn>
This pain is called in our land Nakir: and it is a pain which happens in some limb: then it changes from limb to limb.</start_of_turn
And I myself have seen it, as I have told you.</start_of_turn
I was called to a woman who was sick in some village.</start_of_turn
And I found her arm swollen, and I saw inflation of the vein of the arm.</start_of_turn
And after an hour had passed, I saw another swelling increase with a worm, as it were running, ascending to his shoulder more quickly than is possible: as if it were silver that was running from place to place.</start_of_turn
The pain subsided from that place and was fixed in the shoulder.</start_of_turn
Then one hour passes, and it runs through the remainder of the body until it reaches the other arm.
Then he said to me, "It revolves throughout the whole of its body, as I see.
I marvel at the swiftness of its movement from limb to limb
And I myself did not believe my eyes when I saw it like this before
But I have seen many who have found that the pain changes from limb to limb: and I have not seen it with my eyes, as I have seen it in women.
I do not believe this, except that it is because of the great swelling of the veins caused by the disease in the lower parts of the body: from this therefore appears to me a change in sensation from the lower parts to the upper parts
It is necessary that they do not appear in those who are delicate and in whom the veins are hidden by moisture.
When therefore he has received his cure and the patient feels this pain: then if it appears to you in the eye, as we have said, grasp above and below the place more quickly: and dry above the place, until the coarseness has gone away: and cauterize the place
If you do not see it with your eyes: then cure it with the excuse of the body, and with that which drives out the swellings, and carmine them with drugs like sulfurous pills and saffron pills, and the like.
(The provided text does not include information regarding the extraction of Sagittarum, so I cannot translate this sentence.)
Chapter XCVI. Sagittae are varied according to their kind and according to the place from which they are expelled from the body.
The diversity of ears is great: for some have large teeth, others have small teeth, and some are concave and others are convex.
And some have three angles
And some have tongues.
And some have stars.
The ears which are hung from the body are in two modes
Or they are like the great members which are concave, such as the brain, the heart, the spleen, the lung, the kidneys, the intestines, and the bladder, and things like these
When any of these great members falls into some part of the body and appears to be a sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary to remove that arrow from the ear, for death follows the wound in many situations
And when it is not evident that there is a bad sign and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then extract it and care for the wound.
When the arrow falls into the brain and penetrates the bone, and comes out through the skull, these signs are: because there are exuding from that place bile which causes swelling, and bruising, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood comes out of the nose or the ears.
And perhaps the speech is stammered, and the voice is lost
And comes out from the wound a white moisture like pus
And comes out like water of meat
If any sign of the disease be apparent to thee, then abstain from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it does not issue forth.
When an arrow lies in the cord, the signs are: that it is close to the left breast: and that it feels as though it were fixed in something hard, not in something soft
The arrow may also be moved like the pulse: and it runs from the wound of black blood.
And following this will be coldness at the extremity, and cold sweat, and fainting.
Know therefore that death approaches with certainty.
When the arrow wounds the lung, the sign is the emission of bloody froth from the wound: and the after-effects which follow the collar, become pale, and change the colour of the patient.
And the spirit expires greatly, loudly: and seeks the attraction of cold air
If an arrow falls into the diaphragm, which is in the chest: then it is near the flanks: and there is a great panting with pain, with breath holding, with sighing: and all the limbs of the arms are moved
If an arrow falls into the stomach: then perhaps it will issue from the wound from some undigested food
If an arrow falls into the belly, and it lies there: something of stool will issue from the wound, or blood, or intestine which has been broken
There is no hope in the treatment of this, neither in the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder, and it is ejected: and something proceeds from it outwards, and the pain is greater over the patient: then you know that it is mortal
The remaining members, namely the face, neck, chest, gut, spatula, aidant, spine, rib, hip, thigh, and knee, are similar to one another and are treated in accordance with various dispositions: when neither an arrow nor a nerve is found.
I also tell you that I have seen no such arrows, which would signify that this is beyond your care.
That is, because I take care that the arrow of envy does not reach his eye or his nose root.
I extracted it from his other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no mark remained on his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had penetrated him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was hidden, and I did not find its tip until I had removed a portion of the wood from it: and it was a great arrow, like those of the Turkish archers, with a lead tip, in which there were no ears
He was healed of this, and no bad thing happened to his eye And I extracted another arrow from the belly of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, which is like those which have ears
Following this, between two ribs: and it was deeply embedded in his belly
I was careful with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another one which had penetrated his chest: and we thought that he would die from it
Afterward, when thirty days had passed, and no change appeared in his condition with regard to the arrow, we thought that it would be better to remove it: and we did so, and he was healed, and no bad thing happened to him
And the arrow that had pierced the man in his back has become fixed, and a knot has formed above it.
And thus has the arrow remained for seven years, since it went out from the root of his thigh
And the arrow that had pierced the woman in her belly has become fixed, and a knot has formed above it, and the arrow remains inside her: and it has not changed from its positions, and the woman has not found any relief from her natural operations.
And the arrow that had pierced the man on his face has become fixed, and a knot has formed, and it remains, without causing him much pain: and there are many like this.
And I extracted the arrow from the King's nose, which had pierced him in the middle of his nose, and it had inclined towards the right side downwards: and the arrow was completely hidden.
I was called to treat him for the wound caused by the arrow until three days later.
I found the knot of the arrow to be firm and high up
I asked him to move his limb slightly with a gentle touch, and he did not feel pain: and even I could see the puncture mark and the pain beneath his right ear
I hope that this was the puncture made by the tip of the arrow.
I plastered the place with a pleasant and digestible ointment, trusting that the wound would heal, and that the sign of the arrow would disappear on its own: and it did not happen in the place of the wound that the arrow had followed
I attended to him with the ointment for many days: and no accident happened, and the knot consolidated in the meantime: and he felt the arrow again on the following day inside his nose
And he told me that.
And he told me that he placed upon it a sharp instrument, corrosive for many days, until it had opened: and when he had tried to grasp it, he found a slight arrowhead adhering to the wood.
And then I added to the incision the sharp instrument, until we saw the tip of the arrow clearly: and we left it for about four months
And when the wound had healed, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and to move it, and it did not yield: then I did not desist from the subtle probing, but devised ways and means to protect it, until I came to do the same with forceps of a greater size, as it happened in the end of the chapter, when I drew out the arrow
And I restored the wound.
And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored
I restored it, and the wound was consolidated and healed with perfect health: and nothing remained of it
And I tell you the nature of the extraction of several arrows: so that you will know the rule and the signification of this which I have not mentioned
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended by the narration: neither did that book comprehend them, nor did the skillful artificer compare them with little to much: and when he found that which is present was wanting, and that which was absent was present: he invented a new operation and a new instrument in the descent of these things of this art when they arise
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed, except in two ways. Or by traction from the place from whence it came in.
Or from the opposite part.
And that which goes out from whence it came, or that is to say the arrow proceeding in the fleshy place: it is drawn and goes out.
If it does not obey the exit at the hour in which it fell: then it is necessary that you delay it for a few days, until the putrefaction of the flesh which is around it is over: and you must relax the traction and the going out of it
And in like manner if it is fixed in a bone, and it does not obey you at the exit: then you must also delay it for a few days: and do it again every day with traction and motion, until it goes out
If it does not obey you at the exit after days: then you must perform an incision around the arrow in the very bone from all sides with a fine thread, until the arrow is amplified
And then draw it and pull it out
If however the arrow is fixed in the head of the bone, and it has gone through one of the veins of the brain, and appears from the wound some of those accidents which I mentioned: then abstain from the traction of the arrow and leave it, until it becomes equal to itself after days.
For if the arrow goes on to the marrow, the death is not prolonged for it
And if the arrow is not fixed except in the body of the bone, and does not penetrate until the marrow: and remains wounded for a few days, and nothing of those accidents happens to it: then think of the traction of the arrow and its pulling out
If however it is fixed loosely, and does not obey you at the traction: then administer a bandage around the arrow as I have told you: then take care of the place, until it is healed.
If, however, the arrow is hidden in some part of the body, and is hidden and concealed from sense: then inquire concerning it with a grasp.
If you feel it, then grasp it with some instrument which is suitable for its attraction.</start_of_turn>
If, however, you cannot see it, because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in depth: and there is neither bone, nor nerve, nor blood vessel there: then find above it until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.</start_of_turn>
Which if there are any ears which hold it, then loosen the flesh fixed in the bone from every side, by every means which you can think, and contort, if you cannot see beyond the fracture of the ears, and the twisting of the ears, until it comes loose.</start_of_turn
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps at all parts, until you make it come loose: and with the last slight pull, that the arrow may not break, and that its extraction should be difficult, and itself be extracted.</start_of_turn
If you cannot see it from one hour, then leave it for a few days, until the things which are around it have putrefied.</start_of_turn
Then repeat it: for it will aid you in that it makes the flux of blood easier. Then administer what we have said from the chapter on treatment: and guard your virtue from the incision of the vein, or the nerve, or the chord.</start_of_turn>
And administer ingenuity in every way which is possible for you to achieve the extraction of the arrow: and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowly, and firmly, as I have said to you.</start_of_turn
It is necessary that you make the patient conform to the figure of the arrow according to how it was in the case of the arrow itself.
Since this is the case, you must make the patient conform to the form of the arrow as it is in the case of the arrow itself.
If this is not possible, then do what you can from the figure.
The arrow which proceeds from the opposite side of the other, or which proceeds from that to the exterior: or it makes a prominence at the extremity of the arrow by means of the sense from the upper part of the skin nearby, and it dries up: thus it is above the wound, and the section is according to the quantity which they take in that clamp.
Then draw out the arrow: itself will thereby become easy to expel.
If it remains in the bone, then turn your hand according to the roundness, until you press the arrow into the bone, and amplify it: then draw it out
If not: leave it for a few days: then do it again, until it comes out by itself
If the arrow is in wood, then push it out with that.
If the wood has broken, and you wish to administer a push: then introduce an instrument with a concave edge into the wound so that it may join the concavity of the instrument to the heel of the arrow: then push out the arrow with that.
If the arrow is concave, then push out the arrow with an instrument entering into it
The arrow will be expelled by that.
If the arrow is venomous, then it is necessary to cut away the entire piece of flesh in which the poison is: if this is possible
Then care for it with that which is suitable for it.
If an arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or on the side: and it is close to that which you touch with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut, and cauterize from the incision of the belly, or nerve, and extract the arrow.
Then bandage it, if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
And this is the form of forceps, with which arrows are extracted.
There are two similar extremities like the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp over the arrow, they do not slacken it
And there are many kinds of forceps, great and small, medium and small, according to the quantity of the magnitude of the arrow, and the rarity of it, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Concave Impeller Form.</start_of_turn>
And the form of the Impeller is blunt.</start_of_turn
This is the shape of the extremity like a Radius, so as to facilitate the entrance of its entrance into the concave arrow, and to drive it with that.</start_of_turn
This extremity of the Impeller is concave like the beak of a bird: so as to facilitate the entrance of the arrow into itself and the driving of it.</start_of_turn
Of the Phlebotomy of Veins.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 147.</start_of_turn The veins that are to be phlebotomized, whose custom runs in the body, are thirty.</start_of_turn
From the head there are sixty: two pulsating veins which are behind the ears, two herbs which are in the two temples, two arteries which are visible in two temporal regions, two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes, a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose.
And two guide veins which are in the neck.
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins which are in the lower lip
And these are the veins which are called Algecherich.
And two veins which are under the tongue
And the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms are five in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is from the side of the shoulder: and it is named after the large vein of the head
And the Fusca.
And it is the Middle vein, and it is composed of the branches of the basilica and the cephalic vein: and it is named after the great vein of the body
And the Basilica, and it is situated in the domestic side: and it is also called the Titillicaris.
And it is named after the vein of the belly
And the Brachial vein, and it is situated over the elbow: and it is that from which phlebotomy is done, and that which appears above the wrist with a visible pulsation.
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the annular and the minimum: and there are two branches to it.
There are three veins in the thigh and in the foot.
One of these veins is that which is under the curvature of the thumb from the side of the heel.
The second is the saphenous: and its place is beside the domestic part of the calcaneum.
The third is the tibial: and its place is beside the heel from the side of the heel
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to these.
As for the two veins behind the knee, from the Aures (popliteal space).
The incisions of these two veins behind the knee are useful for ancient cataracts, and headaches, and safra, and ulcer of the head that is ancient.
And the quality of the incisions of the veins is as I have mentioned
And it is like causing the head of the patient to bleed: and break the skin of his head in the place of the two veins with rough cloth friction.
Then the patient should tighten his neck with his hand until two veins appear
And their places are behind the knee in two depressed parts of the head
Seek therefore easily with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there is the sign with the scar
Then take the cutting knife, which is called the Incidens.
Then introduce it under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone
Then lift up your hand with the vein and the skin to the upper part, and cut the vein with the cutting incision.
The length of the incision should be equal to the width of two joined fingers, or thereabouts: and let blood escape as much as you wish.
Then bind the wound with silk threads and let it go until it has healed
And thus it has gone before in the book concerning the incisions and their cauterization.
Of the cutting of two veins at their bases.
Two veins which are in two positions of phlebotomy are sufficient for an ancient headache: and sweat on the forehead, and constant vomiting: and an excessive flow of acute tears towards the eyes The quality of the phlebotomy is easy according to what I have told you.
Bind the patient's neck very much until two veins appear to the sense of touch: and let the pulse of both of them be under your finger
Then signs with cauterization
Then lift the skin over the vein with your index finger, and make the phlebotomy incision below it, and lift the vein up to the superior part
And cut the vein as you did in the two other veins: and let blood escape according to the quantity you need Then loosen the binding of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour.
Then place above the wound and the threads, and bind it tightly: and let it go until it has healed
And thus it has passed concerning the recollection of the wounds, their incisions, and their extraction at the beginning of the book
From the cutting of the vein of the front of the head after the cutting of the Cephalic vein.
The remedy for the pain of the face after the cutting of the Cephalic vein is the cutting of the vein of the front of the head. This is for old head-aches, and for migraine, and redness, and ulcer and wound.
And as for the quality of the cutting of this vein, that is what I shall tell you.
Take the patient's neck and turn it until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
It has this shape.
Put the sharp point which is in the head of the Fossorium over the vein, and pierce through it with the pin, or with something in the like way: and let the blood run out as much as you wish.
Then close the perforation of the patient, and bind it up, until it is healed
And when it is opened with the wide phlebotomy.
Indeed, it should not be done with a sharp phlebotomy of the extremities, like the rest of the phlebotomies, but rather with a wide phlebotomy
And the phlebotomy must be made according to the passing of the hand: because the bone is close by: and perhaps in this the phlebotomy will break when it is slight
From the cutting of the veins in the two Lacrimalia.
The remedy for the eye from scabies and redness: and for swelling in the eye, and for pains of the face.
And as for the quality of the cutting of these veins, that is to say to tighten the patient's neck and turn it until it appears
Then let the phlebotomy be easy: and you stand over the head of him.
And let the phlebotomy be done according to the passing of the vein to a small length, with a small lancet, broad rather than narrow, for in that place there is no flesh.
If the phlebotomy is too close to the extremity, it may well break
Then let run out blood as much as is necessary for you
And put over his head a cushion, and bind up his head once, and rest him.
Of the phlebotomy of the veins of the nose
The veins of the nose, however, undergo phlebotomy in cases of acute fever, and excessive sweating, and facial ailments, such as migraine, and redness that happens in the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of them is that it tightens the neck of the patient.
Then take hold of his nose with your left hand, and make the phlebotomy below the middle of the nose, long: and hold it at the middle of the nose itself, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straight line.
Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary to take away the last hand with the small lancet: and let run out blood according to your need.
And bind up his head once at night
The bleeding will soon stop by itself.
Of the phlebotomy of the veins of the jaw.
The Guidegi of phlebotomy is useful for constriction of the hiccup, leprosy, melancholic diseases, bad ulcers and wounds, and corrosive substances, that is, herpetiform diseases of the abdomen.
The quality of phlebotomy is that it tightens the patient under the two armpits in the neck: and let the artist stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit upon a seat
Then the phlebotomy is made to the length of the wide part of the phlebotomy.
Then draw out from the blood the quantity that is temperate, or according to that which you need for the purpose
Then do the same with the other arm
Then tie the ligament and tighten the two arms with medium tension: so that the patient is not bruised.
And leave it until the morning.
The wound is healed by itself.
Of the phlebotomy of the veins of Algeberich
The veins of Algeberich are useful for phlebotomy because they cause swelling in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, wounds on the lips, and ulcers on the tongue and in the surrounding area
The quality of phlebotomy of these is that you make the patient sit before you: and tighten his neck with a cloth
Then pull down his lip, and look at two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left side: and their demonstration is by the black color of both.
And this is true: because around them are small veins, black in color
Each incision must be made precisely as it should be. If you are in doubt as to which incision should be made, or which of the two you should choose: then you must proceed with the greater incision and its marks will be evident to you.
Proceed in the same way with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and most frequently these run in accordance with custom with each other: and make two incisions in the two veins that are in the lower lip.
As for the phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after the cephalic phlebotomy has been made
The two veins which are under the tongue are to be bled after the cephalic phlebotomy has been performed: that is to say that the cephalic phlebotomy is for the treatment of the affections of the throat, of the tongue, and of the mouth
The quality of the phlebotomy of the mandible is that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under the tongue at the side of it one vein, and at the side of it the other vein: and the colour of both should be towards black.
Both incisions must be made precisely: and take care not to grasp your last hand in making the phlebotomy
For under them are arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from them.
Of the three veins in the cubit.
The three veins which are to be bled in the cubit are such that their phlebotomy is customary in all men
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways.
Either by grasping with the forceps with a broad handle: or by using oil to soften the skin: or by cutting with a knife, which is Alnesil
This is its form.
Thus is the way of it.
There are many different forms of it, and subtle according to the width of the veins and the degree of tension.
It is suitable for opening wide, plump, protruding, visible, large, and those which contain thick blood
This phlebotomy is of smaller width and more delicate extremity
It is suitable for the phlebotomy of small veins, which contain thin, yellow blood
Of the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
The Basilica is one of these three veins which receive the phlebotomy. Because it draws blood from the abscesses, which are under the throat and chin, from the thing which follows the chest, and the belly: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist with the phlebotomy of the veins, in order to prevent excessive bleeding from them which is below
If, therefore, he is mistaken, and adds too much in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will reach the artery, and there will be a flow of blood
Therefore it is necessary not to perform the phlebotomy together with the puncture: rather it should be dry like Alnesil.
If the Basilica does not appear clearly, then one must seek it out, and change to another, or ask about someone of its branches: or perform the phlebotomy in its place, the forearm branch
It is itself obvious, and dry with the phlebotomy of Alnesil, as we have said.
If however you wish to perform a phlebotomy on the same arm, then it is necessary before the tightening of the limb to touch the place, until you recognize the place of the pulse.
Then mark over the place with a scar, afterwards the limb, and dry the area with a concave section with the phlebotome of Alnesil, as we have said
And beware lest the incision should slip from the place of the artery.
And when you go, when you tighten the ligature, inflation in the place which you marked with a scar, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: you must therefore do it
That if blood should come out at the phlebotomy like urine from a boy, and is thin and red: then you know that it is from the artery.
Then therefore act with speed, and place your finger on the said long space, then take your finger away.
If therefore blood is cut (for it is much cut), then tighten the limb, and let it go: and beware lest the patient should move: and be over his fear.
And do not move it for a few days, until it is healed.
If however blood does not cut, and it increases to you: and it is not in your presence at the present time of medicine, then cut the artery, if you see it
For its extremities are contracted, and blood is cut
Or take the edge of the flesh, and find it: take half of one, and tighten it over the place of the vein with a ligature and a loop until the next day.
Then if blood is cut, that is good.
If not: then care for him with that with which preceded it, remembering from the place of the scattered fragments the flowing of blood: and the cutting of blood in this is not difficult in many situations, because of the smallness of the wound and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
If not: then take care of him with that which preceded it, remembering from the place of the scattered fragments the flowing of blood: and the cutting of blood in this is not difficult in many situations, because of the smallness of the wound and the possibility of a ligament from the arm.
But the veins of the Fuscae are suitable for phlebotomy, because they draw blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because they are composed of the branches of the basilica and the branches of the cephalic, as we said.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomist that there be no fear of phlebotomy from him, for under this is a nerve.
If therefore he adds at the puncture of the phlebotomy, and finds a nerve, this will cause in him a stupor, and the healing of it will be difficult, and perhaps will not heal completely.</start_of_turn>
And this nerve appears much to be connected with sensation.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it is hidden in some men, and is slight, and is not evident: then you must take care that you do not perform the phlebotomy in such a way as to section the nerve with your forceps.
For if the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.</start_of_turn
Of the cephalic vein.
But the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is suitable, because it draws blood from the head and supplies it to the eyes.</start_of_turn
And it must be done with its own needle, if you will, for the puncture with the olive or with the myrtle is safer, because it is less likely to reach an artery or a nerve.</start_of_turn True indeed; it meets with you at the phlebotomy, that you may take with the phlebotomist only the head of the lacerated part, and inquire about a softer place: for it does no harm to him, if it is not found at the first percussion, as it may return above with further phlebotomy. True indeed; it often happens in some that when not bled at the first percussion, it does not harm them.
Of the usefulness of Phlebotomy, and the precautions to be taken in its performance.
The quality of Phlebotomy, and the accidents which may arise from it, concerning which you must reflect
Firstly, therefore, you must know that Phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health, and for the perseverance of its efficacy, and the precautions against the introduction of diseases.
And that it is performed in one of the three veins which are in the elbow, namely the Cephalica, and the Fusca, and the Basilica.
And that it is performed at the beginning of Spring upon fasting, in summer, and in Autumn, and in Winter after a meal, when there are signs of repletion
And it is performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed
Phlebotomy, however, which is administered in diseases, has no fixed hour: but when it brings about convenience and necessity for this, in the night or day, and at every hour, and at every time
And it is not proper to bleed children until they are fourteen years of age
Neither should a pregnant woman be bled except from the fourth month until the seventh
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties.
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties.
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties.
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties.
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Neither are old men to be bled, who have passed their sixties
Then after the stricture, it is necessary that the phlebotomist should hold his hand towards the inside, until the veins are filled, and until they are declared to be full by sense.
Then the phlebotomist should withdraw the phlebotome with little force, as before.</start_of_turn>
Then he places his finger on the index of his left hand over the vein at the place where he wishes to make the phlebotomy, somewhat: so that the vein does not flee, and so that the percussion may be set.</start_of_turn>
For from the veins is as from strings which are fleeing from the phlebotomy: and from the veins is that which is full of blood: and when you place the phlebotome upon it, it contracts under the phlebotome, and the phlebotomist is struck, and the phlebotomy does not open the vein: and if it does open the vein, it is a stricture: because of that therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist should be firm, and attentive in all these matters.</start_of_turn>
Then he lays down the phlebotome.</start_of_turn
And if not, then do it again with that side somewhat lower, or above it with speed: if the place does not yield.</start_of_turn
And if it yields, or the patient becomes faint, then let him go away for one day, or two: and do not bind the ligament.</start_of_turn
Perhaps indeed the swelling will draw away.</start_of_turn
Neither let him apply a poultice.</start_of_turn
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.</start_of_turn>
If the opening is small, or blood runs too quickly: be careful lest blood escape beyond what is necessary. Then repeat the phlebotomy in the same place following the rule and add slightly more to the operation.
Do the same as when making a veinous opening before the place is closed. For in many people the closed place is near the area being operated on for a small matter.</start_of_turn>
If therefore you wish to close it immediately, do not go over it entirely; for that would excuse you for nothing.</start_of_turn> And place something soft over it of the fat of oil: because it will soothe the course of the blood.</start_of_turn>
Better is wax than oil in this place, and than any other oil.</start_of_turn>
And do the same with fat of oil in all your phlebotomies, which you make against the running of the blood: and make them thick as tyriaca alfarach and sage, when you put one on the other over the place.</start_of_turn>
Blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.</start_of_turn
If it happens that in the place of the phlebotomy the closing is large, for example because it is not a complete phlebotomy or because the opening of the vein is small: then be careful and put over the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed up slightly: and bind it for one hour: for it will dissolve.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has gone out of the vein, with the addition of something or from another vein.</start_of_turn
Many wounds also occur at the posteriors and eminences near the phlebotomy of Basilica.
Put your hand upon the wound; if you find softness under your compression, then that eminence is bad
Therefore, do as we have said before concerning that thing.
For perhaps blood will flow from it.
But make a dressing for it with that which has styptic action, so that the place is bound up.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
And it is necessary to draw out from every man from the blood according to the quantity of his virtue.
And what appears from the colour of the blood that is above it.
For blood that is black, then let it go out: and in the same way if you see it thick: then let it go, until it becomes thin: and in the same way if it is acute, until its sharpness is taken away
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and indigent of blood to take only one, so that the phlebotomy is facilitated by one, and that the phlebotomist is broad: and in him who is weak, let the contrary be done
And it is necessary to draw it out in small quantities, and that the hole be strict: and it is better that it be administered by phlebotomy of one, than by puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safer from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of nerves: and it is more praiseworthy, and safer than phlebotomy by breadth and length.
And when it has become accustomed to remain beside the phlebotomies during the syncope, it is necessary that food be given to the patient before the phlebotomy with bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or dry bread, if it is heated: and take from him from the blood in three or four doses.
And if the patient is pale, then before the phlebotomy let him take bread soaked in pomegranate juice, or in honey syrup scented with spices, or in scented syrup with a strong odor
And if there is fainting during the phlebotomy, and this is the cause of its exitus sanguinis multi: then it is necessary that he take in the drink water with meat, and a mild aromatic syrup: and let it be scented with herbs, and keep his chest filled with these things: and do all that we said in the chapter on fainting from evacuation.
Whoever wishes to restrain his arm and solve his blood slowly: must do that whose phlebotomy is because of a great evacuation, and his strength is weak, so that he may slowly solve the blood by the quantity of his strength in continuous days.
Whoever wishes to restrain his arm and solve his blood slowly, and his body is strong: then let him do that after seven hours, or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body to the contrary part of which it hangs down: must do that in the second or third day.
In whose body there is much blood that is heated and acute, and causes fever: it is necessary that it be drawn from him in one dose, and that a great quantity be extracted from him: and the opening should be increased until fainting occurs: after which you must preserve all the conditions of the phlebotomy, and put your hand over the pulse of his wrist beside the course of the blood, so that no fainting occurs at that place.
Many times, this occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglectful.
It should not be when he wishes to close the arm and stop the bleeding, while the orifice of the vein is closed, and there is difficulty in the exit of the blood, as it will happen before that when he has delayed too long.
For indeed that is bad, rather let him depart, until the phlebotomist comes again in a second
Or move quickly when the phlebotomy is acute that which has coagulated in the vein at the orifice, and put over it something salty dissolved in water
And put over it something of Tyriaca Alfaroch, or sage, and press it gently, until the blood comes out
If indeed the vein is clotted, then depart from it, and do not tighten it, until the clot has settled down.
When indeed the need compels to stop the bleeding again, and it is not excusable, then either perform the phlebotomy above the place, or in another arm in another vein.
But the veins of the forearm and the elbow, when not found, are hidden, because they are composed of marrow.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it allows the patient to immerse his hand in warm water, until the skin reddens, and the vein appears clearly visible.
Then bind over it with a bandage with a moderate degree of constriction
Then perform the phlebotomy in a transverse direction gradually, not latitudinally, neither along the length: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be like that which you perform over a small wound of the hand
And most of all, the course of blood is put in warm water in the winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is more useful to all diseases, because there is no pulsation under this vein, neither nerve.
The phlebotomy of the right hand is useful for the jaundice of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you must bind the wrist with a string or your hand, after you have introduced the hand into the warm water, until the vein is swollen and you can feel the cold sensation
Then the phlebotomy is passed over.
And if you cut the vein entirely, it will not cause any damage to him in any way.
And be careful not to make the last move of your hand with the phlebotomy
Under this, indeed, are the nerves of the fingers naked from the flesh.
Then move the hand once more into the warm water, and let the blood run in it
For if you do not move the hand into the warm water, the blood coagulates in the opening of the vein, and is prohibited from flowing.
When you have therefore extracted from the blood the quantity of need, then put over the vein oil and salt: so that it does not solidify too quickly
And in the same way it is necessary to do with every strict limb.
The vein itself of the left hand is: because it is related to the diseases of the spleen: and do likewise in the phlebotomy of this, as you did in the second equal.
The vein of the left hand indeed is: because it is related to the diseases which are in the lower parts of the body, such as the diseases of the uterus, and retention of menstrual blood, and kidney disease, and ulcers of the buttocks and ancient fractures, and similar diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is, that it lets the patient's foot enter the warm water: and make above it friction, until the veins burst: and ligate above the junction of the foot with the bandage.
And the veins are at the heel, appearing under the thumb: and they are broken from these in the face of the foot in many places.
The phlebotomy is therefore in the greater branch of this vein, or at the heel in its collection: because this is better and safer.
And if the phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then take care of the nerves which are under these and over the face of the foot
And place your phlebotomy through from the cross, as if you wish to cut through it: and let the phlebotomy be of Nesil.
But if the blood is prohibited from coming out, then repeat the foot in the warm water: and let the blood run in the vein, until it is evacuated
And if the phlebotomist has erred in the first attempt, then repeat with the phlebotomy to the upper parts, for the place is safe, and not for that reason does it cause harm, when you cut the nerves, as we said.
And in like manner as the saphenous vein of the other foot is equally.
The sciatic vein is located at the heel on the outside of the ankle, as we have said.
Its sensation is to cause pain in the knee when there is thickened blood in it.
Its quality is that it should be made with a soft bandage and should be hurried: and it should be bound around the leg from the ankle up to the heel with four fingers, and should be left on for a long time. It will not be seen except for this.
When it appears, then the vein must be cut according to any expedient means which are possible, or by stripping: and it is better either to cauterize it with a burn or to cut it through with a section
Its place is safer, and it is often hidden in many people.
If you do not find it and do not perceive it at all: then cut some branch of it, that which appears in the back of the foot and below the heel: and cauterize from the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish
Then loosen the ligature, and place over the place of the phlebotomy some skin, and bind the place.
It will soon heal.
Note: The provided text continues beyond this section, but the instructions are in a different language and are not included here.
Chapter 103.</start_of_turn>
The humors arise from the bones, and from the air, and from the spleen.
There are two kinds of ventilation
When there is scarification and bloodletting, the other is [treatment] without scarification. And this treatment without scarification is according to two methods.
Or it is with oil.
Or it is without fire
And the treatments which are administered with scarification and bloodletting are fourteen in number throughout the body
These latter four are of the head and neck: Aloe is applied to the back of the head: Alkhel to the middle of the neck: the two Alhagdahim are for the two layers of the neck from two parts together: Ment is for under the jaw at the lower part of the mouth: Alachosos is for between the two angles of the jaw: the two Focus are for the middle of the two arms: the two Crura for the two wrists: and the two Caudae for the two ankles
And indeed the treatment does not draw out blood from many small veins throughout the flesh, but because of this it does not cause loss of blood, as is the case with phlebotomy.
Neither is it necessary to administer treatment with fire or without fire in any ailment which arises from congestion, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If necessity demands, we administer it at every hour at the beginning, at the end, and in the middle of the month, and at any other time if necessary
For in men, when there is an increase in blood in this way, until it requires extraction by treatment, it acquires great weight in the head and becomes harmful
And from this is that which causes congestion and redness of the face, head and neck
And from the eye there is that which causes itching in the face, and the front of the face, and shadows, and dullness in the eyes.
And from the eye there is that which severs the seat of its moisture. And from the eye there is that which causes laughter to be multiplied
And from the eye there is that which causes the taste of blood in the mouth: either the tongue swells up and expels blood
And from the eye there is that which causes sleep to be multiplied
And from the eye there is that which causes vomiting of blood and redness, and discharge, and spots, and things which are similar to these. When we see anything of these things, and especially if it has been more than two or three days since the last: we then order that the moisture be removed, after two or three hours have passed by The ointment of the night is thus: because it itself causes an excess of weight in the head, and what flows down to the eyes.
