After I have finished with you, my son, this book which is the last of my works on medicine, completed with its end in view, following the explanations and affirmations of this treatise, I wish to complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand is now abandoned in our time and is a private matter: until perhaps its science is lost and its practice has ceased, except for brief notices in ancient books, which have been altered by the hand: and there have happened to be mistakes and hesitation, until its intentions have been closed and its purpose prolonged: I have deemed it necessary to provide this treatise with an orderly arrangement of its contents, according to its position and affirmations, and with brevity: and to include the forms of instruments, such as the Cautery and other implements, with their specifications and their preparation which is necessary
However, because a skilled artisan of this sort is not to be found easily in our time with his hand: for the art of medicine is long, and the author must exercise himself beforehand in the science of anatomy, as Galen has said, until he knows the functions of the limbs, their forms, and their connection, and separation, and has an understanding of the bones, nerves, and lacerations, and their number, and their exit, and the pulse of veins, and quietness, and the locations of their exits.
For this reason Hippocrates said, "A name is much more than a name, and work is little, especially in the art of the hand.
We have indeed mentioned this at the beginning of this book.
For one who is ignorant of what we have said concerning anatomy will fall into error, and will endanger human life: as I have seen many who have learned this science carelessly and without study or experiment
Why is it that the doctor has secured the scrofula in the woman's neck with a stiff ligature, and has thereby obstructed some of the arteries in the neck? Because of this, blood flows from the woman until she dies in her hands.
And the doctor observed another one who had presumed to extract a stone from the bladder which was in the bladder, and the stone was large.
He went to him and extracted it with the bladder's husk
Because the man died on the third day.
And I too was called to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took hold of a certain Duke of our land because of medicine: and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him, that he fractured his leg near the heel: and the doctor, with his ignorance, bound the fracture with vinegar and nails, and tight bands, and did not let the wound breathe.
And he died according to his desires.
Afterwards he sent him away for a few days, and gave him orders not to loosen the ligament: and he stood thus until the swelling of his leg had gone down, and his foot and leg, and came to an end
I was called to him again: and I set about loosening the ligament: and there ensued peace, and he was freed from his pains
But indeed the corruption was confirmed in the limb: and I could not restrain it
So the corruption ceased to spread in the limb, until it died
And the physician went to another, who had perforated the cancerous abscess: and it was ulcerated after days, until its malice was increased with the lord himself.
For when a cancer is pure from melancholic humour, it must not be treated with iron in every case, except in a limb which can tolerate it, that it be entirely excised
And therefore, my son, you must know that an operation is divided into two parts: that which is associated with health, and that which carries risk in various situations I am grieved in every place of this book where an operation is mentioned, where fear and terror are present.
Therefore you must be cautious of this, and be restrained: lest they find fault with you, and speak dishonestly
Receive therefore with humility and protection, and the sick with facility and firmness, and use the better way that leads to greater glory to God concerning the preservation of life and the obtaining of praise: and banish the terrifying diseases which are difficult to cure: and take away from your soul that which makes you fear, so that there may be no obstacle to your faith and your comfort For there remains for you a greater glory in your faith, and a sublimity in this world, and finally in the number of your souls.
For Galen has said in some of his admonitions. You do not heal a bad disease: do not speak of a bad physician.
Chapter One.
Concerning incision and perforation, phlebotomy and packing, wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and things of that kind: and the whole of this chapter, arranged in order of the instruments.
Third Chapter.
Concerning restoration, and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting, and things of that kind: this chapter is arranged from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
Glory be to God.
The Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part I.
Concerning the application of bandages, and the use of cautery: and in what complexions it is suitable, and when: and if with iron, or gold.
Chapter I
But before any operation is performed, it is necessary to state the qualities of the bandages and instruments to be used: and in what complexion they should be displayed
I say therefore, that the discourse concerning the quality of the cautery instrument, and its name, is a lengthy, subtle, scientific, and occult discourse.
And it is said by many wise men in this matter, and they disagree among themselves: and indeed little is sufficient from their discourses, fearing the prolongation of the discussion
I say therefore, that the cautery instrument is useful in all complexions, which is with material, and without material: except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without material, and the dry complexion without material
In the hot and dry complexion with material they disagree
Some indeed say that the cautery instrument is useful in these.
Others argue that Cauterium is not suitable for carbuncles, which arise from heat and dryness, because fire itself is hot: and it is unsuitable to cure a hot and dry ailment with heat and dryness.
Others maintain that Cauterium is not suitable for any hot and dry carbuncles that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with fire and moisten it, you find the body of a man to be cold.
I too have heard from experience that this is true.</start_of_turn>
It is true that it does not suffice simply to say that Cauterium is not suitable for carbuncles; for one must have studied Cauterium in its final exercise and become acquainted with the diversity of human complexions, the nature of ailments, their causes and their course.</start_of_turn>
With the other complexions there is no fear; and especially with cold and moist ailments.</start_of_turn> I know that all physicians agree about this: and they do not deny the use of Cauterium in these matters.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, the sons know that the secret of Cauterium with fire and its advantage over Cauterium with burning medicine lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action does not extend beyond the part which is cauterized: and it does not harm any other connected part, except for a slight bruising.</start_of_turn
Burning medicine, however, extends its action to the parts surrounding the cauterized area: and sometimes it makes the healing of the ailment more difficult, and sometimes it even brings about death.</start_of_turn>
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its substance, does not make this [surgery] ill, unless it be excessive.
Fire, however, by reason of its subtlety and the excellence of its substance, does not make this [surgery] bad, unless it be excessive.
And behold, children, that even they [philosophers] disagree concerning the time when fire becomes a cautery, and they say that it is better to delay the time of the operation.
I say also that cautery is useful at all times: for in every case the document becomes submerged in urine, which is attracted by the cautery.
Above all, if the cautery is to be used for severe and sudden pains, which do not tolerate delay, for these are subject to the danger of an increase in evil which is greater than the slight damage done by the operation at a later time.
Do not be deceived by the minds of the vulgar or stupid physicians, who say that surgery is never necessary for ailments which are cured by cautery: for in this they are mistaken. Indeed, cautery alters the complexion and dries up humors which are the causes of these ailments.
Indeed, cautery surpasses medicine in speed of action, in the excellence of its operation, and in its gentleness: and it is possible that the ailment will be cured at some later hour according to the complexion of the patient, the location of the ailment, and the excellence of the operation itself. And this is effected in the body by the collection of superfluous humors which are evacuated by the cautery. And this is the reason why it brings about the healing of ailments which medicine cannot cure. Acute pain in a few superabundant and humid parts, as in a burnt tooth, because of pain, and similar to it, is possible that it will not depart from there without pain.
But this is in few cases.
Indeed, it is right that the cauterism is the most recent of the medical arts, and that is why they do not believe that there is any healing that can be obtained by medicine, nor by anything else after the cauterism has been made.
But the thing is contrary to that. The intention is not that the cauterism is the most recent of the medical arts, but when we administer methods of treatment in some ailment, and they do not confer that treatment: then we administer in the end the cauterism, and it confers: thus it is that the cauterism is the last thing, not according to the intention which the vulgar people and the multitude of the physicians understand
The ancients say that the cauterism with gold is better than the cauterism with iron: and they do not say this except because of the equality of the gold and the fineness of its substance: and they say that it does not form pus at the place of the cauterism But it is not absolutely so. For I myself have seen this to be the case, and I have found that it does not do this in some bodies without other things
And the cauterism with the very thing is good, and better than with iron, as they say.
But when you ignite the cauterism with fire from gold, you are not to declare that it is ignited according to its quantity, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the cold and if you add to it more fire, it liquefies in the fire, and turns into plates.
Why does the artificer depart from that to engage in this business? And because of this, the Cauterium with the iron is brought near and is more rapid and proximate to the operation from its upright position.
I have also ordered this Chapter in Cauterium, according to the Chapters: and I have ordered them from the head down to the feet: so that they may perform whatever they wish from it. As to the manner of cauterizing the Head in the coronal suture.
Chapter 2: Of the Head.
Here the cauterization is done according to the lord of humidity and cold over the brain: because these two are the causes of swelling, and of the flow of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and of the swelling of sleep, and of toothache, and of throat pain: and in general of all diseases which arise from cold, such as palsy, and swelling, and epilepsy, and apoplexy, and things like these from diseases.
The method of cauterization is as follows: when the patient is in good health, he should be evacuated at first with a purgative medicine which softens the head for three or four nights, according to the nature of the disease, and the age of the patient, and his habit.
Then command him to make a circular burn on his head with the lancet
Then make him sit between your hands square, so that you can place your hands on his chest
Then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes Wherever your middle finger touches, that is the place where you must cauterize with the burn Then take the Cauterium Olive: which has this shape Then place it upon the marked place with the cautery, descending gradually, so that your hand may be gradually constricted, and you shall withdraw it.
Then draw your hand quickly, and grasp the place.
If you see any quantity of bone or cartilage or herbs, then draw your hand quickly.
And if not, repeat your hand with the iron itself, or with something else that is heated: until you see the bone which I told you of.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it down with this sponge, and place it upon the place: and keep it there for three days.
Then place upon it a sponge soaked in butter, and keep the flame over the place, until the eschar is consumed by fire. Then care for it with unguents of four herbs, until it is healed
It has been said that the greater the wound remains open, the more pus will be emitted: which is better and more useful.
And some people say that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and let the Cautery remain in contact until something of the thickness of bone is charred
Then it will be withdrawn after that which was scorched from the bone, and it will be cured
And others say that it is necessary that the Cautery should remain until the very end, until it has left an imprint in the bone like a footprint, so that the bone will fall out, as it is like a woman's stylus made of a small letter: and they say that from this place vapor escapes from the head, and the wound will be healed in a long time
Then he cares until they are solidified.
Neither of two species of cautery is useless in all people except in some in whom there is fear of excessive bleeding.
Leave it [the cautery] and attend to the health of the patient. It is better for me like that.</start_of_turn>
The head grows weak from the continuity of its natural discharge: as we have seen in the rest of the limbs: and especially when the head of the patient is weak by nature: the first kind of cautery is most safe and better for me in this case, and I will work with it for the health of the patient.</start_of_turn
In the case of cauterizing the head in the pain of the whole head.</start_of_turn>
Head section III.</start_of_turn
When in the whole head there occurs chronic pain: and it persists in the patient, and there is pus, and boils, and head-purgings, and oil, and application of these things.</start_of_turn
And especially if one kind of cautery has already been applied, as we have mentioned, and no other of these things has been added to it: then consider carefully.</start_of_turn
For if the head of the patient is strong by nature and not weak, and there is cold sweat: then cauterize with another kind of cautery under that little bit.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize over the whole horn of the head with that cautery, but do not pass through the skin, and uncover an amount of bone as we have mentioned.</start_of_turn
And cauterize with one kind of cautery in the nape of the neck of the head, in the place which is called the uas: and this is the place where the marrow is placed: and elevate your hand in this and do not uncover the bone.</start_of_turn
The infirm one finds because of that pain which arises, and diverse from the pain of the other cauterizations of the head altogether.
I say concerning this Cauterization: it must be that which cauterizes the horns of the head and the back of the head more finely, and which cauterizes the middle of the head more broadly.
This is its form.
Concerning the method of cauterization in hemianche, both with the medicinal unguents and with the iron
Chapter III.
When it happens in the part of the head that there is pain and swelling, or that the pain extends up to the eye, and it is evacuated with the physicians who moderate the head, and the rest of the treatment is administered as I have said in the discourse on the diseases of the head, and it does not suffice for that: then the cauterization in that case is done in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine or with the iron The cauterization with the acute burning medicine is that, you take a tooth from another person and burn it, and you remove the bark from it, and you split its extremities from both sides
Then split the place of the pain in time with a wide phlebotomy, until there is under the skin in that place where the tooth is taken
Introduce it there under the skin until it is hidden: then bind over it with a bandage of constriction of low tension, and leave it for fifteen hours. Then take out the dressing and leave it for two or three days. Finally put on a wet bandage over it which is immersed in butter, until the place heals. Then care for it with an unguent until it is healed
And if you wish to do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth tractate, on the Burning Medicines.
Burning the inside of the belly with iron is in this way.
Burning with iron is like this
It is called Clausais: for its head has the shape of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle there is a small prominence.
Then put it on the place and hold your hand: and move the iron slowly while applying pressure: and let the quantity which is enough to burn through the thickness of the skin be as much as half of its size
Lift your hand so that the artery below is not burned and the blood flow does not increase
Then soak the area in salt water, and put it on the place, and leave it for three days: then put the area with butter: afterwards care with unguents until it is healed. If necessary, burn the haemorrhoids with the second extremity of the knife according to the Cauterization technique.
Burn from the incision of the artery in this haemorrhoid, not from the old way directly.
In the old way, the haemorrhoids were cauterized like this.</start_of_turn>
End of document.
When treating haemorrhoids, with all that has been said about the treatment of ailments, and when the cure has not taken hold: and when the pain persists, and the ailment has not been overcome by the cautery with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary to burn the haemorrhoids with the knife until they become white when there are signs of pain along a line whose length is half the digit, or almost like that: then take your hand away from the area with one hand, and hold the area firmly until the artery is cut through, and keep it that way until bone is reached. It is necessary to restrain you, so that you do not suffer from the continuation of the mandible, which moves during mastication, lest it become wide or the nerve which moves it, from which the spasm arises.
And take care of the guarding of the artery which has been cut off, and of the flow of blood from it.</start_of_turn>
For in the cutting of it there is fear, especially for him who is ignorant of what it does, and who is not studious or experienced: and he departs from the operation at once.</start_of_turn>
And I come with the reminder of the regime of the flow of blood which is accidental to the artery according to its method, and in its place here in this book.</start_of_turn
If you see that the wound is of such a kind that the Cauterium is not sufficient for it, and that the body of the sick man can tolerate the Cauterium in the middle of the head, as we have mentioned, take care of the burn until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if you wish, apply the Cauterium, as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with the Cauterium which has two blades.</start_of_turn
For the cauterization is better in this way and more effective.</start_of_turn Of the way of cauterizing in the pain of the ears.</start_of_turn
Chapter VI.</start_of_turn> When it happens in the ear a pain from the cold, and it is cured with solutions, and the rest of the cure as we have said in the preceding, and the pain does not move, then ignite the Cauterium: and that is what is called the Point, which has this shape.</start_of_turn
Then the point with it after its ignition around the whole ear, as it is turned: or around both sides, if the pain is in both.</start_of_turn
And prolong thee with the Cauterium from the root of the ear downwards, after you have marked the area with the Cautery: and let the quantity of the Cautery be ten points in every aure, and thus in all.
And then care for the area until it has healed.
In this manner Cauterize in Tortura.
Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
Torture which is cured by Cauterization is nothing except for those species which arise from phlegmas, as we said in the discussions of the causes of diseases.</start_of_turn> And you must Cauterize the species which arise from exication and nerve spasm.</start_of_turn
When you have cured this species of torture with baths, catapults, and gargles, and the cure has not taken effect, then you must Cauterize the patient three times with the Cautery: once at the root of the ear, and once somewhat lower from the earlobe, and once at the junction of the two lips.</start_of_turn
And place the Cautery on the side opposite the diseased part.</start_of_turn
For the soothing of the parts must be in the sound part.</start_of_turn
And the form of Cauterization is that you Cauterize with the Cautery itself at the root of the upper ear under the earlobe: and on the earlobe itself. The length of the Cautery should be as long as the length of the thumb.</start_of_turn
And hold your hand with the Cautery until half of the thickness of the skin has been consumed by the flame.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the Cautery, and it is of the kind of knife whose form is as described: truly it is not more delicate than that of the needle: and it must be so that the knife is of a suitable thickness.</start_of_turn Then care for the place until it is healed.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed.
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed Then care for the place until it is healed Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Then care for the place until it is healed
Regarding the cauterization of paralysis and its soothing.
Regarding the cauterization of paralysis and its soothing.
One must proceed with care in the cauterization of the head with lye and with that which we have mentioned.
Then touch the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize the middle of the head, and the corners of the head, and the back of the head, and three times on the prominence of the collarbone
If, however, you deem it appropriate in the soothing of the body by means of many of these, and the patient is tolerant, and the ailment is severe: then cauterize four times on the prominences of the back, and the last with a fifth cauterization, until the greatest part of its surface is consumed by fire, and lift your hand up.
Then care for it until it heals: and thus is the treatment complete.
Regarding the cauterization of epilepsy.
Regarding the cauterization of epilepsy
Epilepsy is not cauterized, except for that which is due to phlegm One must therefore first soften the brain of the patient with lye, and with the rest of the treatment which we have mentioned: when the patient is great or is tolerant of the medicines
If, however, it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then gargling and nourishing bites are administered before many days with the improvement of the appetite
Then touch the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize the middle of the head as we have mentioned before, and another on the back of the head, and over every corner of the head with a single cauterization
If the patient be robust and endure pain, then cauterize him with cautery, as I have mentioned in the case of paralysis, and to soften the body above the cervical vertebrae and the vertebrae of the back: and let the cautery be performed according to the method which went before. If, however, the patient be a boy, then apply the cautery gently, according to this method.
Method of cauterization in Melancholia.
Chapter XII
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors, and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with cautery, as I have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess of bile leading to melancholy, and the patient’s body be moist, then give him something to drink which will stimulate his brain, according to what has been mentioned previously: then bind the head of the patient, and make a small incision in the center of the forehead, like a circle
Then place the cautery in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting upright is to be held secure from all sides
Then apply linimentum. And it is good to use old butter or oil
And heat it over a moderate fire, as much as the finger can bear when it is introduced into it
Then evacuate it in the middle of his head in a circle, and hold it until it is cold
Do this to the patient every week once, along with the rest of his treatment, until he is healed
Or if you wish, cauterize him by making many small holes in it, besides that you hold the hand with the cautery: and let it stink.
This kind of cautery moistens the brain with the same quality.
Then put upon it a covering soaked in butter, or fat from a hen.
In descending water, cauterize to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the water in the eye is declared by the signs which I mentioned in the previous discourse, then you begin and apply the cautery to the diseased part, until it changes the head of the limb
And keep it away from all moistness, and let it sit in a bath for a few days
Then command him to raise his head, and cauterize in the middle of his head Then cauterize on either side of the two temples with two cautery instruments at once: if the descent of the water is simultaneous in both eyes: or from one side only if the descent of the water is in one eye only: and cut away with the cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let the cautery be long in length in the width of the temples: and burn from the flow of blood.
If anything else escapes from it, then immediately cut away with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom in the extraction of the arteries, and the cutting away of them, and care for the flow of blood
And when cauterizing in the brain, under two bones, with two ultimate cautery instruments.
In the ancient lacrimal glands.
Chapter XIIII
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, sticky: and are on the veins and arteries which are in the exterior of the head, it is proved that this comes from the excessive cold, phlegmatic humours: then cauterize with the same cautery which I mentioned in the beginning of the discourse, the cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cautery instruments on either side of the two temples, and with two cautery instruments in the brain under two bones
If the swelling persists after the addition of medicine, then burn the area all around the eye cautiously, over the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small burn.
In the case of an eye wound, burn around the eye cautiously, over the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small burn.
Chapter 15.
When you have treated it with the medicine we have mentioned and the swelling persists: then make the patient drink three doses of castor oil every night: then bandage the head and burn it with an average burn, with olive oil
Then burn it with two small burns, over the two eyebrows under the hair
And take care not to burn the artery, lest you cause blindness
This is the method of burning the eyebrows
Method for burning for the softening of the eyelids
Chapter 16
When the eyelids of the eye are softened by the brightness or humidity: then burn the eyelid once with a lunar burn
And if necessary, burn it over the two eyebrows a little at a time with two small burns in every part: and stretch for two times: and the length of each burn should be as long as the eyebrow: and do not touch your hand with the burn, but according to the quantity which is to be burned of the third of the eyelid.
This is the method of burning for the softening of the eyelid in this way.
Method for burning the eyelid when the hair of the eyelashes is inflamed by the eye Chapter 17
The cautery is of two kinds: either with fire or with burning medicine.
When using the cautery with fire, the surgeon should precede the instrument over the wound so that it may expel its hair, if there be any, until the hair has become prolonged and equal If, however, the cautery should touch the edge of the wound: then clamp the edges of the wound with forceps so that they do not move until they have healed.</start_of_turn>
When they have healed and become equal, then place the head of the patient upon your lap: then mark over the pupils of his eyes with the cautery, making a sign which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.</start_of_turn>
Then place a soaked compress on the white of the eye: or on the hair of the eyelashes over the eye.</start_of_turn>
Then apply the cautery, which is shaped like this.</start_of_turn>
Then burn over the figure which you have marked slowly in many places, until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a myrtle leaf, is completely consumed.</start_of_turn
And the sign of the completion of your work is that if you touch the pupil of the eye it will contract, and the hair will be plucked at the point of the eye.</start_of_turn>
Lift your hand then: and let it go in three days.</start_of_turn
Then place upon it a compress with butter, until the scar has disappeared.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it with unguents, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Should any hair remain after an hour, and the pupil be soft: then repeat the cautery in the same place as before.</start_of_turn
If, however, the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it itself, until it rises to its natural place: and make it even so that it does not puncture the eyes.
In the same way, cauterize with the burning medicine in this case.
Chapter XVIII.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary to order the sick person to remove the hairs, until they grow long and are evened out.</start_of_turn
Make from parchment in the shape of a leaf of myrtle.</start_of_turn
Then take from boiled soap, which has been ground, and from chalk which has not been imbibed from one pound about an inch or somewhat less: then mix these together with good pressure, and make it so that it does not freeze.</start_of_turn
Then take from this ball what is above and put it on the eyelid of one or both.</start_of_turn
And put under the eye a soaked bandage in albumin or oil: and keep the head of the sick person in your hand.</start_of_turn>
And put your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly.</start_of_turn
And you move it whenever the sick person feels the biting of the medicine: because it has found its biting like fire.</start_of_turn
When therefore you have persevered with this and it has found its biting, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger.</start_of_turn
When the biting has subsided, then remove the medicine and bathe the eye with water.</start_of_turn
And consider then, if the eyelid is raised by the expansion with the fire, or with the incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat the medicine on the place where the medicine does not press, and does not irritate, until your operation is complete, and the eyes are closed.</start_of_turn
Then place above the utmost part of the cushion with butter, until the skin of the wound has been eradicated.
Then keep the wound covered with ointment, or something else, until it has healed
And it is necessary to keep the patient near at hand during the operation, so that nothing from the medicine should fall into the eye
If the eyelashes become soft after a day, and something from the hair gets into the eye, then repeat the medicine on the place where the eyelashes softened of their own accord, just as you did at the beginning
Then keep the wound covered, until it has healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and shape
Therefore take into consideration the following: and do not hide the straightness of the limb, which is the study of this art
Concerning the cauterization of the fistula of the tear duct.
Chapter XIX.
When you have cured the fistula, when you know that your treatment has not been effective: then it is necessary to cauterize the thing according to this method
Command the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold his head between your hands like this, so that it does not move or shake with his head
Then place buttered cotton in the eye-socket or in the hair of the eyelashes over his eye: then burn the Cauterium, which is of this shape.
Sit concave, like the shape of the tip of a wing of a feather, as it is with the Cauterium: and if you wish that it should penetrate until the other end, and if you wish that it should remain above, do so as you please
It is better to make the incision with this curve for your work.
Then place above the wound a Cauterium, which is made of an ignited wool.</start_of_turn>
Hold your hand near the Cauterium from the eye to the nose, so that your hand does not slip, or irritate the patient: and place the Cauterium on the fatty tissue of the eye and burn it through.</start_of_turn
If you proceed with the Cauterium at the beginning until the bone, it will be good.</start_of_turn
And if not: then repeat the Cauterium once or twice if necessary: and keep it for three days.</start_of_turn
Then apply a bandage with butter, and care for it with an ointment until it heals.</start_of_turn If after forty days it has not healed: then apply above it an acute corrosive medicine, until the bone is exposed: and remove it according to what is written in its chapter.</start_of_turn
There is another method of Cauterizing the fistula, which some of the first said.</start_of_turn>
Direct it to the location of the fistula and find it: then put under the fistula a thin cushion, that is, a needle of a fine size, whose form is like this.</start_of_turn
And pour into it the quantity of a drachma of liquid lead, and hold your hand firmly with the needle retention, and do not move the patient at all, so that it does not run, or that the liquid lead reaches his eye.</start_of_turn
It is necessary that you place above the eye of the patient a compress soaked in albumin or in water.
Lead will consume the place of the fistula, and will effect a remarkable healing.
When the fistula has been healed, as we mentioned previously from the Cauterium and treatment, it is good
And if not, it is necessary to administer a nose-opening, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according as it comes to its own place
Regarding the cauterization of fissures of the lips
Chapter XX.
Many accidents happen in the lip fissures, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children
When you treat these fissures, when the healing is not confirmed, then slightly burn the cautery according to this shape
And let the concavity of it be according to the sharpness of the knife
Then care for it with oil until it heals.
Regarding the cauterization of the fistula of the eye
Chapter XXI
When there is swelling in the root of the gums, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus forms, and it ruptures: afterwards it becomes infected, and pus comes out, and there forms a fistula: then treat this, and do not allow healing in it, then it is necessary to burn the cautery according to the quantity which is in the fistula.
Then insert the burning object into the fistula, and keep your hand there until the iron burns deep into it, and finally: do that once, or twice at most.
Then care for it afterwards as we have said about the care until it heals completely.</start_of_turn>
If it severs and heals, it is good.</start_of_turn>
And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place and take out the corrupt bone according to what comes to light in its head.</start_of_turn>
In this way, cauterizing in the Gingiues and softening of teeth is done.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
When the gingiva is softened because of moisture, and the teeth are loose, and you take care of it with the physicians, and do not confer: then put the head of the patient in your lap.</start_of_turn
Then burn the cautery, whose form will come afterwards, so that you put the cannula on the tooth: and insert the burning cautery into it quickly: and keep your hand still, until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
And lift your hand: then repeat the cautery a few times, as you wish.</start_of_turn
Then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, and keep it for one hour: and then expel it.</start_of_turn
The tooth will then be firm again, and the gingiva will be softened and stretched, and the moisture will be dried up.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXIII.
When the toothache is caused by cold, or if the tooth itself is cold, or if there is a worm therein, and the cure does not succeed with physicians: then Cauterium is used in two ways: either with butter or with fire.
Or with fire, as it takes butter to smear thickly, and applies it to the tooth in the ear or in the root
Then take alum, and smear it over the edge of the tooth.
Then soak it in boiling butter: and put it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools down: then repeat it several times, until the fire has reached the root of the tooth.
Or if you wish, soak wool, or alum in cold butter, and put it on the painful tooth: and put on top of it a burning iron, until the fire has reached the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
Note: Cauterium refers to burning or cauterizing, which involves treating a wound or disease by applying intense heat or burning. And be careful that there be no excess of the heat, lest it should reach the bone of the infirm person.
Then let the Cauterium be cool: and put it on the tooth: and hold your hand, until the Cauterium cools down.
Do it repeatedly, for the pain will disappear either on the same day or the next day
And it is necessary to impress that Cauterium into the cavity of the tooth, so that the infirm person may apply butter to his bone well, and keep it for an hour: then expel it.
This is the form of Cauterium.
Burn with whatever extremity you can manage: this is the form of the cannula.
Burn with whatever extremity you can manage: this is the method of the cannula.
Chapter 24.
When the swellings are from phlegm, and moisture of cold, and do not yield to medicine, and you wish to speed up their digestion: then burn with a concave cautery, whose form is like this.
Having two open extremities, so that the smoke may escape from the cautery between the extremities: and place the flame upon the swelling once, and again, if it does not digest, until it reaches the depth of the swelling
If the swelling is small: then burn the cautery according to the size of the swelling
Then remove it for three days, and place upon it a poultice soaked in butter, until the burnt part has disappeared
Then care for it with unguents until the shape of the cannula is restored
On the method of burning in a raucous voice and constriction of the chest.
Chapter 25
When the wind moistens over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it is with the coldness of the complexion: then it is necessary to evacuate the sick person immediately with resolving remedies
Then burn in the night at the root of the gullet in a depressed place: and burn cautiously, so as not to reach the gut or the skin, except for a little of it.
Then burn again with another cautery at the junction of the collar in the last rib: and let the cautery be fixed according to the mode which preceded it
Then care for yourself until you are healed.
In the treatment of pulmonary and testicular ailments, cauterization should be employed.
Chapter XXVI.</start_of_turn>
When cough and pulmonary ailment are caused by cold dampness, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, nor old consumption: then cauterize twice with two cautery instruments above the cartilage in the depressed places, in lenium, or in the lacunae.</start_of_turn
And cauterize once in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery instrument be in the shape that preceded.</start_of_turn
And if you wish to cauterize by puncturing with a cautery, which is called Punctum, which has a shape like that which preceded in the puncture of pain in the ears: and let there be from thirty punctures up to almost as many.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself until you are healed.</start_of_turn> And let the cautery instrument have three branches: according to this shape.</start_of_turn
Because it alleviates with three cautery instruments when you do it with one of them at a time.</start_of_turn
In the treatment of dislocation of the Humerus in the Titillico area.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to humidity and does not return to its place in an hour, until it has become accustomed to its return: then it must be reduced by a small movement, as we have testified to this. Then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation immediately.</start_of_turn
Then the sickly man lies upon his back, or upon his side towards the healthy side.
Then lift the skin which is at the inner part of the Titillic to the upper part with your left hand: and if the joint is dislocated inwards.</start_of_turn>
Then take the Cauterium having two handles.</start_of_turn> Which is like this.</start_of_turn
Then burn the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the figure of the burn will be like four cauterizations.</start_of_turn
And when the burn is made with a cautery having three handles, because of this the figure of the burn will be like six cauterizations: and these are the handles that are according to the degree of tension.</start_of_turn
And this is the figure of the cautery having three handles.</start_of_turn
And when you add on this manner one more, because there are eight cauteries in all.</start_of_turn
Then put upon the cautery fat sponges with salt.</start_of_turn
Then make the sickly man adhere to tranquility, so that he does not move the limb for some time, until he is comfortable.</start_of_turn
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts, and this rarely happens, then burn the upper part of the humerus with the cautery claw, or with many punctures.</start_of_turn
For the joint is solidified, and the moisture is drained away: and the sickly man is healed.</start_of_turn
In this manner the Stomach is to be cauterized.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXVIII.
When cold and moisture abound in the stomach, until they are expelled from their composition, and multiply pus to it, and apply assiduous methods of treatment, and do not confer [treatments]: then it is necessary that the patient rest upon his back, extend his limbs, and clench his fists.
Then cauterize with three cautery instruments, the cautery under the collar of the chest measuring the quantity of a single digit with the cautery of the claw, and two cautery instruments beneath the two lower angles of the single cautery, until the triangle of cauteries appears
And lengthen between each [cautery] so that they do not join, when they produce pus. And the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin
And let the figure of the cauteries be in this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize the great cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: let the cautery be as much as this single cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form.
And cauterize the stomach by puncturing it with that which returns from this cautery: and it is that the signs upon the stomach be pierced in quantity as much as you wish with encasement: then cauterize it with the cautery of the puncture: then care for it with the treatment which preceded until it heals
In this manner cauterize the spleen when cold.
Chapter XXIX
When it happens in the spleen that there is pain from cold and moisture, or from great wind, until it is expelled from its natural composition by excessive emission, and the patient is cured as we have said, and does not profit from it: then it is necessary that the patient rest upon his chest, and put the signs with three cauteries according to this figure and this quantity on the spleen below the hypochondria, where the elbow of a man is found: and let the space that is between every cautery be according to the thickness of a digit: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body's rectum: and do not press your hand too much with the cautery
And let the quantity of that which is to be taken away from the thickness of the skin be not added to the middle: and let the patient be standing on his feet.
And if he is not standing, then he is lying down, who has extended his limbs and raised his arms high This is the form of cautery.
And indeed it is possible that these carbuncles may be cauterized with a knife, when there is subtlety and skill in the art.
Beware lest you go too far in the cautery, and that you burn the whole body, because the skin there is thin, as you know well
Concerning the cautery of the after-eruption of the liver
Chapter 30.
When this happens, and you wish to write, if the after-eruption is in the liver itself, or in its covering: if it is in the liver itself, there is severe pain and swelling without acute pain: and if it is in the covering of the liver, with acute pain there is also swelling: and know that I am commanding you to go away, because it fatigues the physician of its care
It is necessary therefore that the patient lies down on his belly
Then the figure of the place of the after-eruption with the cautery: then you will apply the cautery which is assimilated by the heat.
And this is its form
And cauterize with this knife once, until the whole skin is consumed, and it reaches the spleen, until the whole body is healed: then take care of the after-eruption, until the patient is healed
Neither should any instrument of the cauterizing kind be used without thorough study in the art of medicine: for by means of such study the disorders mentioned above will concur with experience on numerous occasions.
It is better to omit it than to risk damaging it.
On the method of cauterization in the chest
Chapter 1
The ancients say that cauterization with aristolochia roots is used for a cold pleurisis in this way.
And it is to be taken that from the dry roots of aristolochia one should take a single long root which is taken from it and be as thick as a finger
Then immerse the root in oil: and kindle the same in fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery that is between the continuation of the collarbone and the jugulum, and with two small cauteries under guidance slightly bent downwards to the part which is under the beard
And with two cauteries also in that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs bent downwards to the rear: and a third cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach
And three cauteries from behind: one in that which is between two ribs: and two cauteries from both sides of the chest, the lower cautery which is between two ribs
Neither must you touch your hand with the cautery, but let it be evident that the skin is fragrant. And some ancient writers say that there are certain men who use a cautery like iron to burn: and they burn and throw it into that which is between the ribs, until it is consumed by it to the very bone, and comes out whole: as we said concerning the spleen
But in this perforation with the cautery there is fear, for either the infirm dies immediately, or it happens that in the place of the fistula there is no healing.
In this way the cautery is to be used for the spleen head.
When you are treating a spleen ailment, when it is such that your treatment does not suffice for the healing of the ailment, then the cautery must be used in three ways, all of which are correct
One of them is to make three cauteries, or four in line, following the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the Liver
And let there be between every two cauteries the thickness of a finger, or less
And let the mode of the cautery be equal to that which we said of the cautery of the Liver
Do not touch your hand with the cautery: and let the infirm lie supine over his back
Another method of cautery is: to take two fingers and grasp the cautery as we said in the chapter on the dislocation of the humerus: and raise the skin which is over the spleen, where the left elbow of the infirm lies: and raise the skin as much as the breadth of the body, so that the cautery falls along the length of the body
Then introduce two fingers with the flame upwards, until when the flame has pierced the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cautery: there will be four cauteries thus made And if you wish to cauterize with another cautery which has three fingers.
Then care for the cautery after you have put it away: let it emit pus for several days: for this is better than any other remedy which has preceded it
On how to cauterize in Hydropisi.
In the treatment of hydropisis, cauterize accordingly.
The cautery must not be applied directly to hydropisis, but must be used with the asclitium tool.
When you are treating hydropisis with these methods of treatment, which we mentioned in the previous chapter, and the condition does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize four times around the belly button, once on the stomach, once on the liver, and once on the spleen, and twice on the back between the vertebrae, and once on the chest and once on the abdomen: and the depth of the cautery should be equal to the thickness of the skin.
Then remove the cautery without delay, so that pus can be emitted over a long time
Do not remove the patient from treatment after the cautery: two intentions should be added together for this purpose. And it will quickly recover with the help of God
The shape of the cautery which is to be used for the uterus is like a claw: as we have previously described. And that which is to be used for the back is like an olive tree, as we have previously described
On how to cauterize the feet and legs. The chapter is not included in the provided text.
When the swelling subsides in hydropisis, and the area is filled with yellow water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the instep and the heel: grasp your hand with the cautery and do not twist it: then grasp your hand again: do not move it at all
The yellow water will then rise up, and the cautery should be used in this shape
Then make over two crura two cauteria on every limb, and apply the cautery with the extremity of the knife of the cautery: and make the cautery according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below the knee, approximately in the middle of the limb: and over every hip make two cauteria: and withdraw the cautery opened without care for a long time: so that it will dry up from it some water: then care for it with the rest which we have said.
Then make over two incisions two cauteria on every limb, and apply the cautery with the tip of the knife: and make the cautery according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below the knee, approximately in the middle of the limb: and over every hip make two cauteria: and withdraw the cautery opened without care for a long time: so that it will dry up from it some water: then care for it with the rest which we have mentioned. Then make over two incisions two cauteria on every limb, and apply the cautery with the tip of the knife: and make the cautery according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below the knee, approximately in the middle of the limb: and over every hip make two cauteria: and withdraw the cautery opened without care for a long time: so that it will dry up from it some water: then care for it with the rest which we have mentioned.
When the solution of the belly is from cold and moisture until the hardness of the retention and digestion is softened, which are in the stomach and intestines: and care for that with the methods of treatment, and do not cure it: and give the sick person the power to tolerate the excessive virtue of the cautery, then burn the belly itself with a large cautery over the stomach, according to what was previously said concerning the cautery of the circle, and four cauteries around the navel below the ribs, with a cautery of the navel itself: and a cautery over the fat above the buttocks, or two cauteries.
And if the liquid moistens the excessive, and the sick person tolerates it, then burn the belly itself with a cautery over the ribcage, and a cautery over all the intestines: and perhaps add two small cauteries over the stomach near the large one
There exists a proficient treatment whose application does not err.
There exists a proficient treatment whose application does not err.
There exists a proficient treatment whose application does not err.
When in the rectum are many old hemorrhoids, either one, and they are from gross, cold, or humid humors, they are cured when these things are used, as we said before, and do not require treatment: then cauterize three times with cautery over the lower part of the spine under the almonds in a triangular shape, and cauterize under the navel like two fingers.
When you think that its stomach is stiff, its food does not digest, and its face is pale, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery, as before: and cauterize over the spleen and the other over the tailbone: and remove the open cautery at some other time. Then take care of it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When you think that its stomach is stiff, its food does not digest, and its face is pale, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery, as before: and cauterize over the spleen and the other over the tailbone: and remove the open cautery at some other time. Then take care of it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
When you think that its stomach is stiff, its food does not digest, and its face is pale, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery, as before: and cauterize over the spleen and the other over the tailbone: and remove the open cautery at some other time. Then take care of it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
When you cut away the anal fistula, then apply the cautery which is absorbed by the radix.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the fire into the cut fistula: and keep your last hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood runs: do this once or twice.</start_of_turn If there are many boils, then cauterize each one individually as we have said.
Then care for them until they are healed, when the wound has closed with the discharge of the pus
And if you cauterize it with a great cautery over the boil, that is the last thing in its treatment.
In this way cauterize the fistula in the rectum.
Chapter XXXVIII.</start_of_turn>
When the patient does not obey the section and the work that we have said in its place, and returns from it, perhaps it will heal with cautery.</start_of_turn>
When there is any fistula, and it has become old, pus runs from it, and it softens the corrupted matter.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is proper that you should try with a fine needle.</start_of_turn
Then know the quantity of its depth with the needle.</start_of_turn
Then ignite the cautery, which is like a rod.</start_of_turn
Then introduce yourself with the ignited cautery into the fistula and the quantity in which the thread has entered.</start_of_turn And repeat over the cautery until you have burned all the corrupted bodies, once, or twice, or three times, according to the necessity.</start_of_turn
And take care that there is no scorching of the nerve, if there is any, or great veins: or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder, or to the body of the intestines, then take care that you are not burned in those places.</start_of_turn
Do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think that it is not penetrating.</start_of_turn
Then care for the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is sealed and matters are excised from it, and it remains thus for a long time: then you know that it is already healed whole.</start_of_turn>
If they are not excised from it, matters, then you know that it is penetrating, or that its bone is corrupt, or as if from those things: of which recollection will come to its place.</start_of_turn>
In this way it is necessary to cauterize the reins.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXXIX.</start_of_turn
When it happens in the reins that there is pain from cold or from great moisture, and they diminish because of that from which the patient is suffering, then it is necessary to cauterize them over the fat over the kidneys, cauterizing every kidney with a cautery needle, of which there is recollection.</start_of_turn
And perhaps we cauterize them a second time in the same fat.</start_of_turn
Because three lines come.</start_of_turn
Therefore there will be four last things in the treatment.</start_of_turn
In this way it is necessary to cauterize the bladder.</start_of_turn
Chapter XL.</start_of_turn When there is weakness in the bladder, and softening from the stone and moisture, until the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the belly above the bladder, where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right side of the belly and from the left side of it: and let the length of that cautery be as much as the breadth of the thumb: and cauterize it with a lower burn, or with two burns, if you like: and let that be according as the cautery needle went before.</start_of_turn
How to cauterize the Matrix. How to cauterize the Matrix.
When cold and moisture abound in the Matrix, and it is prohibited by this [moisture] from being impregnated, and its blood is corrupted, its periods are delayed, and there is pain at its side, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we have said concerning the cauterization of the uterus, and to cauterize above the lower edge of the liver, or to make two cauterizations: and let the cauterium be blunt.
How to cauterize the Ancham in dislocation
How to cauterize the Ancham in dislocation
When moisture of the mucous membrane flows down to the ankle of the Ancham and becomes the cause of its displacement from its place: and the sign of this is that the leg is prolonged over the other when compared with the limb below: and the place of dislocation is found in that hollow space.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the diseased part over the ankle of the Ancham with a circle: after you have marked the circumference with the cautery, as if you were rolling over: and that the ankle itself falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the cauterium be of the form which was mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach
If you do not find this cautery [for the ankle] previously mentioned, then cauterize it three times with a large olive cautery: and make the depth of the cautery equal to the amount of thickness of the skin of the whole body
Then take care of it until it is healed
How to cauterize in Sciatica Chapter XLIII.
When pain occurs in the area of the knee, due to cold and moisture: the physician should treat the patient as we have said previously, and if no benefit results from this treatment, it is necessary to evacuate the patient from the humours with large pills of foetid material, or with artificial pills, and the like.
Then cauterize it.</start_of_turn>
And the mode of cauterization in this case is in two ways: either with cautery and astringents, or with fire.</start_of_turn>
Cauterization with fire is done in many ways.</start_of_turn
One of them is to cauterize over the knee with three triangular cautery instruments, according to this form.</start_of_turn
And do it with a good depth, or a slight depth.</start_of_turn
And let there be space between every two cauteries equal to the thickness of a finger: and let the cauteries be small.</start_of_turn
When the cauterization is done in the middle of the knee, it must be done cautiously.</start_of_turn
For there are four cautery instruments.</start_of_turn
And if you wish to cauterize in a circle, whose form precedes the cauterization of dislocation of the knee, do one: so that the circle contains the whole knee.</start_of_turn
And burn the hairiness of the whole skin.</start_of_turn
This is the mode of cauterization in Sciatica, when the pain is attached to the knee itself, and does not extend up to the hip and thigh.</start_of_turn
If it extends up to the knee and thigh, then cauterize it with two cautery irons above the knee, above the place where the sick person has pain, where the pain is, and cauterize your cautery iron four digits above the heel to the outer side: and let the cautery iron be sharp. And let the depth of the cautery be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient complains that the pain extends up to near the toes, then cauterize it there where he complains with the cautery needle, three or four or more, as he needs it
And if he complains that the pain is under the knee or thigh, then cauterize it there with one cautery iron.
And take care in all your cauterizations that you do not reach the nerves or great arteries, and that you do not pull on it over the patient's bad tissue, or cause contraction.
I also know of one and another who have cauterized above the heel, and have finished their cauterization, and the thigh has swollen, until the tumor has followed the foot down to the ground, and has burst open, and become corrupted throughout: then the solution of the belly has followed, and death after that.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize both of them according to this method.
And some wise men say that the cautery of anchan is like this.
Make like a wise man from iron, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and let it be at the level of its orifice according to the thickness of the kernel of the thumb, or less wide: and there is to be within it the third of the same.
And there shall be space between every two fingers according to the quantity of a thumb-node: and the fingers shall be opened by two parts: and the height of them shall be like a thumb-node, or two thumb-nodes: and make a handle of iron adapted to the palm of the hand.
This is its form.</start_of_turn>
Then it is to be ignited in fire, until it is red, and the sparks are to be thrown away: then it is to be placed upon a wound covered with a soft cushion on the side of the healthy hand.</start_of_turn>
Burn thus three round burns in oil together.</start_of_turn
Then leave it for three days.</start_of_turn
Then apply with butter: and take away the wound after many days.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with unguents, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Albucasis saith, in this kind of cautery, or of the sons of men, we use it little, because of the fear of its appearance: and therefore, because of this, we find few who are willing to endure it.</start_of_turn
But truly it is from the good cautery that it is useful to him who endures it, and he finds it when he needs it.</start_of_turn
But the cautery with the physicians is best when it is used on two fingers which have a perforated palm, in which the tendon of the wrist has descended from the air, or from iron, the length of the edge being two thumb-nodes, or as much as these.</start_of_turn
And there shall be space between every two fingers according to the quantity of a thumb-node: and the fingers shall be opened below and above: and the thumb-node shall contain itself inward, according to this form.</start_of_turn
Then lay the wound above the heel of the bed, the sick man being over the wide side of the bed.
And press your hand firmly above the heel of the bed much.</start_of_turn>
Then pour between two circles of warm water, which is heated with a moderate fire, and keep it for an hour: and the sick man will endure the biting of his wound, and its swelling, for he himself finds the biting of the wound like fire, until the biting subsides.</start_of_turn>
Then lift your hand with the instrument, and wipe away the warm water from the wound with sweet water: then leave it for three days.</start_of_turn
And put upon it butter, until the black of the wound has disappeared: and leave it for a few days, and it will come out with pus.</start_of_turn
This is the end of the treatment.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it with unguents, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the pain extends up to the hip or thigh: make for him a support in which there is water, just as you did above the wound.</start_of_turn
This is the way of warm water: and I have written about it in the treatise on medical rectifications.</start_of_turn>
Take alkali and unslaked lime, both of which take up half each: put both into a new vessel, the lower part of which is pierced with a small hole, according to the quantity of the radius which is to be treated: and put under the bottom of the vessel another vessel filled with water: and pour over the alkali and lime from sweet water, which submerges both by a finger: and when you have compressed them with your hand with a good compression: and pour out the vessel, until the acute water has descended from the treated part.</start_of_turn
Then add all the water, and throw the sponge over the other heel: and withdraw the heel until it returns.
The water itself is often strong and acute, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the remaining limbs.
For it performs the work of fire itself
And there are many physicians who, when they cauterize widely, use tallow, beeswax, and soap, so that both are mixed together
Galen himself, speaking of an ancient practitioner, relates that he cured the pain of an aching heel and sciatica: and praised his method highly
He said that no other cure was necessary, and that he himself had suffered from a swelling of the foot for a long time, until he was healed by this method It is like taking the thigh of a young man: and if you cannot find a young man, take dry [horse dung]: put much of it with some fat, and put it on the heel where the pain is, or on the knee or in the hip: and bind it, and let it go for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels comfortable.
Then put the sponge into the bath.
When the sponge is soft, put it into the shoe
For the pain goes away and is healed.
And know that no other cauterization should be used along with these medicines, except after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who says this, when he cauterizes the heel with horse dung, gives relief from sciatica: and does the cauterization in this way.
Let a lancet be held, and let an old olive oil be taken, and let it be poured over the deep place, which is between the thumb of the foot and between the nails, and is closer to the nail.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it, until it turns to charcoal.
Then place it over the lancet and let it go, until it is extinguished.
Repeat this procedure.
Do not cease doing this until sensation returns above the application of the lancet, and the pain has ceased
And this method of cauterization is called cauterization of the Vaccinum
Of the cauterization of the dorsal pain
Chapter XLIV.
When there is pain in the back from many wounds, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, or in like manner, from the infusion of cold and moist matter: in this case cauterization is not useless, except for one kind which is made from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the sick person with foul pills and like things, to make three lines on the back, where there is pain, according to the width of the almond of the eye: and let five cauteries be made on each line, or more according to the patient’s tolerance of the pain of the disease: and let the cauterization be made with the cautery needle.
Or if you wish, cauterize three or four times with the middle cautery needle, according to this form
Of the manner of cauterizing in the groin.
Chapter XLV.
Many such ailments befall young children.
A sign of its inception is that it happens over stricture in coughing, at elevation, and motion: and is found in the lower spine and its nodes, which begin to rise above the rest of the vertebrae.
When you have thus helped it, and wish to make it cease, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this shape
Capture the cautery over the whole of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a point cautery, make two or three points close together
Then take care of the place, until it is healed as we have said.
Be careful, do not apply the cautery to a swelling, which is in a nerve spasm.
In the same way as for cauterizing in Podagra, and for joined pains. Chapter XLVI.
When joint pains are caused by cold humors which flow throughout the body, and when they happen in the feet, it is customary among doctors to call it Podagra
When it has been cured with cold causes of Podagra, as with other medicines, and the pain does not go away, then the cautery will remove it
And it is necessary to cauterize around the joint after emptying it with multiple cauteries: and let the cautery be of Olive oil.
This is its shape
And if you do not wish to make points over the face of the foot, then make them with the point cautery
If pain ascends to the knee, or if the other ligatures remain, and this happens frequently, then burn the whole knee with three burns, or four from every side, with the same burn as Claudius. If it is necessary to burn the knee more often, then burn it again.</start_of_turn> And do not immerse your hand with the burn, but keep the thickness of the skin only.</start_of_turn>
If pain ascends to the knee and the back: then perform what we said about the burn in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
If the pain is only in the hands: then puncture around the nails, like two lines are returned.</start_of_turn
If there remains pain in the toes: then puncture them, over every knot and over the palm of the hand.</start_of_turn
If pain ascends after a few days to the cubits or to the arms: then burn both from every side.</start_of_turn
And do not neglect the patient from the management of the good, from the recovery of medicines.</start_of_turn
For if there is a good regimen, and the phlegm is evacuated, the patient will recover with the help of God with this burn.</start_of_turn>
¶ On the method of burning in ruptures.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLVII.</start_of_turn
When a rupture happens in the groin, and the intestines or the bladder descend to the testicles, and this is beginning close by: then it is necessary for the patient to vomit immediately in his day.</start_of_turn
And so it is done from the soft things, from which the stool descends from its belly.
Then sit between your hands over his back: and command him to keep his breath still until he goes out, or until he appears to have a wound or an intestine
Then press down with your fingers and sign with the thumb under the rupture above the hip bone, with the sign of which the extremity is similar to the middle of the circle of the body.
Then burn the cautery, whose shape is like this, until it becomes white, and throw away the fat.
Then reduce the intestine or the wound to its cavity.
Then put your hand on the place, so that the intestine does not go out: and you have opened between the ribs, and put under it some powder, and another one on the ribs that holds his hand.
Then put the cautery on the sign itself, your hand with the cautery standing straight up
And hold it there, until you follow the bone: or do it again with oil if you have not followed it with oil from the beginning until the bone
And observe prudently the exit of the intestine at the time of your cautery, that you do not burn it, and that it comes out through that over the patient or the wound, or a great malice
And you know, that when you do not follow with the cautery the bone, your operation will be in vain.
And it is necessary that the cautery of the infants be subtle, according to their measure
Then take care of the rest of the wounds, until they are healed.
And if the patient has been lying upon his back for forty days, until the swelling subsides.
And it should be provided that he be given nourishment during the course of his treatment, which will soften his belly: so that the intestine does not remain in the bowels and evacuate through the mouth.
When the swelling subsides after forty days, then administer the ligature of the central part and keep it for another forty days.
For thus, if these things are observed, the patient will recover completely.
When, however, ruptures happen in the rest of the belly, and are beginning to form, and it is desired that they should not grow larger, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to their size: and let it be so that from that time on it appears as if a third of it has been burned away
And then care for it as we have said: and do not add to it.
And some people say: cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
When it has been signed with charcoal, and a line is drawn which is through the breadth at the upper side of the rupture, and a line which is at the lower side. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery of the hook
But the first cautery is easier and better In cases of pain caused by falling or percussion.
Chapter XLVIII.
When something happens in some limb by wound or blow, and pain persists for a long time, and does not yield to treatment with physicians: then it is necessary to cauterize with the Puncti cautery.
And let the cautery be performed on every limb according to its size, its shape, its toughness, its strength, its position and the pain from it
If therefore it is healed by the first cautery, it is good.
If not: then repeat the cautery over it again.
For the custom of these pains is that they change from one limb to another approaching that which is most painful
Therefore follow them with the cautery until the infirmity is healed
And concerning the cautery of Lepra...
Chapter XLIX.
Leprosy, however, is sometimes treated by cautery with the greatest care
And especially those species of Leprosy which arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: with such ones great care is necessary for the cautery
If indeed the Lepra is not severe, and you wish to treat it with this, as we have said previously, and it does not subside, neither does it remain: and when it has spread over the whole face: then cauterize it over the head five times: one in the middle of the head between the ears, and the second below it at the edge of the hair, and two over the two horns, and one behind the earlobe.
And finally touch your hand with the cautery lightly, until you make an imprint in the bone, and the cortices are displaced from it: so that the emission of thick vapors from it is alleviated, and cauterize the spleen also with the cautery, as we have said before
If, however, leprosy has become sparse upon the sick person, and is apparent, then it is necessary that you should cauterize with these cauteries which we mentioned at the head, and with a cautery upon the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries upon the two maxillae, and two upon the spines of the neck, and six upon the spines of the back, and one large one upon the hairless parts at the root of the tail and one above the middle of the palm: and two upon the ankles: that is, upon every ankle one, and two upon the knees: one upon every knee, and two upon the humeri, and two upon the cubits, and two upon the armpits of the chest. And cauterize the whole of every joint, from the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and cauterize the whole of every heel of the feet.
And cauterize the nerves which are upon the posterior heel, that you do not burn them. And when you cauterize with a cautery upon the bone of the pelvis, and another upon the bone of the stomach, and another upon the spleen.
And you know that the more you add cauteries, the greater the damage, and the greater the suffering.
And you know that the sick person does not find ease in the cautery, as they find rest in health: because the body of the latter is already stunned
It is necessary that there be large and small cauteries according to the members and the joints: according to what has preceded from the kinds of instruments.
Head L.
When any limb is stiff and will not recover with medicines, oils, plasters, it is then to cauterize the stiff limb with cautery, according to the size of the limb or its degree of stiffness.
And let your cautery not pass through the thickness of the skin superficially.
Then care for it with unguents until it is healed
And when it is cauterized for some stiffness of the hand, foot, in the bones of the back near the exit of the nerves which move that limb: and the stiffness will be moved away
But it does not matter over that, except for one who is skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves moving the body
Thus cauterizing in Albaras.
Head LII
When Albaras has become old and does not yield to any medical treatment: then cauterize over the surface of the deep cautery sparingly, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes
Then care for it with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnica, and poppy seeds, and hyssop blood: from each of these things take one part: mix all these things together and smear them over the wound, and they will adhere to the place until it is healed.
Thus cauterizing in Cancer
Head LII
When Cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it turns.
Wise men have said, 'The cautery should be performed with the last cautery in the middle.'
I do not see that this is necessary: for I fear that it will cause a burn. And I have seen this happen many times before.</start_of_turn> It is better to cauterize around it in a circle, as we have said: or with multiple cauteries.</start_of_turn> Regarding the cautery of Adubelati.</start_of_turn
Chapter LIII.</start_of_turn>
When someone has Adubelati and it is delayed in maturation, or because of excessive fat, or because of old age which makes the patient weak, or because of the passing of time, and he wishes to hasten the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, puncturing.</start_of_turn
Then remove the dressing.</start_of_turn
For it will itself hasten the maturation.</start_of_turn
If, however, you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then make a burn with the cautery that has this shape.</start_of_turn
And place it in the middle of Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be far from the healthy parts, in order to relieve the pain.</start_of_turn
Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
Regarding the cautery of the soft swelling.</start_of_turn Chapter LIIII.</start_of_turn
A soft swelling is not except for a corruption in a limb that is able to walk, and it corrupts it: just as fire consumes dry wood.</start_of_turn
If there is any fluid which has eaten away its place and tolerates cautery with fire, then burn the cautery much, make the nails small and great, as it shall be fitting in the place where the corrosive matter is.
Burn it from every side until you have eradicated the whole corruption, and let nothing remain of it inside or outside Then remove it in three days, and put upon the cauterized place sulfur three times ground with oil, until all the eschars are eradicated, and all corruption is gone.
Then care for it with nourishing unguents of flesh.
If there is any fluid which after three days new flesh is born without corruption, this is good.
And if not: then burn the cautery once more over that which remains from the corrupted places.
And the corrosive is to be treated with acute medicine.
It itself arises in the place of the cautery.
But truly, the cautery with fire is faster in its action: and I indeed said above that the cautery should be made with acute medicine in its application: take therefore care of it there when it is indigested
In the manner of cauterizing nails and vericles. Chapter LV.
Many things happen in the lower parts of the feet with this disease: and it is a great, filtering thing that causes damage to the foot. And the cautery is done in two ways: cautery with fire, and cautery with warm water
When done with fire, let the cautery be in the shape of a concave curve like the nail of a hare: which is made of iron, according to the quantity which contains the nail from every side: and be fine at the edges.
Then lay the burning [incense] upon the palm of the hand. Then retract the hand with the cautery around the circumference of the thumb, until the cautery reaches the depth of the thumb: and keep it there for three days, until pus begins to discharge. Then cover it with sponges soaked in salt, and keep it covered with a bandage at night. The inflammation will disappear from its roots
Then care for the place where the burn has generated tissue, until it heals
If they are not healed, and are multiplied on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply cautery with warm water: or take a needle from iron or ivory, or from a quill, and lay it upon the thumb, or the great toe
Then pour a small quantity of warm water into the needle: hold your hand, and retract the needle with pressure, so as to impress the mark of the needle at the root of the thumb, and to bring the warm water up to the root of the thumb: and expect the patient to endure the pain for an hour
Then let it go, for the thumb is eradicated with its roots
Do so with one hand after the other, until you have passed over all that is in the body from the hand
Then care for the rest after they have been eradicated, with that which generates tissue from the incisions.
In this way cauterize in Tremore.
Chapter 66.
When it happens to anyone to have a tremor from cold in a nerve, or from a quartan fever, or anything else: then it is necessary to cauterize four times with the cautery, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize with the cautery, and in the chest cauterize with the cautery, and over the stomach with the cautery.
The tremor ceases when the olive oil cauterization is performed, and the health of the cold disease returns. The tremor ceases when olive oil cauterization is performed, and the health of the cold disease returns.
The tremor ceases when olive oil cauterization is performed, and the health of the cold disease returns.
When the large matter in the body of Albathir is expelled, that is, pus, which arises from corrupted matter.
Therefore, in the first place when it appears, it is necessary to cauterize over every head of pus with a fine cautery of myrtwood, whose extremity is kindled with fire.
Or with the long radix of aristolochiae
Or with a lenticular cautery And when the cautery has been performed around the circumference in the beginning of the expulsion, according to this method: and they do not increase; the superabundance breaks and the superfluous is expelled, and health is restored from the remnants.
However, it is necessary to perform this after the evacuation with a phlebotomy
Of the cauterization of the flux of blood from the artery in the wound.
Of the cauterization of the flux of blood from the artery in the wound Many times blood from an artery escapes from an incision made in the wound, which happens either externally, or at the base of the wound, or from the cautery of a limb, or like this: and this makes it difficult to close the wound
When this happens to anyone, then take hold of your hand with your thumb over the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger over that: and tighten it much, until blood ceases to flow from under your finger, and does not escape from there again Then put on the fire a few small olive stones and many more in great number: and blow over them until they are kindled.
Then take one, or a few, or many bones, according to the wound and place, where the artery is ruptured, and put the cautery on the very part: then move your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is severed.
If it is expelled with the finger from the opening of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire Do not cease to do this until the blood is severed.
And be careful not to burn the nerve which is there, and do not add any other evil to the sick person You know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to sever it: especially when the artery is great, except with four fingers together
Or with the cautery, as we have said
Or with extraction, when it is not extracted For when it is extracted, its extremities contract and the blood is severed
For when it is extracted, its extremities contract and the blood is severed Or it is bound with a strong ligature.
Or there are placed upon it medicines which have the property of severing blood, and they are bound with a constriction of thread.
Whoever performs an excision with a ligature, and a tightening with a bandage, or position of the burning things, or like these, does not give him pain, except rarely.
If however this happens to anyone, and there is no physician or medicine present: then begin with the position of the index finger over the opening of the vein, as we have said, and the constriction of the hand, until the blood is overcome from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery itself
And the finger must not be moved, but should be left resting upon the cold water until the blood congeals, and swells, and is severed. Meantime, let him consider what is needed from the cautery, or from the medicine.
Part One, Finished
Book of Surgery by Albucasis, Part Two. Concerning Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and things of that nature
We have already spoken in the first chapter about every ailment in which the use of the cautery with fire and burning medicine is useful, as well as the occasions when it is necessary, its causes, and its instruments, and the forms of cauteries And I shall proceed to speak of the chapters from the head down to the foot
And I shall follow the same order in this chapter: in order to satisfy the seeker of knowledge concerning this matter And before I begin this, let me remind you, son or daughter, what was said in the first chapter concerning cautery
Therefore it is necessary to take great care in this operation, because in this chapter there is great likelihood of bloodletting with the opening of the vein, or incision over the bone, or opening of the exit, or healing of the wound, or extracting an arrow, or incision over the stone, and things of that nature: from which all these things are associated with tremor and fear, and fall in many.
I warn you, do not be careless in this matter, for when people are careless in this art, as well as in the art of healing the sick, they often fall into the same errors as ordinary men
Whoever is irascible with his ailment is his foe: for his wrath arises from the awareness of his infirmity and the length of his suffering.
And when an ailment is accompanied by fear of death, it is significant
Whoever attributes his suffering to the physician and speaks to him with hope of recovery is a madman. It is not right that you should consent to his coming to you from the realm of illness with a method that is like this.
Be more cautious of your wrath than of your love and your violence
Do not presume anything about it from him except after a definite science has proved it to be beneficial to you
Make use of the care of all sick people, the prognosis and the indication of that which is suitable for health.
For in this lies your aid in acquiring fame and glory, and in memory and praise.
May God inspire you, son, your intellect, and do not take from you direction and inspiration: for this is in his hand.
And I, too, order this chapter to be distinguished by chapters, following the order of the Cauteries chapter from the groin to the feet: so that your request which you desire from this and for which you yearn may be alleviated from you
Of the care for water which accumulates in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
You know that this infirmity often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without gentleness
Whenever anything happens even from an occult cause which is not discerned.
I am not aware of any such ailment among adults as I am among children; and concerning all those from whom I have learned, the sea has been their master: on account of this, therefore, I deem it expedient to omit the operation in this case.
I have observed among children that whenever their heads were filled with water and their heads grew large every day, they could not sit down due to the size of their heads, and there was an increase in moisture until they died.
And such moisture either accumulates between the skin and bones or accumulates under the bones on the surface of the wound
If there is moisture between the skin and bones and the swelling is slight, then it is necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head, the length of which should be like two knots, until the moisture is drained out
This is the form of the spatula.
If there is much moisture and the swelling is great, then make two incisions according to this form.</start_of_turn>
If the moisture is under the bones, and its sign is that the edges of the head are open from all sides: and the moisture is driven out when you push your hand into the wound, and it does not remain hidden: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method.</start_of_turn>
And after the incision, drain out all the moisture.</start_of_turn>
And then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day.</start_of_turn
Then solve the ligament, and care for the wound with tension and moisture.
Do not neglect to tighten the head with equal tension.
And keep the wound moist with little food, until the limb is comfortable and healed.</start_of_turn>
Another way of making an incision is to consider the size of the opening of the wound and the collection of fluid.</start_of_turn>
For sometimes in the neck it is more, or in the armpit, or on the right, or on the left.</start_of_turn
Proceed accordingly with the incision where you see the swelling and the collection of fluid: and cut that as much as you can.</start_of_turn
And observe, that you do not cut an artery, and that there is not excessive bleeding, and that the patient dies from that bleeding with the evacuation of moisture.</start_of_turn
As for the incision of the arteries that are behind the ears.</start_of_turn
(The text following this section is not included in the request and is therefore not translated.)</start_of_turn>
When any swelling has occurred in the eyes or the chest, and it is old, and no cure has been of any avail: then the last cure is to cut these two arteries.</start_of_turn>
You must therefore when you wish to cut easily, so that the patient bears the pain of his head.</start_of_turn
Then scrape the place with rough linen, so that the arteries appear.</start_of_turn
Then tighten the patient's neck with whatever linen he has.</start_of_turn
Then consider where the vein pulsates.</start_of_turn
The ears are located behind the auricle, and are rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then signs with a burn above each: and cut each with a scalpel both above and below, with the incision reaching the bone: and do this across the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce the spatula under the artery, and cut upwards with the incision.
Let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers
For when the bone is cut, blood flows out with the pulsation, which leaps inside frequently
But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers
Then signs with a burn, and find until the bone.
And what should be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less is emitted from it All this according to the quantity which appears to you from the patient's sickness and the repletion of the artery itself.
Then consider the wound
Then if there remains anything of the bone from the shaving, cut it off so that no callous swelling occurs: then bind the wound with strips of linen cloth
And take care of the wound with ointment, until it is healed
Concerning the extraction of arteries, which are in temporary cases
Chapter 3
When it happens to a man an old headache, or acute catarrh due to acrid humilities, and heat in the lacerations of the times, or old soda, bile, or like these: and when these are treated with the methods of the medical art, and do not yield: then we are experts in these ailments of the arteries of the times, or their cauterization, as we have mentioned
And as regards the method of operation in the extraction of ears, it is that the diseased person should pluck the hairs which are in the temporal regions, and bring them down to the apparent artery in the temple.
It is itself evident from its pulse, and is rarely hidden except in a few individuals, or because of excessive cold.
If it is hidden, the diseased person should tighten his head with whatever garment he has: then he should rub the place with rough cloth
or apply warm vapor to the place, until the artery becomes visible. Then take hold of the forceps, which are before like a sickle And scrape away with it the skin with ease, until you reach the artery itself
Then pull out the vessel upwards, and extract it to the upper parts, until you have extracted it from the skin, and make it retract from under the clothes from all sides
If the artery is thin: then grasp it with the end of a needle.
And then cut from it the second part according to the length of its extremities, and contract, and do not allow the flow of blood to occur
For if it is not cut through, and if it is not severed, the blood will not ascend fully Then wash from the blood about six ounces, until about three remain
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to ligate it in two places with double silk, strong, from silk: or with silk thread, so that it does not swell before the wound is consolidated, and the flow of blood is restored
And then cut away the surplus, which is between the two ligatures.
Do it now or later. Perform it now or later.
It is better to do the work now rather than later, especially if the patient has a fever or is flushed with heat.
For the cautery is from the earth, which helps to dry up humors.
Therefore, it is better to burn (perform the surgery).
And it is necessary after the extraction of the arteries that the place be closed with old silk: and put above the middle of the wound a little piece of wool.
And after closing, care with dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and with lint, until it heals
If during the work blood flows from an artery, then immediately cauterize it or put in place a plug with a sliver of bone: and bind your hand, until the blood is stopped
If nothing of these things is present, then put over the place of the digit your hand, until the blood solidifies
And embroider the place with cold water, until the pain subsides, and bind according as seems best
And from this it is easier and more convenient to extract the artery, namely to cauterize it with this cautery that has two knives: and let the pain of the two knives be like an ointment
Indeed, they are much less acute than two knives
For if they are acute, like two knives, they cause great heat: and do not penetrate the flesh with speed.
When anything in the body is of a greater size, and is held fast by the heat of fire, and is soon severed: in such a manner is this work better than all others, more easy, and more convenient.
When the space between two nails is equal to the breadth of a finger, after you mark two points with an incision: and you lay both of them alight, until they reach the bone, and they touch at two points: in order to lengthen that which is between their extremities
For in this way they do not solidify together.
This is the form of the cautery.</start_of_turn>
About the care of acute tears from the eyes.</start_of_turn>
Chapter III.</start_of_turn>
When tears are acute and flow from the eyes, which are above the outer part of the head: and there is no need for any medical treatment with a physician, and the face of the patient is reddened, and he feels a wandering in front of him, like the wandering of ants: and his eyes are swollen, wet, for they are corroded by the tears: and the eyelashes are reddened from the intensity of the tears: then the ancients considered in the treatment of these ailments this operation, and they called it Ense.</start_of_turn>
And it is like shaving the hair on his face.</start_of_turn
Then make three incisions on the forehead, equidistant from each other according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and let one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of the lower jaw, and the third from the other side: and cauterize from the arteries that are on the two sides. And extend your hand from the continuation of your two mandibles, and let the space of the incision be equal to the breadth of three fingers joined together. And let there be a sponge prepared, or dry cloth, with which to soak up the blood.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the sponge of two acute extremities, whose form follows.
From the incision from the temporal side to the second incision: and scrape away the whole skin between the two incisions, with the sponge, which is over the bone. Do the same also from the middle incision to the second incision.
Then draw out the sponge, and introduce into the first incision once more an instrument called the acute knife, from one blunt side, not from the acute side
This is its form.
And place the acute edge towards the meat annexed with skin, and the blunt edge towards the bone: and press it in until it reaches the middle cleft: and cut away everything that hangs down from the head to the eyes: except that which remains of the skin.
Do the same in the middle cleft until the other cleft
And when blood has run out in an equal quantity, express the place from the coagulated blood clots Then place in every incision a piece of old cotton, and place over it soaked wool plugs in wine, and oil, or vinegar.
And see that no cold swelling occurs.
And on the third day heal the ligament, and give a large infusion with warm water
Then care for it from the ointment of basilisk, and for the rest which heals wounds: until it is healed
About the care of acute tears and catarrh of the eyes from the inside of the head.
Chapter V.
When acute catarrh, acres, or assiduity occur to anyone: and the tears of his eyes are prolonged, small, and the sight is impaired: and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from the edge of the eye, and there is acute pain in the depth of the head, groaning, and sneezing follows: then take from these signs that the matter and the catarrh do not come from one source, except from many tears.
And the best cure for the eye is this.
And it is to make the patient scrape the front of his eye with his finger
Then make an incision one-third in the middle of the front, or somewhat lower in breadth, and begin from the left side to the right side: and let the incision reach the bone: and stretch your hand from the bites of the teeth, which move during chewing: until the bone is detected: and you will extract all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with cotton wool or strips of linen.
Then bind above with thread: and soak the thread with wine and oil, so that no abscess forms.
And when you have finished with this, and the swelling of the abscess has gone down: then it is necessary to heat the bone, until flesh begins to form in it.
And then care for the eye with the regimen of drying which makes flesh grow: like if you take from wheat flour two parts, and from colophony four parts: and prepare from these materials a plaster, and give it to the eye until the flesh grows in these wounds.
And concerning the care of the eye that falls in the autumn. Chapter VI. Every part that falls into gold is of four kinds: either a mineral lapis, or one like it, such as iron; or it is derived from a plant, such as cicer and beans; or it is a flowing substance, such as water and vinegar, and things that resemble it; or it is some animal.
When any lapis or stone falls into gold, or any genus of stone that does not grow or exist in gold, it exposes the gold alone; if any liquid is poured over the stone, there will then be distilled from the fat some liquid from the fat of the stone, or from the blood
Then administer the extraction and make the patient sneeze with conditions, and anoint the nostrils above the sneeze, after you have put around the ear a cloth or bandage, and extend the gold upwards
Many things depart with this care.
If they do not depart, then administer the extraction with sponges, that is, fine sponges: which are of this form.
If they depart with the sponges, it is good.
And if they do not depart, then administer the extraction with a blunt needle of small size. If they do not depart by this, then make a hole in the ear with a needle of air, and introduce the extremity of the needle into the ear much, and anoint what is around the needle with butter mixed with oil, so that there is no air remaining except the air of the needle: then draw out with your hand with a strong attraction. Many things depart with this which we have said.
If they do not depart in this way: then take from barley or from vinegar, that is, prepared gluten, with which birds are caught, a remedy: and put it on the edge of the radius after you have wrapped round the heel placed centrally: then introduce it into the ear with ease, after you have dried the gold from moisture.
If, however, it does not go out with all that we have said, then it is proper to cut before the swelling becomes cold or spasmodic.
The method of incision is as follows: first of all, let an untrained person draw out the blood from the head: and take from him blood in proportion to his worth.
Then sit the patient between your hands, and draw up his skin towards the head, and make an incision in the middle of the ear at the place where there is a dimple: and let the incision be in the shape of a crescent until you reach the bone: then take out the instrument with that
Then take out the instrument with speed from the hour, and care for the wound, until it is healed.
If there is a foreign body in the ear from a grain which has grown and swelled: then order its extraction.
If it does not obey you in coming out, then take a small towel, fine and subtle, according to this form.
And administer with it the excision of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not make that, when you think that that grain is already softened by the vapor of the ear, until you put it out with great force: then take it out with hooks, or with a subtle hand, or with suction, as we have said, for its extraction relieves it.
But in water which enters the ear, it is necessary that the patient should sneeze at first: and then put into the ear a little cotton wool with a little butter: and lie down on the ear which is in the water.
If it comes out by itself, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, firm, soft, and heat them with fire near, and let the patient put one of his ears into the hole of his ear: and he should lick his foot with that hand, and strike with another stone on the stone which is in the ear.
Until all the water has drained out, do not cease to work with the stone and the stone.
Until the water has drained out, do not desist from working with the stone and the stone until the fire has consumed a portion of it, or until it has consumed one joint of the bone, and you introduce the extremity of the former into the cavity of the latter: and raise the other extremity with fire until most of it is consumed.
Then repeat the process with another joint, and do this many times until all the water has drained out: and extract the latter with a needle as is prescribed in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that is within the stone, such as a flea or anything like it, take care of it as I have said in the explanation.
But if it is a large body, which appears to the sense: then manage the extraction of it with hands and needles: and thus it is easier for all who hold the stone.
In the extraction of worms that are generated in the stone, when you have cured it as we have said in the explanation of distillation and other treatises, and your care has not been of benefit: then it is necessary to burn the stone in the sun.
If anything appears there from the worms, then extract it with hands or with fine needles.
If nothing appears there, then take a needle of this shape, straight below and wide above: and introduce the lower extremity into the stone according to the quantity which the sick stone can tolerate: then draw out with this strong suction
Do this many times until all the worms have drained out
If they do not obey you with regard to their exit, then smear the circumference of the needle with grease, like I have said in the stone
If they do not go out with it as we have said: then administer distillations which the ancients are experts in concerning the bites of dogs: and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be that which you pour out fats and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.
Like wax you make it from silver or gold, lower part tight, in which there is a small hole, the upper part wide open
Let the impelling force which is in the cavity of the tube be made of air, centered
And if you wish, take a radius and encircle in its extremity a sponge soaked in the descent: then pour oil, or gum, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the tube: and let it be in the ear: then insert the radius with the sponge above, and press it with your hand compressed, until the oil is driven into the cavity of the ear, and the patient feels it inside: and what is poured into the ear is already warmed with fire near: and beware that nothing is distilled in the ear which is cold and wet: for medicines do not tolerate that.
Of the care of the burn of the Golden Ear.
(The text continues with the next section of the translation.)
Whenever some infants emerge from the holes of their mothers' breasts unpierced.
And sometimes also to men happens a burning in the ear from a wound, or from the natural hardness of the flesh in that place
And this burning often happens in the depth of the ear canal, as it does not follow ordinary use: and sometimes it happens on the outside of the ear canal little by little, and follows common use.
Nothing happens in the depth of the ear which the eye does not comprehend is difficult to cure in many situations.
In such cases as occur within the depth of the ear, which the eye does not comprehend, these are difficult to cure in many situations
If the like of this arises from the native tissue of the ear: then hold the needle with a fine point and cut through with ease until the whole tissue has been removed.
If it arises in the depth of the ear: then take a fine needle, soft and warm it with fire: then pass it through the tissue of the ear
If you feel a sensation of the condition which causes the sufferer to complain of the weight of the ear, try to open it with ease: and take care that you do not injure the nerve of the ear.
Then put in the ear a dressing according to the quantity of the opening which you have made in the Egyptian unguent: do this for a few days, until you are sure that the wound has consolidated
Or take a dressing and soak it in rose-water, and grind over it the residue of the masticated sage, and use this for the purpose.
If you have finished with the ear: then you must remove the dressing and cover it with another dressing, which you will place in the cavity made with the rose-water, until the swelling has subsided: then care for it until it is healed
If blood flows: then immerse a sponge or pack in cold water, and put it on the ear: and use the rest of the treatment which expels the said blood-flow mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
On the care of the Almond of the Eyes.
On the care of the Almond of the Eyes. These Althelis, which happen in the Palpebras of the eye, are either wet or dry when they occur
It is necessary therefore to treat them with cataplasms: with honey or with an ointment of herbs from their roots
Then put on the place a little of beaten egg white
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine lancet.
And the cauterization must be done after the incision
Many of them indeed return when something remains of their roots.
And when cauterized with fire, they burn those roots and they do not return
On the care of the Big Almond of the Eye
On the care of the Big Almond of the Eye
Many things happen in the eyelids something that fills the Crandnium in its strength and hardness, and because of this it is called the Big One: and it is an aggregation of great humidity in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid
The operation is therefore done in this eye as you see, if there is a Big One proceeding from the eyelid, which appears from the eyelid and moves to all parts, and its resolution is easy
Find therefore above the seam for the width.
Then scrape out the eye from all parts with ease until it is evacuated
Then suspend the eye with honey, and cut it off
If, however, the incision is not prepared beforehand, except when you pierce the eyeball with a small incision, then it will harm the patient in some way.
If the incision is large: then join it with a suture: and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And if it is small, it will not cause any harm from it.</start_of_turn>
The ointment restores it and nourishes it.</start_of_turn>
And if it is great and extends downwards into the inner part of the ear towards the surface, then invert the eyeball, and suspend the great vessel with a ligature: except that you do not wish to make an incision, and press it from all around.</start_of_turn
And if the eyeball is elongated through the incision, it does not harm it in any way.</start_of_turn
Then wash the eye after the large incision with salt water: and care for the place with it which is inccised, until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
(End of text)</start_of_turn>
(End of book)</start_of_turn>
Axirnath is a kind of swelling which is generated in the upper eyelid: and it often happens to children: and it weighs down their eyes, and causes them to have difficulty seeing in the mornings, and they are not able to see the sunlight, because tears run down their face, and because of this the tears are dispersed from their eyes always, and over their face, and they sleep with their eyes always wet, and their eyes are always wet under their eyebrows. And the prominence of the Axirnath is seen in the eye, and when you press on it with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between your fingers.</start_of_turn>
And thus is the manner of his operation, that he place the patient's head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, and prepare it in the blood, and make from it a circle according to the quantity which contains Axirnath from all sides.
Then place it above the wound, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that the Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle thereof moisture with blood dripping, and let there be no greater tear than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the whole skin, until you reach the Axirnath in many positions, for the Axirnath comes out of the wound according to the shape of the white crust of the wound
Extract thus the wound with the cloth which you have infiltrated between your fingers outwards: and you will wring your hand to the right and left, until it is scattered: and be careful, lest you add to the wound, so that you do not reach the eye with the blood, and heal it.</start_of_turn>
If however the Axirnath does not appear at the beginning of the wound, you will add a little at the wound with ease, until the Axirnath comes out.</start_of_turn>
Then extract the wound as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Then soak the cloth in vinegar and water, and place it over the place, and bind it with thread.</start_of_turn
And there are some who put salt on it, and place it in the hollow of the wound, so that the blood that remains from that moisture is liquefied.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
If, however, it happens in the place of the apostema [gallstone], you must care for it with sedative plasters until it is healed.
Regarding the treatment of the eye, that is, when the eyelids are softened, from which it results that the eye is swollen as it should not be.
Chapter XI.</start_of_turn>
When hairs grow up on the eyelids of the eye beyond the natural curve, and are excessive: then they harm the eye, and cause diseases such as excessive tears, softening of the eyelids, and inflammation, until this becomes the cause of the destruction of the eye.</start_of_turn>
And the treatment of the eye is based on four methods.</start_of_turn> Or with the use of a cautery with fire.</start_of_turn
Or with acute medicine, as is mentioned in the chapter on cautery.</start_of_turn
Or by incision and stitching.</start_of_turn
Or with needles, as I will say.</start_of_turn>
You must place the head of the patient in your lap.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.</start_of_turn
If it turns, that is good.</start_of_turn
And if not: introduce the needle into the flesh at the point where the hair arises from the lower part of the eyelid, and pass the needle through with the thread until it reaches the hair itself, which is near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and fix the knot.</start_of_turn
Then find within the inner part of the eyelid beneath the added hairs with the edge of the spatula from the greater lacrimal gland up to the lesser lacrimal gland.
Then draw out the thread and place under the small hair of the eyelid from cotton or linen: then mark upon the eyelid with cautery, which should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
It is necessary to know, that it is done according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for as it is varied in men.
For indeed, there is that which demands that the incision be made from the eyelid in a large quantity, according to the quantity which is softened by the eyelid Then when the spatula is found upon two lines which you have marked, and begin from the greater lacrimal gland up to the lesser lacrimal gland, and let there be one incision near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of a radius
Then introduce the needle through one of the two angles of the skin. Then remove the whole thing. Then gather together with a suture the two lips, with needle and fine thread: and stop the bleeding, and make fast what has been split from the two eyebrows with some astringents, if you wish to do so: and if not, do not worry
Then remove the suture and the thread for three days, or four: afterwards care for it. And if you wish, remove the wound without suture, and care for it as before, which will dry up and contract.
For the eyelid is raised at the sealing of the wound and the gathering together of its parts: but the future is better.
Ancient physicians taught this method of treatment for Ataxmir.
Truth be told, excessive solicitude is harmful to the sick man; it is good practice, and not otherwise
There is another method in Ataxmir also: as the sign on the eyelids is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have narrated
Then lift the eyelid with three separate hooks, or together, according to the form of the sign which follows; then cut away what is superfluous with fine scissors, according to the form of the sign, with the equality of the incision.
If, however, it is not possible to hold the hook, and it does not match: then grasp the point where the thread is and introduce it into the middle of the sign: and introduce another thread near the greater lacrimal gland, and another thread near the lesser lacrimal gland: and gather together the two threads with your fingers, with equality
Then lift your hand with equal elevation: and lift the skin above which the sign is drawn, as we have narrated
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it until it is healed.
If, however, swelling occurs at the incision of your wound, or a tear: stop the bleeding with powder, and with similar things, from seated unguents.
And when the eyelids are also swollen, so that their lashes are congealed together.
¶ On the treatment of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is to cover the eyelid and split the tear that is inside, as I have narrated.
Then make two holes or two lower limbs: their length should be equal to the length of the eyelashes, and their width less than the width of the palm of your hand. And now you have pierced at the extremities from both sides from both parts where you hold the thread.
Then join each one with fullness over that which remains from the eyelash, and string two holes from both parts with strong stitches, and cut them off every few days. The skin will tighten and die, and will turn black, and will decay, until it falls away by itself.
If it is slow to fall away, then cut it out with scissors.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
When it has consolidated, lift the eyelash: do not prick the hair.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the two holes which you make according to this figure and quantity in length and width.</start_of_turn
Regarding the elevation of the plucked hairs in the eye with the needle.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XII.</start_of_turn>
The operation in this is that you take a fine needle and introduce it under the thread from the fine silk, gently.</start_of_turn Then join the extremities of it and knot each one with a fine knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.</start_of_turn
Then make a second knot in the middle of the thread, and knot the extremities of it if you wish.</start_of_turn
Then place your hand above your head, and let it rest near the cheek so that the operation is apparent: because the operation is slight, or even insignificant.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the needle with the silk thread through the root of the eyelash, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly, until you have extracted the natural hair from above.
Then draw out the hair until above the knot: and introduce the needle into the knot with the hair: if there is one, or two, or three, not more.</start_of_turn>
Then pull out your hand with it, until the hair comes out with the knot in the eyelid with the natural hair.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the knot is pulled out, and the hair does not come out with it: pull out the knot downwards, with the thread which you have made in it, until the knot comes out from the upper hole, and the eye is open: then indeed pull out the knot and the thread, and draw out both, and close the eye: and leave the closure for two days, or three, until the hair has adhered to its place, and has grown over the wound.</start_of_turn>
What if the hair is short: then either associate with it a long hair from the natural hair, and elevate with it: or leave it alone, until it has grown out again, and then elevate it.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of the upper eyelid which happens in the upper eyelid.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XIII.</start_of_turn>
When this happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.</start_of_turn
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.</start_of_turn
Accidental is therefore caused by the consolidation of the wound, or the section, or the cauterization, and things like these.</start_of_turn
And thus is the manner of the operation in this case, that you find its consolidation, and that you separate its lips, and put in between them a cloth from linen, and bind them up, until it is healed.
It is not fitting that you use in its curation those things which excite and constrict: for if you do, Alxatratus deteriorates more than before. Rather use in it those things which soften, such as barley-straw: and embroil with water, in which is boiled alum, poppyseed, and oil: and apply with it the cloth which has been soaked in it, and care for it with it.
The equipment of your curation should be such that you may prepare everything with skill, so that it does not solidify, according to the form which was in the beginning
And this, indeed, is the operation which we have mentioned, is not except a certain rectification of Alxatratus, that it does not return to its form as before As for the care of Alxatratus which is done in the lower eyelid, and is stretching or contracting upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 123.
This is Alxatratus which is below, is what is truly called Alxatratus.
And it is natural, and is accidental.
And it is accidental from a wound, or a fissure, or a cautery, and things like these.
And the manner of the operation in this case is that you take a needle which has a double thread, and pass it through the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal gland to the right lacrimal gland, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh upwards with the hook, and cut with the scalpel on the wide side.
If the outline of the pupil returns according to what is required, that is good.
And if not, grasp the radius [of the pupil] and place it in the fissure, and join it with that [pupil]. And find two incisions on the inner side of the pupil, and let the extremities of the two incisions issue from two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they gather together they make the shape of the said pupil, and that is the Greek laudatory letter
Then remove the flesh by the amount which is the width of its lower edge above the pupil, from that which follows the pupil
Then join the separated parts: suture the pupil with a thread of silk.
Then take care of the ease with which we have done, of the soothing medicines, and of the salves, until they are healed
And if Albucasis should happen from the incision and the suture, or the cautery: then it is necessary that you find a flat wound under the eyelashes, even according to what has gone before.
Then separate the two lips with a salve, according to what we have said.
And the sum of the sermon concerning the care of Albucasis, when it is above, or below, is that it should be carried out in that operation, according to the form of Albucasis.
For itself there are many varieties in form: and the skillful artist prepares the mind in any way that is possible for him, until he makes the figure resemble the natural form, or is close to it, and even the patient himself, according to what is convenient for him from the operation and the instruments in many situations.
About the adhesion of the palpebrae of the eye with the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
About the adhesion of the eyelids of the eye with the conjunctiva, or the cornea.
Whenever such a consolidation happens to many people, it is like the upper eyelid to adhere to the white of the eye, and to hinder its natural operations.
One must therefore introduce the tip of the radius under the eyelid, and lift it up: or stretch it out with a hook: then cut into the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which should not be sharp like the cutting of the scalpel, but rather obtuse so as not to irritate the patient during the operation, and to make the scalpel withdraw from the adhesion easily, and restore the eyelid to its natural form, and heal the adhesion completely.
Then pour water salt into the eye, when the eye has been washed with water: or instill from a syringe containing dissolved salt with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a piece of linen thread: and put over the eye wool soaked in alum or oil: and on the third day use the syringe, and solid dressings, until it heals
About the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of the tear-ducts
About the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh of the tear-ducts
You know that the nail is according to two ways Or it is fleshy: and is similar to hard cheese, fine-grained.
Or it is not fleshy, like frozen white moisture: which when it touches iron, or you try to grasp it with a hook, it breaks and does not stay fixed in it
Neither of these species commence until the greater lacrimal has flowed somewhat, until it covers the whole, and shuts out light and the movement of the eye.
The method of handling the incision is as follows: you place the patient's head in your lap.</start_of_turn>
Then open the eyes and lift the eyelids with your hand.</start_of_turn
Then collect the nail with a loop of few doublings, and extend it upwards.</start_of_turn
Then grasp the needle, and introduce it through the hair of the horse, and blood, or fat: and let the thread be strong, and double the extremity of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce the nail with the needle, and ligate with the thread the nail, and extend it upwards: and remove the hair surrounding the pupil, as if you are clipping the nail until the black spot of the pupil.</start_of_turn
Then cut the remainder in the root of the lacrimal with fine scissors, or with small forceps: and release the natural flesh of the lacrimal, so that it does not cause excessive flow of tears from the incision.</start_of_turn
And when the nail is extended with only a loop, or with a thread, as we have said.</start_of_turn
Then it is to be scraped with a soft sponge, which is of this shape.</start_of_turn
And beware, lest you touch the corneal tunic with the sponge, and cause a rupture, and perforate the pupil.</start_of_turn
Then, after the incision, put in the eye some powdered salt, or mix some up from barley, and keep it in until tomorrow.</start_of_turn>
Then care for yourself until you are healed. If the nail is not neurovascular and does not contain marrow within, or if it does not protrude in the nail, then this kind of nail is cured with medicines and heals as I have said before.</start_of_turn>
If you wish to cut the nail, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine sponge, soft and flexible, and apply it to the tip of the nail, according to this form.</start_of_turn
And remove the nail with the root with subtlety.</start_of_turn>
If you see that the nail is becoming pale and cracking, and that it is leaving tracks in the flesh, then bathe your eye from an hour hence with vinegar, or with red alum, or with salt: and anoint the eye until tomorrow.</start_of_turn
Then repeat the operation until the whole of it is removed.</start_of_turn
Except that in the eye there is a thick yellow pus: then hold it back, and care for the pus until it is healed.</start_of_turn Then repeat the operation on the nail with care until it is healed.</start_of_turn
The prominence of the tear duct, if it causes great suffering in the eye, is suspended with a stitch, and is cut from it: and do not make the last incision, lest you cause the tear to become obstructed.</start_of_turn
Then bathe the tear with red alum, or make it from vinegar, until it is healed.</start_of_turn Of the incision of the nail, and the flesh that is in the eye.</start_of_turn
Chapter XVII.
A redness sometimes occurs in the eyes of men, when the fatty substance which is in their bodies surrounding the pupil, or which is superposed, is either protruded, or approximated, or strained over the eyelids, and sometimes the eyelids are turned outwards: and it is assimilated like the scales of a rose.
And also in this case there is an operation, that you put the patient's head in your lap.
Then open his eyes, and gather all the flesh with hooks which are convenient for this: and hold that with a forceps or hand
Then cut the flesh at first, until you have finished all of it with the knife.</start_of_turn>
And burn from the eye, so that you do not damage it during the operation: and let your incision be as we have said in the incision of the nail, or with fine forceps, with which the fat is collected, according as its shape will be afterwards.
When you have thus completed your incision, and you have moved all the surrounding fat, then remove the eye from the salt, or distill it into red powder, and similar things are done by physicians with corrosive medicines: and put over the eye a bandage of wool or lint: so as to secure it from the heat of the after-burn.
And if anything remains of the fat, and the blood is hot, and there is a swelling: then remove the eye, and care for it until the swelling has gone down.
And do the same again over the eye with the operation, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And do the same with the addition of flesh which is in the eye of this kind.</start_of_turn>
It is proper to know that all ailments of the eye, whether natural or accidental, must be treated with iron, without introducing the hand into any of these operations until you know that the limb can tolerate such an operation.
It is proper to know that all ailments of the eye, whether natural or accidental, must be treated with iron, without introducing the hand into any of these operations until you know that the limb can tolerate such an operation.
It is proper to know that all ailments of the eye, whether natural or accidental, must be treated with iron, without introducing the hand into any of these operations until you know that the limb can tolerate such an operation. The ailments of the eye are like red spots that cover the eye, and which prevent the liquid from performing its operation: and they weaken the eye with the length of the days.
It is necessary therefore, in the first place, to consider whether the eye in which the ailment exists is strong and not subject to any other ailment except for the ailment: then collect the ailment of that eye
And it is necessary to know, before all things, that the eye which has the ailment must be firmly placed in your hand
Then suspend those veins with one hook, or two according to your prudence: and let the hook be of fine steel, like the form of a nail, or let there be two hooks graduated in one body, like this form
Then collect with fine forceps those veins with diligence, and withdraw the blood every hour, until you know that those veins have been removed from the eye, and have dissolved: and beware that you do not damage the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation so that you do not injure anything except for the veins
And when you have finished, then instill in the eye a little oil, or red pepper: so that your sight may restore what remains of the ailment.
If it is not possible to collect the whole of it in this hour, then plaster the eye with this, which will soothe the pain of the eye: and leave it for a few days, until the pain has subsided: and keep it away from a cold compress: and repeat over it again according to the same method, until it is healed.
This is the form of the scissors.
On the reduction of the swelling of the nose.
Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn>
Physicians call the swelling of the nose a Fistula, which they cure with cautery, or with acute medicine burning, as it is appropriate to its nature.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not heal, then there is no wisdom in that: except that you should find pus above the swelling at its origin, and evacuate all the moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is cleansed.</start_of_turn
When the bone is cleansed, and the surrounding area is freed from corruption or blackness, then apply to it an instrument whose form is like this.</start_of_turn
And it is called the Asperation of the head.</start_of_turn
It is made of iron thread, and its head is round like an olive, which is pierced with the point of a lime-stone, or with the point of a needle or with a fine point: and place it over the corrupted place of the bone.</start_of_turn Then draw it out between your fingers, and keep your hand near, until you know that that corruption is gone: and do it again.</start_of_turn
Then draw it out between your fingers, and keep your hand near, until you know that that corruption is gone: and do it again.</start_of_turn Then restore the place with astringent drugs.</start_of_turn
If therefore the place is consolidated, and there is formed in it flesh, and the course of the ailment is over: and it remains for forty days, and does not return, and does not swell, and no accident happens in it: then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if not, then it is not in this ingenuity, except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this fashion.
And it is like that you should detect the second bone with iron, or with acute medicine: and when it has been detected, then take hold of the prominence according to this fashion, when there is a ferrous extremity, triangular: and the wood of it should be a protracted pyramid up to the extremity, like a river.
Then place it over the bone itself: and let it be close to the tear duct: and extend your hand from the eye somewhat.
Then turn your hand with the prominence, until it penetrates the bone, and feel that it is infirm: by this it will be known that it has found the opening to exit from there, when you hold your hand over your nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with styptic medicines that are being applied, as I have taught you.
When therefore the flesh has been born, and the place has hardened: then the matter which was flowing outwards returns to the nose: thus it is easier for it to lie over the infirmity.
¶ On the reduction of the prominence of the eye. Chapter XX.
When the eye protrudes with its entirety, and it has not happened in any liquid document, neither by diminution: then it is necessary to dissolve the infirmity: then perform phlebotomy on it: afterwards place ointments on the surface without scarring, but with suction
Then put on the eye a liniment which is made from acacia, and aloe, and olive oil, and beeswax.
Then bind the eye over the plaster with many small beads
And thus with the pouls [pullets] it is: take many fine threads and double every thread above four: make many from these: then put one over the other according to the quantity required for the eye: then tighten over these with a strong thread.
Repeat the process until the wound is closed without leaving a scar.
Then remove the sutures and keep the eye closed day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary to tighten it much: then remove the ligament after a day and a night, as we have said
If therefore you again see swelling in the eye, it is good: and if not, then repeat the plaster, the pouls, the tightening and the sutures until the eye is healed.
Of the incision of the tunica of the eye.
Chapter 21.
When a rupture occurs in the tunica of the eye, then it will protrude and proceed outside the eyelids like a grain of the tunica, and will be deformed like a man because of this. Then it is necessary to make an incision in this: and the operation in this is as follows: and it is that you introduce a needle into the root of the tunica from the lower part to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle in which there is a doubled thread from the lachrymal part, and make it penetrate: and remove the first needle according to its position.
Then cut the place of the doubled thread and ligate with it the part of the tunica around the needle: and tighten it much
Then remove the needle, and put over the eye a lanolin bandage on an albumin: and leave it in place until the thread is gone with the tunica
Then care for the eyes while they are comforted, until the wound is healed.
And when the limb is bound up from every part with a circle of cloth, until the eye regains great elevation
Then pierce with a fine needle that reaches the depth of the eye, and let out the humidy of the albumen, and the eye will descend, and join immediately: then bind it up until it is healed.
On the treatment of the eye.
Chapter XXII.
This ailment which is called Alcomnati, is not except for health which collects in the eye, like descending water, and is not itself
And the way of working on it is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly
Then grasp his head with your hands from two parts, and move him until you see the health go up to the lower parts of your eyes
Then it will remain fixed, and will not descend, and the light will be extinguished: and you will know that it is water
If however the preparation of the descent of the health is not done with it which we have said, then make him sit between your hands Then take a fine needle, and pierce with it above the corneal membrane near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the membrane of the cornea in a circle, until the health comes out.
When it comes out, then instill in the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have ground barley and honey: then care for it with the remaining treatment, until it is healed
Concerning the care of water which flows into the eye, or a cataract.
Concerning the care of water which flows into the eye, or a cataract.
We have already spoken of ten kinds of water which exist in the eye, and of which some are harmful and some are beneficial; take heed of this according to the state of health.
Then therefore it is necessary that you should keep the diseased hand away from the eye opposite the light, near the cheek: and bind the healthy eye tightly: then grasp the eyelid of the eye which has the water in it with your right hand, if the water is in the left eye: or grasp the eyelid of the right eye if the water is in the left eye
Then grasp your right hand with the almond, if the eye is left: or your left hand if the eye is right.
Then put the tip of the almond near the edge of the visible white part of the eye: then press the almond with force: and you will see that the almond has penetrated the membrane of the eye. Feel that the almond has reached its endpoint
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the almond be to the depth, the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the black part: and that is the circumference of the eye
You will see this in the pupil of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea.
Then put the almond until it reaches the water
Then press the lower eyelid downwards one after the other.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the diseased hand will immediately close over what has opened its eye, and the almond in the eye.
Then rest a little while.
If water descends, then lay the sponge aside, except when the vomit is evacuated.
When it has become fixed and does not ascend: then extract the vomit with ease: and you turn your hand slowly. Then dissolve in water something of clear salt pearl: and wipe away with it when the eye is closed
Then put outside the eye the whole lump of ointment, or soaked wool fat with rosewater, and alum: and bind with it the sound eye.
But we, who are of our time, put upon it a soft cushion of beaten eggs with alum.
If the vomit does not yield to the eye because of its hardness, because it is from a man whose eye is hard like that of a stone: then it is necessary to take the sponge, which is called Alberid, whose form is like that
The sponge must be taken with it joined to the eye only, and do not touch the hand with the thumb: and do not do anything except to make the vomit go to the bottom of the eye
Then introduce the vomit, as we have said
And in addition to this, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient, made in the center of the room, in which he should lie on his back in a dark room: and be guarded against all movements, and from vomiting: and give him food that will soothe his nature: and do not move his head to the right or to the left at all
And remain quiet according to your custom until the third day. Then loosen it in that dark room, and experience its effect: and make him drink something.
Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
The procedure should not be performed immediately after surgery or during the first hour of treatment. It is better to wait a while because the fluid ascends quickly through the painful area.
If there is a cold swelling: then it is necessary to wait until the seventh day: and straighten it out along with that which settles the swelling: until it settles down: then remove the cause of the swelling and place over the face of it a bandage which will regulate the swelling for a few days, even though it exists in the dark space.</start_of_turn>
Then gradually go out of the room and return to your home.</start_of_turn>
And know that in the hospital a pupil is not excused from seeing for a long time: then indeed he will hear about the operation.</start_of_turn>
And indeed some people from Alayrach have said that a magdan was perforated in Alayrach, because of which water ascends.</start_of_turn>
But indeed no one in our land has done this: neither have I read of it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is new.</start_of_turn
And these are the forms of the spirits of magdas, as they remain over it who are ignorant of them.</start_of_turn
Be like the air itself: and let their extremities be like those of a triangle with a pointed tip.</start_of_turn
The spirits of magdas.</start_of_turn
On the care of the newborn flesh in the nose.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXIII.</start_of_turn
When the diverse meats of the nose are cut, something is absorbed from the numerous feet of scorpions: from this is a cancerous tumor, a stone, of saffron color; from this is what is a soft tumor, not of saffron color.
When the various meats of the nose are cut, something is absorbed from the numerous feet of scorpions: from this is a cancerous tumor, a stone, saffron-colored; from this is what is a soft tumor, not saffron-colored.
When what remains of it from whose excision is not possible: then take that with a fine instrument with ease, until nothing remains of it.
If blood dominates it, or thick pus arises: then oppose it by that which is necessary: either by malignant pus, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped, and remove all the meat.
Then spit into the nose after the incision of the flesh, and water, or liquid.
If the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you know that it is healed.
If however moisture does not penetrate, according to what is necessary, then you know that inside there is living flesh in the upper bones of the nose, which does not disappear with the incision of the instrument.
Then you must introduce a thread with some thickness, and pass it through numerous knots: and put between every knot the quantity of a digit, or less: and the patient will vomit, so that he sends out one extremity of the thread through the nose with a hook, or in whatever way is possible for him to do it: and he will pull out the stench until it reaches the stomach, and it will go out through his mouth
Many do like him, just as this Attomi boy often does in school. It is easy for him who wishes.
Then place two extremities of the boy, one that projects over the nose and the other that remains in the nose
Then the minister shall bind the flesh with knots that are in the limb. Do this until you know that the flesh is joined with the knots of the limb.
Then draw out the thread: and put in the nose after wiping away the blood with a bandage of Egyptian unguent: do this for three days, or more, until the unguent has eaten away all that remains of the flesh
Then put at the end of the matter in the nose a lead cannula for a few days, until it is healed
If however urgent is the care which is required, use this.
For the head-purging which is to be made, when oil and other medicines are distilled in the nose, do this with silver, or with air: which should be like fine pepper, opened like a conch shell: and its meat should be like that of the almond
And if you wish to make a closed cannula, like a tube.
And the conch of the instrument for head-purging must be full, closed: which must have a handle at its rear, with which you will grasp it, when you heat it in oil, or when you wish to draw out something from it, and from the fluxes.
This is the form of the instrument. On the care of the eye of the nose.
Day 25.
Many are born in the extremity of the nose of Thelul, and they grow large, and increase with the days, until their aspect becomes like that of a wound
And therefore it is necessary, that in the beginning of its appearance, it should be cut in pieces, and its entirety should be excised.
Then place above it, or cauterize, or apply a burning medicine which is in its place
If, however, its incision is delayed until it has grown large, then consider, if it be a stone, hard, of the color of feces, with little sensation: then do not touch it with the iron: for the tumor is cancerous.
Many are the times when a wound occurs from an abscess, and it proceeds from this great malice above all that which it had before
And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of the color of feces, and if the wound is possible throughout its entirety, then evacuate the sick person, and cut it without fear, without pain: and care for the place where it has been excised until it is healed
Of the suture of the nose, and the lip, and the ear
Chapter XXVI.
You know that when a solution of continuity occurs in some cartilaginous substance, it provides little support in that operation, except in some people.
It is necessary, therefore, when anything is excised from that, that you consider whether it has any blood vessels adhering to it: and then join together the edges of the wound with a suture: then care for it until it is healed
And if the continuity of the lips has already been separated, and has become one entire healthy part: then it is necessary to remove every part from its apparent skin, until the blood has clotted.
Then join the lips together with a suture, and bind them, and apply above it dragons' blood, and mastic of olibanum: and place above the powders a plaster of beeswax, and any other adhesive plaster: and leave it bound for two days, or three
Then solve yourself, and move the medicine: and let go of yourself, until the threads are severed by themselves. Then take care of yourself with the unguent, until you are healed.
The way of stitching is that you gather the solution of continuity, or with a loop, as we say in the stitching of the belly: or you gather the solution with the thread, as you were told
About the extraction of the knots of the lips.
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn> Many people have happened to have swelling in the insides of their lips like hard seeds of grass: and some of them are minor, and some are major
Therefore it is necessary to cover the lips, and find on every nodule of them, and suspend them with a hook, and cut them off from all sides
Then place the place after the incision with a bit of sponge, until the blood is separated
Then it is to be bound with vinegar, and the place is to be cared for with that which has styptic power, until the wound is healed
About the incision of the newly-formed flesh upon the gum
Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn Many times there is formed upon the gum new flesh which the ancients call abuluss
Therefore it is necessary to suspend the flesh with a hook: or to grasp the flesh with forceps, and cut it off at its root, and let the blood run, or the pus flow out
Then place upon the place some coarse sponge, or other powder which has styptic power.
If the flesh returns again after treatment, for it often returns many times, then cut through it a second time and burn it: for it will not return after it has been burned.
Regarding the wisdom of teeth with iron.
Chapter XXIX.</start_of_turn>
When teeth gather together on the surface both from the inside and outside and between the gums, their enamel becomes rough, dark, and sometimes even falls out, and ulcers form, and they become yellow, until the corruption reaches the gum and causes the teeth to loosen.</start_of_turn
It is therefore necessary to make the infirm man sit between your hands and place his head in your lap, and grasp the molar and the tooth, where you see the enamel, and do like sand: until something remains from that, and do likewise with blackness, and yellowness, and ulcers, and other things until they are moved.</start_of_turn
If therefore something is taken away from the beginning of the wisdom, it is good: and if not, then repeat the wisdom again on another day, the second day, and the third day, until finally the study is complete in that which you desire.</start_of_turn>
You know that teeth need various rasps of different forms, many figures: according to the preparation of your operation: because the rasp which removes the tooth from the lower part is different from the rasp which removes the teeth between the teeth, according to other figures.</start_of_turn>
And these figures of rasps are prepared for you, which you will use.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXVIII.</start_of_turn
When the tooth is inflamed and painful, and the pain is great, and the swelling is such that it cannot be borne, and the tooth cannot be moved, then it is necessary to extract the tooth.
It is necessary that the tooth be freed from its pain with all possible skill, and afterwards its eradication be aimed at.
It is not in its power to remove the pain without eradicating it: for it is a lofty substance. Therefore, when eradication is not indicated, it is necessary to consider that the sickly person must eradicate it, in order to strengthen himself, and to confirm to you that the tooth is painful
Many men indeed deceive the sickly person with their pain, and say that it is in the tooth itself and eradicate it: but the pain does not depart until the diseased tooth is eradicated.
We do not indeed go about this from the performance of blood-lettings.
When it is confirmed to you that the tooth itself is painful, then it is necessary to make incisions around the tooth with sponges, in which there is some advantage, until the gums are separated from all parts: then move the tooth with your fingers, or with fine forceps from the outset gradually, until you break it
Then place the forceps in a large place well, and hold the patient's head between your knees: which you have done well, for it will not move: then draw out the tooth in accordance with the rule, so that you do not break it
If it does not come out, then grasp any of those instruments, and introduce it under it from all parts with ease, and endeavor to move it, as you did at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill the hole with gauze: and tie it with the extremity of a fine thread, so that it does not break in the time of your constriction with the forceps.
And it is necessary that you take care when you make incisions around the gums from all parts much.
Be steadfast in your fortitude, lest you break your own spirit, and a part of it remain broken, and return upon the infirm from that malice which is greater than his initial pain.
Be cautious lest you do that which the unskilled do, phlebotomists in their frenzy, and overween their own eradication, besides that which we have mentioned
Many do indeed make their patients endure great illnesses, from which it is difficult to recover, and leave behind roots of their entire being, or extract some of them with teeth of the jaw: as we have often seen Then it is joined after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt. When blood flows out from any place (for many do indeed flow out from their limb), then there is something from the limb which remains: and put in with it the cautery. If not, cauterize it if it does not give you the limb back.
The tweezers which are used to grasp the teeth in the first place are long-handled, short-handed, thick, so that they do not bend when pressure is put upon them: they are like large nails, until when they are bound to the tooth, they do not bite into themselves, neither do they bend: short-handled, and made of iron or of hammered steel, direct-handed, and in their handles are teeth, some of which enter into some of the others, and bind them together loosely, firmly
And when the handles become like the beak of a bird which is called a ciconia, and are strong in their constriction.
Of the eradication of teeth, and the extraction of fractured mandibular bones.
Chapter 1.
When the tooth remains at the eradication of a fractured piece, then it is necessary to place butter on the place of the tooth for one or two days until the place is softened: then introduce into the cavity itself the ligature or forceps, the extremities of which absorb the hair which is called ciconia.
The form of these forceps is as follows.
Their extremities are made like a file or like a pair of pincers
If, however, these do not suffice to bring about the evacuation [of the fractured fragment], then it is necessary to place a hook over the root and remove the whole flesh, and introduce the small hook, which is called Palanca, whose form is as follows
Its handle is short, its head large: and it is not to be wet, lest it break
If the root comes out through this, that is good: and if not, it is necessary to burn with these instruments which have a similar form
The first has a triangular-shaped extremity, in which there is some thickness
The second has a slender triangular extremity.
It is also used with this instrument which has two branches, whose form is as follows. And with other instruments and materials which are suitable for teeth.
It is also necessary to burn with this instrument which absorbs a large hair, of this form, triangular-shaped extremity which has some thickness, so that it does not break: and it must not be wet.
You know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the rest of the instruments do not agree. And a skilled craftsman, skilled in his art, will himself find the most appropriate instrument for each operation and for the nature of the disease.
Since they are from diverse sorts of instruments, these things are not mentioned by the ancients.
If the jawbone or any other bone of the mouth is fractured, or if it becomes corrupted: then it is necessary to explore above that [affected area] in its place with the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and to handle it with care, since its shape is like this.</start_of_turn>
Let there be something of size in it which is gradually tightened, or held with the bone, so that it does not slip away and become loose until the bone is extruded: and restore the place with the physicians who are competent in that.</start_of_turn>
If there is only a small amount of decay in the bone, then remove it from its decay and care for it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
About the closing of a prominent tooth over the others.</start_of_turn
End of book II.</start_of_turn>
When teeth deviate from their natural course, a wound is formed by that shape: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, in those who are in their menstrual period.</start_of_turn
For if a tooth has grown after another tooth and is not placed, or if it is possible to close it, or to file it down: then extract it: and if it is connected to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument which has this shape.</start_of_turn
It is like a small face, made of iron, with acute extremities that are blunt.</start_of_turn
And make your incision such that you do not injure the other teeth on many days, because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that it does not break.</start_of_turn
If, however, the exposed part of the limb is prominent: then apply the limb itself to the limb from inside, whose shape is like this.
If, however, the exposed part of the limb is prominent: then apply the limb itself to the limb from inside, whose shape is like that of a needle. With this, the tooth is gradually softened in many days with ease, so that it does not become inflamed, and falls out: then soften it again, and finally bind it up with some dressings.
If the tooth is loose from which a part has fractured, and bites the tongue: then it is necessary to bind the limb even more tightly until the sharpness of that fracture has gone, and it is equal: and it is flattened, and does not bite the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
On the return of the tooth with threads.
Chapter 33.
When it happens to the front teeth that concussion and displacement has occurred from a blow, or in the case: and the patient cannot hold the bite with his hand because of pain: and it is not useful to apply treatment for it: then it is necessary to know in the tooth itself that it must be bound with thread: for silver is easily tarnished, and putrefies after many days: but gold never changes
And let the middle thread be of moderate thickness and strength according to the quantity that it can grasp between the teeth.
And the form of the return is that you grasp the thread and pass the loop through between two sound teeth: then you tie with two ends of the thread between the teeth that are loose, whether one or more, until you have reached with the thread until the sound tooth of the other part
And repeat the tying until you reach the part from which you began: and bind your hand with moderate skill and knowledge, so that it does not move forward: and let your constriction be such as to bind the thread at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not swell
Then insert the superabundant extremities with scissors: and gather each one together, and close them with the thumb: and hide them between the sound tooth and the moved tooth, so that it does not damage the tongue: then release it very tightly as it remains.
If, however, it is dissolved or fractured, string it with another thread, and keep it firm as for the whole time
This is the form of a tooth, and the figure of the alternation of two sound teeth and two moved teeth, as with water.
And when it is necessary, as a tooth returns or two after falling out in their places, and returns as we have said, and remains: and it does not happen except by a skillful, prudent, and experienced artist.
And when something is adapted from bones or teeth: and it is made like a tooth in shape, and is placed in the place from which the tooth is extracted and bound, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time
Regarding the incision of the ligament that happens under the tongue, and which prevents speech.
Chapter XXIII.
Which, if there is something of hardness and nodulation, and if it comes from the consolidation of an injury: then cut into that tissue, and find the nerve of the ligament across its width, until you cut through the ligament and the nodule is freed
If blood flow is increased, then put over the place a bandage that is soaked in urine. If blood boils, then cauterize the place with a sponge cautery that is appropriate for this: then care for the patient with the rest of the treatment until he is healed. As for the extraction of a ranula that is under the tongue.
Chapter 5.
When it happens under the tongue a small swelling that is a ranula, preventing the tongue from its natural action: and perhaps it will grow so much that it fills the mouth
If therefore you see the swelling red or black, hard, which does not respond to the patient, do not touch it, because it is cancer
And if it is inclined towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then project into it a needle, and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from all around
If indeed blood boils in your hour of operation, then put over it a bandage soaked in urine, until the blood is stopped: then return to your operation until you have extracted it with its complement
Then it is bound with vinegar and salt: and care for the rest of the treatment suitable for this, until it is healed.
For the treatment of an abscess of two amygdalar.
Chapter 6.
And then you will either perforate it: or it will rupture by itself
And if it is white in colour, round, and its root is thin: then you must cut it open
And the operation in this is as follows: as you consider before your operation, if the abscess has become cold and quiet: then lie the patient with his head towards you: and open the abscess, and take out the pus between your hands, and pull down the tongue with an instrument of this shape Do it with silver, or with air, which is subtle like a knife
When you have finished with the tongue, and you see the abscess, and it has gone down on your hand: then take pliers, and hold it in the abscess, and extract the pus to the outside as much as you can, without pulling out anything from the clothes.
Then strike the wound with the instrument whose form follows this.
The instrument's tip should resemble that of scissors: its extremities are bent outwards so that the opening of each is opposite the other at an acute angle: hence care must be taken so that it does not slip or be imbued with alum.
If such an instrument is not available, then strike the wound with the spatula, whose form is similar to that of the instrument described above
It should be acutely angled from one side, not from the other side
And after you have made an incision in one place, make an incision in the other place according to the same kind of incision.
Then let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flows from the wound, make the patient gargle with water in which pomegranate seeds or myrtle leaves have been boiled: or similar substances like sponges, until the bleeding stops: then care for the wound until it has healed
And when there are formed in the throat after the swelling of the two tonsils
Strike these accordingly as I have said in the incision of the two tonsils evenly
I too have seen a woman who was suffering from a swelling in her throat, which caused her to gasp for breath, little sense, and caused her to close her throat: and the woman died from this, either in one day or two days.
The swelling only ascended as far as to emit two branches, until it went out through the two nasal passages
I did this quickly and bound them together in one loop
Then I drew it out, and from it there is a great part.
Then I drew it out, and from it there is a great part.
Then I drew it out, and from it there is a great part from the other side of the nose
Then I opened its mouth and pressed its tongue: and afterwards I fixed a hook into it at that place: then I drew out a part of it, and there did not run out from it little blood: it is quite complete, for the woman's gut has become accustomed to it, and it immediately drinks water, and then takes food.
It does not cease to cut from that place many times a long time: and the apostema follows the place where I cut, until it is prolonged too much and with it
I devised, and cauterized the apostema between the gut
It stood from the addition: then I went from the part, and I do not know what God did with it after me
Of the incision of the small apostema.
Chapter 7
When the catarrus descends to the lower part, and there is an apostema, and it is long: then it is called perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part large and round, then it is called a loop
When it is cured with that which we said in the explanation, and the cure does not suffice: and you see that the apostema is cold and quiet from it: then it is necessary to cut it off
And what is aggregated round about it, and is not of its length, and is bloody, or of the colour of rust, or black, and has no feeling: then it is necessary to make an incision of it
In every ailment there is fear over the infirm.
Whenever you deal with an ailment, fear is proper when you do as I have said in white, and in length, so that you make the infirm sit before the sun: and touch his tongue with an instrument whose precedent I have mentioned: then fix the knot in one, and draw it downwards: and cut through it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the incision of two amygdales.
It is proper that you do not cut through from that which adds to the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut through from that which adds to the natural limit, you will make the wound and the speech worse
Then after the incision make use of that which we have narrated in the incision of two amygdales: and care for him, until he is healed.
If however the infirm person returns from the incision: then it is proper that you use your ingenuity in the cauterization of his without fear and aversion.
And the mode of cauterization in this is not except with acute water: and it is that you place the head of the infirm person in your lap.
Then touch his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned.
Then take from the water which I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with burnt lime, and put it on him not thick, neither thin, and make an incision from this with the help of this instrument
So that the extremities of it where the medicine is placed are of the shape of the cochlea of a radius
And place the instrument with the medicine on the thing itself: and the infirm person lies on his side, so that the moisture from his mouth comes out from the medicine from within, so that it does not go down into his gut and harm him
Then take your hand with the medicine.
And you from the first part put it above the wound quantity of half an hour, until you see the wound has diminished, and then cease the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish to take hold of the limb, and cover it with the medicine itself over the end of the radius, and fill the limb with the medicine, and introduce the radius with the thumb into the cannula above, until the limb adheres to the wound over half an hour Do it many times, until you follow that you wish for the cautery of the vein
Then let go of the medicine: itself will dry and fall off in three days, or four.
And if you think it is necessary to go over the medicine, go over it: and after cauterization remove the surrounding area of the vein with the thumb, and moisten with butter, and bandage with the same as was in the surrounding of the medicine: and cool it with cold water.
And take care of the outside with sutures, and of the inside with gargling, until it is healed
Thus is this kind of treatment safer than an incision and longer lasting in fear
And when the wound is healed even with this medicine that is subtler than cautery and incision: it is healed by fumigation, according to this method.
Take calamine, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and asa, and chamomile, and marjoram, and similar things from herbs: and gather them all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse them in vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be covered with a lid: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which is made a concave instrument according to this method.
Let air or silver issue forth: and let the extremity be introduced into that which contains the pomegranate, until the vapor rises up to the upper opening of the tube, until the upper part becomes dark much.
Then repeat over the much, until it softens.
And be careful, lest you perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of fever.
Praise be to you: for in fever there is to be added in the bowels: and it does not be necessary to do this except when the fever has subsided
But if this instrument is not present to you, then take the tube and compound in its extremity bark or resin: that it does not burn the bone of the sick: for the bark of the resin hinders the vapor from burning the bone: and this is from a good treatment with health.
About the extraction of thorns and bones from the gullet.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Many things adhere to the gut: fish bones, or thorns, or something else.
It is necessary therefore that you extract what is seen to have fallen down from the gut, after you have moved the tongue with the instrument at the epiglottis, and declared that it is in the gut
And that which is not seen by you and is hidden in the gut, it is necessary that you make the sick vomit before food is digested in the stomach
Perhaps therefore also the thing that is annexed will go out with the vomit.
Or the sick person may swallow a piece of poppy seed, or the root of lettuce, or swallow a dry piece of bread: or take a dry piece of sponge of the sea and bind it up, and then swallow it down
When it has reached the place where the bones or spines are, or are extracted, it then departs. If it does not depart with that which we have said: then use an instrument of lead in this fashion.
Let it be thicker than a small radius, and have a curvature at its end, which intrudes into its gut without difficulty: and let its head be elevated above itself.
Beware of its touch upon the epiglottis, so that it does not cause it to swell, and drive out with it the bone, or the spine, or be carried in by the physician’s hand itself
However that the patient intrudes it, that is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the thing annexed: and he drives downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, the whole thing according to the quantity which is prepared for it, until it departs
Of the extraction of the blood-sucker
Chapter XXXIX.
When the physician has treated the blood-sucker with that which I have mentioned in the treatise on care with the physicians, and it does not yield, then consider in the belly of the patient at the sole or behind the tongue after you have drawn out its tongue with the instrument which I mentioned to you.
If therefore your instrument should fall upon the blood-sucker, draw it out with a small hook, or with a handle held loosely in the middle
If that is not possible with the hook: then take a curved needle, and introduce it into the belly of the patient up to near the gut: then introduce into the curve of the needle a burning iron with fire.
Do this often: and let the patient abstain from all water for the whole day.
Then he shall take a full treatment of cold water and open its mouth in it: and he shall join his jaw with it and he shall not swallow anything from it: and he shall drink water an hour after the other with his hand.
The blood-sucker will be almost finished when he feels the water falling.
But if he does not depart with it as we have said, then he must fumigate the patient with sponges, or with an instrument as I have mentioned in fumigation of the fistula.</start_of_turn>
Do this often, for it goes away by itself.</start_of_turn>
And the manner of operation in fumigation is that you take a vessel in which there are grapes of vitriol with fire: and the vessel is covered with a cover, in the middle of which is a hole: and you make an incision in that hole with the instrument.</start_of_turn
Then he throws away the fumigation and places the patient's jaw at the end of the tube, and closes his jaw, so that it does not escape the fumigation, until you know that the fumigation has passed to the blood-sucker.</start_of_turn
For the blood-sucker immediately goes away.</start_of_turn>
And if it does not go away, then repeat the fumigation often.</start_of_turn>
And the patient can tolerate to remain sitting, and eat garlic and onions, and does not drink water.</start_of_turn It is necessary therefore that he depart with this regimen.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucker is extracted from the gut when it falls upon the said vomit.</start_of_turn
It is like tweezers, thus: except that it has this curvature which enters the gut.</start_of_turn
And its extremity is like the wing of an owl named ciconia, in which there is coarseness of the lime: when it grasps something, it does not relinquish it entirely.
And concerning the opening of abscesses, their section, and their care in general
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of various modes, according as the nature of the reminder of them is remembered: and they are diverse in their perforation and section into two modes.
One of them is the species of abscess which is from the moisture of the body itself.
The other is that which happens from the body itself
For indeed an abscess which happens in the head is different from an abscess which happens in the belly: and an abscess which happens in a fleshy part is different from an abscess which happens in a joint: and each one of them has its own judgment concerning the operation.
And concerning abscesses there are some which do not require perforation except after the completion of health in them, and the completion of their nourishment: and there are some which require perforation while they are raw and have not matured according to their nourishment.
For example, abscesses which are close to joints
Because an abscess when it happens near a joint and prolongs itself, until it putrefies, which is around it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: which is the cause of the closer contraction of that limb
Or an abscess near a principal limb: because if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will cause pain or swelling or both in that principal limb
If it be close to a hair, perforate it therefore immediately: and it is not necessary, when perforating, to leave a crude stool, not fully digested, except when it is close to a hair, that it not putrefy deeply, and extend to the interior of the rectum, and make a fistula, or remain in its termination which does not heal. It is necessary to know the time of perforation of the stool, which is mature according to its completion: and it is with respect to the sedation of pain, recession of fever, and decrease of redness, and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the stool: and the rest of the signs. It is necessary to make the perforation in a lower place of the stool, and immediately above the prominence: and let the perforation be wide in length of the body, if the stool is in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of laceration, and strings, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all the places equally, where there is no reflection
And in those which reflect, act with the perforation according to that member.
When the stool is in places of hardness: then it is better to omit the perforation of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to its completion.
Because if you perforate it before that, you prolong the course of the disease from that, and there is much pain and swelling, and perhaps they will swell its lips, and depth of it
And some stools are perforated according to the width of the body in necessity: or according to that which the member requires
And it is necessary to administer in small stools a moderate perforation, and in large stools a wide perforation: or many sections similar to the magnitude of the stool.
And there are from the apostemata, in which it is necessary that the skin should be concaved: and it occurs when it has been made like a cloth, and has been made at the end, because it is dead: as it happens with many things, as with a dubelet and with boils.
And there are those which are cut through with a section having three angles.
And there are those which occur like the figure of a myrtle leaf
Like a groin apostema
And there are those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered: and similar things are from sections
That which has no head, like the superficial lenious apostemata, must be perforated through a superficial perforation or flattened only.
And it is necessary, when the apostema is great and has collected much matter, to perforate it, so that it does not burst and draw out all the pus at once: rather extract from it a part of it immediately
Then anoint the apostema until another day.
Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree [of severity]: especially if the patient is weak of spirit, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man: for the spirit of the animal is dissolved from the animal with the evacuation of the matter: and perhaps the patient will die, and you will not perceive it.
Therefore take heed of this chapter, for it contains great caution
And after you have perforated the apostema, which you have perforated, it is necessary to remove the wool: and consider carefully
If there is a small wound from a fracture, either perform a plane section or administer lead from an old vessel.
If the fracture is large and there are many holes in the perforation, it is necessary to administer medication into every wound until it reaches the innermost area
If you have excised a piece of skin from the fracture, or if you have bound the circumference too tightly: then you must apply an old vessel or as much lint as before, or cover it with wool without moisture: and keep it tight until the third day.
Then remove it and care for it as is necessary until it heals
If there is bleeding during your operation in this hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after they have been absorbed into a cloth: and put it over the place of bleeding profusely
If the bleeding persists, then you must administer a regimen and treatment, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places in this book, and from experience.
If it is winter and the place of the fracture is full of nerves: then you must infuse lead with wine, and warm fat: and put it over the place.
And if it is summer and the place is fleshy: then you must put soaked sponges in water, or fat, or both with wine and fat, and keep it cold.
Until then, as we have said, on the third day you must drain the fracture, remove it, and administer treatment that is suitable for it until it heals.
This is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of fractures in general
According to the method of distinguishing the signs, as I have already mentioned concerning every apostemate, how it is possible to cure it is explained in a singular chapter.
Regarding the excision of apostemata that occur in the scalp.
Chapter XLI.
Small apostemata appear on the scalp and are of the kind known as knots, which contain tunica, which is like a sack: they are like little roosters' houses
There are many kinds of these.
Some are hard: others contain moisture like mud: others moisture like wet clay and stones.
In the excision of all of them, and their extraction, there is no fear, as long as one does not damage the arteries during the process.
The operation in the excision of these is as one must learn with the instrument which has a form like that which comes after these, which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains
For if it contains moisture, dry it out by cutting through it superficially: in this way.
Begin from line b to line g. When the moisture has been evacuated, remove the knot which contains it, do not leave any residue behind
There is much risk if any residue is left behind Then immerse the area in Egyptian unguent if it is present: or in water and salt: and apply with the willow and let it go until tomorrow
This dries up what remains of the knot Then repeat above the said hip with the second and third finger, and if you find it not yielding, until you are confident that nothing remains of the boil, then indeed care for the wound with an unguent until it is healed.
If there is a nodulus of fat remaining in the abscess: then dry that up again in this fashion, with a section having the shape of a cross: and project the nails between the two lobes of the section, and scour it from every part: and try your skill in extracting the sac which contains it.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it makes resistance against you, an artery is probably involved, then do as I shall tell you afterwards.</start_of_turn>
Do the same with a stone abscess, by section and care in the same way as before.</start_of_turn And the section of a stone abscess is easier: because there is little blood and moisture.</start_of_turn
And sometimes there are hours of abscesses which are in the head of some men, in which there is no moisture at all.</start_of_turn
Or make the perforation always from below upwards, so as to direct the course of the healing towards below.</start_of_turn
Then care for that which is fitting for them from the care.
Then care for that which is fitting for them from the care of the throat section
Chapter 42.
Many of these wounds happen in the throat, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes in other parts of the body.
And over these which happen in the throat, there are one or many: and they are generated from each one: and every Strophe is within its own tunic, as in the nodes and the head wounds which we have mentioned
There are many kinds of these Strophes
And from these there are soft: and there are those which contain humours: and there are malignant ones, which do not obey care
In this way, as the good humours are disposed in the touch, whose mark is the proximity of the colour of the skin, and which moves to all parts, and is not connected with the nerves of the throat, neither with the gullet, neither with the arteries, neither is it deep: it should be cut off with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body from the line, b. to the line, g. and be stripped from all sides: and extend two lips of the skin with a single layer, or with several layers if necessary, as we said in the head wounds, and pull out the contents little by little.
And it is with caution that one does not touch the bone, or the nerve
And let the blade be neither too acute nor too blunt: so as not to add your hand to the incision, or to frighten the patient, and cut only what is necessary
If, however, you cut a vein, or an artery, or are hindered by the operation, then put in the wound a piece of charred wood, or some powders which absorb blood, and tighten the wound, and leave it until the pain of the wound has ceased, and the wound has become soft: or else you will begin to putrefy it
Blood is severed by the clamp Redi therefore to the operation, until completion.
Then care for yourself.
If the trocar is cut entirely, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound: and hold these themselves immediately, after you have washed because there remains no excess.
If however you find that there remains excess blood because of the size of the trocar, then it is necessary that you extend to the cutting of its root and extract it: and administer the suture as we have said.
And what is contained from the trocar must be perforated with a superficial perforation: so that its maturity may appear: and place the perforation from that which follows below the body, as we have said
Then administer after the perforation, sponges with unguents, and similar things, so that it may consume that which remains from the corruption, until when you wash the wound will be found to be healed: then care for yourself with the unguents of generation of flesh until it is healed
Regarding the excision of the epiglottis from the epiglottic cartilage accidentally in the gut.
Chapter XLIII.
They say that the ancients performed this excision of the epiglottis, and no one in our land has ever done it: and this is the record of their sermon
When the throat is swollen with swelling of the epiglottis, it is necessary to make an incision of the epiglottis: for if this does not take place, all the veins and lungs will be weakened.
When there is a hard swelling in the throat, in the gullet, or in the tonsils, when there is no inflammation of the channel, it is necessary to perform an incision of the epiglottis to escape from the destruction which results from the obstruction. It is necessary therefore, when we wish to perform this operation, to cut the epiglottis under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision in the middle of the two circles, so that the section is in the fat, not in the cartilage: and this is the most suitable place for the incision, because it is devoid of flesh, and the blood vessels from it are long.
If the physician is timid, it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with one finger.
Then find the skin, until it reaches the channel: there will be bleeding from it at that point
Then cut the fat which we have mentioned: and it is signified over the incision of the channel by the phlegm which comes out of it, when it is ruptured, and by the cutting of the vessel.
And let the wound be open for some time.
When the time has passed in which the obstruction has disappeared, gather together the two lips of the wound in the skin, and close it only with skin without cartilage.
Then give medicines which cause the flesh to heal, until it is healed
Thus spoke Albucasis.
The sum of this sermon which we have narrated is not an exposition, except when someone has seen that some of the aftereffects of the disease have already become softened in the gut of the patient: and the patient has died, and he desires to cut across his desire. They go to dissect Epiglottis so that the patient can breathe in the place of the wound which is causing his respiration to be difficult, and they rejoice at his death. Because of this they have commanded the opening of the wound until the malice of the disease has passed away. And it is the malice of this disease for three days, and like itself. Then they have commanded the closing of the wound and its treatment until it is healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a handmaid took a knife and put it into his gut, and it went into the part of the lung canal.
I was called to his care, and I found him spitting blood, like a dead man.
I saw that there was a wound there, and blood had escaped from the small wound
I was amazed, because neither the wound had burst open, nor did the intestines guide her: and the wind was coming out of the wound.
I did this, and I closed the wound, and I treated him, until he was healed: and the handmaid did not suffer anything, except that she coughed in the water. And she returned after a few days to a better state of health.
Henceforth it is clear that there is no fear in the section of Epiglottis
About the section of the hernia of the gut.
Chapter XLIV.
This aftereffect is called a hernia of the gut, is a great aftereffect, according to the colour of the body: and it is very common in women
There are two possibilities: either it is natural, or it is accidental. Certainly not natural is the origin of it
Accidental is indeed according to two modes: one of which is like a knot of fat.
The other mode is like the outgrowth of an artery from a knotting
And in this is fear, and it is not right to assume it simply with the iron, except in the case where it is slight: you must try it and investigate it with the intestines
If indeed you find it like a knot of fat, and it is not suspicious with any other swelling: then dry it off like knots are dried: and extract it with the thing which contains it from the cyst, if it is in a cyst: or if not, then explore all of it
Then take care of the place with the thing which should be cured until it is healed.
Regarding the cutting of things which are greater than knots.
Chapter XLV.</start_of_turn> There are many kinds of knots, and I have mentioned all of their kinds in the explanation: and it is necessary to know the difference between a knot and an extrusion in case of doubt I say, when an extrusion has become lukewarm, and fever, and pain which accompany it, until the heat of excess has passed away and the putrefaction has ceased: then indeed calm down the fever and heat
When a knot does not have lukewarmness, neither fever, neither pain, and contains within itself a cyst which is its own sac, which is according to the colour of the body: and it is an inclusion like millet, and makes like batter, and is greater and smaller.
There are two kinds: either fat or containing moisture.
The colours of moisture are many, as I said in the discourse on moisture It is necessary therefore, when you are dealing with the cure of a Node, to experiment with it and inquire about it first with the instrument which is called the Intromissum, as its form will be found in the following chapter
The way to inquire about the posterior parts and of all Nodes is to take hold of this instrument and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the posterior part: and withdraw your fingers gradually until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin
Then finally touch the hand according to the measure of the size of the posterior part
Then withdraw the Intromissum and consider what has come out through its wound
If therefore moisture is running out, whatever its colour: then dry it out with a superficial section, as I have said in the remaining sections concerning the posterior part
If it does not run out, then you know that it is fat: dry it out therefore with a section having the shape of a cross, as it has been taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and scrape the skin from all sides with ease: and hold the fat in place if you can, until you have extracted it whole with the Node
If however the sac is ruptured during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole: much the same happens in this case, then extract it fragment by fragment, until nothing remains of it
For if anything remains of it, little or much, the Node returns in most cases.
If it swells and remains small: then make a hole beside your completion and pour in corrosive powders of sharpness: and bind up the hole, and place above it what rests upon the soft cushion, and care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If there is a large knot, then cut through its two lips, and care for it as that which has been incarnated If however there is a swelling that is painful, or that does not swell: then cleanse it, and make an incision in the place where the swelling is greatest, and drain it out for two or three days, until the swelling has gone down, and the blood has clotted: and then return to the original condition
As to the instruments for the cutting and perforating of the wound.
Chapter XLVI.
There are three forms of instruments for the introduction of instruments, and there are three sorts.
The first is large, the second is medium, and the third is small
Let the first be of iron, the square end of which is blunt in the middle, so that it facilitates the entrance into the swelling
And these are the forms of the instruments of the experienced, and no, that is, perforating: and one of them is called the beris, that is, the perforator, and there are three sorts
The first is large, the second is medium, and the third is small
They join together, that they may investigate the swelling, and the exits, and the fistula, and the abscesses from that which is between the bones
And others are round, and square, and flat, like a great needle which sews under silk, from citrine or from air, or from iron, or from silver And the better things are those which come from the citron.
And experience is also derived from black lead, which, when applied to these fistulas, causes them to reflect like glass with their smoothness.
There are three things in number. For as regards the size of the wound, it is either wide, medium, or narrow, according to the quantity of the diameter of the fistula and the degree of its constriction The shape of the wounds is diverse, and there are many kinds of them For as regards their kind, there are simple wounds, which have but one curvature: and there are three kinds of them, like liquids, large, medium, and small
There are blind wounds also: and there are three kinds of them
There are wounds with two curvatures: and there are three kinds of them; and there are wounds with three curvatures: and there are three kinds of them; all of which are necessary in their place
And these are the forms of scalpels, with which the knots are cut and excoriated, and abscesses: and there are three kinds of them, for as regards their size, they are either large, medium, or small
Their extremities which are cut are acute, and the others are not acute: and they are not to be placed in this way, except when there is an imposition of healing upon the excision of the knots at the fear of the incision of the vein, or nerves: and that the healing may take place through this and not through excessive bleeding during the excision of the abscess
These are magdas, and there are three kinds of them
They are formed from air, and are like radium, as with which alcohol is made: and at their widest end is a hidden Spatumilis point: and in it runs inwards and outwards as desired, like water.
The points of Spatumilis which are driven between the fingers at the perforation of the apostematum: and they are not perceived by the sick: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The exhalations of the veins when the flow of blood is broken: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small
They are formed from air, or from lemon juice, round, about the length of a palm, like water: and they are transparent.
And it is necessary that these kinds of veins be large and small with you: in order to break the blood quickly when necessary, and then when it is not there a doctor is not present.
However, do not use these things for the breaking of blood in any place of the body, and do not use them except in places where there is carnation: such as wounds of the leg, and hip, and wounds of the arm, and breast, and belly, and groin, and similar places, from wounds of carnation, humors.
And sometimes these things become other small instruments like the edges of fists, according to their form: with which the blood is broken when it flows out from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or an artery: and sometimes these things become round according to this form.
As for the care of the breasts of men who suckle the breasts of women.
Chapter XLVII.
When the breasts of some men swell with sleep (that is, when they begin to soil during sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and they remain with post-traumatic fever.
Whoever loathes that [disease], must secrete above the nipples a section like a crescent, from this line to that line, and then scrape off the fat altogether.
Then apply an ointment of mercury from the medicine box.</start_of_turn>
Then join together two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If however the nipple turns downwards, and is softened by its size, as often happens with women: then it is necessary to find in the two upper sides two sections like the crescent, each one containing the other at the ends as far as the greater line contains the lesser, according to this shape from this line to that line, b. to that line, g. Then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said concerning the sutures and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If however you do not wish to perform an incision of it because of the patient's anxiety or because of bleeding: then you must apply a poultice soaked in corrosive unguent under the wound, and let it go, until it has eaten away what remains of the fat.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
In the perforation of the apostematis, which happens under the nipple.</start_of_turn
Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn> These apostemata which happen under the nipple, are of the kind of hard Strophula, which contains vesicles, and from these are those which contain humours.</start_of_turn
Which are from the humours which contain moistures, must be cut away with a crescent-shaped section, according to this shape from this line to that line, b. to that line, g. and when all that is in the apostemata is evacuated from the blood, then apply a poultice to the old wound, and let it go until another day.</start_of_turn
Then the foot shall be raised up, and cared for with an unguent suitable for it, until it is healed.
If the swelling be from a kind of knot of the Strophular kind, then it must be cut above the same, as we said in the section on the Strophulas which are equal.
If, however, a boil extends in this way as to emit pus, then apply cautery to it, according to what has been said previously.</start_of_turn>
As for the section of a boil which happens because of an artery and a vein.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLIX.</start_of_turn>
When an artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is consolidated, then there is much swelling from the boil: and in the same way, a vein is also ruptured, as in the case of the boil and the swelling.</start_of_turn
And the signs by which it is known that the swelling is from an artery and a vein, are: because when the swelling is from an artery, it is long and aggregated in the depth of the body: and when the swelling is from an infected wound of the fingers, you feel as if there is a constriction there.</start_of_turn
And that which is from a vein, is round in the open part of the body.</start_of_turn
And the section of this boil is dangerous, especially when it is under the armpits, and the groin, and the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is very dangerous.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to take care of it with iron, and that which is from the outside also in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary to take care of it.</start_of_turn
Concerning that which is from the outside, from the swelling of the orifice of the artery, find in the skin in the section in length.</start_of_turn
Then open the part with hooks, afterwards the artery: and loosen the gut from the tunic until it is detached.
Then insert the hook under this and make the gut penetrate through to the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled thread in two places, as you were taught concerning the extraction of two arteries which are in the belly
Then bite the place which is between two ligatures with the ligature needle, until the blood which is in it has gone out, and the clot is dissolved.
Then apply an antidote which produces pus, until the ligatures fall off: afterwards care for this with suitable unguents until it is healed.
As for a clot which has happened from a vein, then it is necessary to take out the hand which is possible from the clot with the skin.
Then insert the hook under the place where you held your hand, and make the gut penetrate: and there be in it a doubled thread, until you have pulled it out from the other side.
Then bind with this very clot the gut which is in this place: according to what I have told you concerning the ligature of a vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread. If however you fear that the thread is being pulled out, then insert another hook with another thread under the whole clot at the incision of the needle: first of all, and bind your thread in four places
Then dry the clot in its middle, until when it comes out what is in it: then cut off the excess of the skin, and discharge that which is bound from it
Then put upon this the powder which you submerged in wine, and fat.
Then apply a cure which is made with salves and unguents, until it is healed
Concerning the swelling which occurs from the torsion of nerves.
Concerning the swelling which occurs from the torsion of nerves.
Just as swelling occurs in arteries and veins due to torsion, in the same way swelling occurs in nerves: which occurs either from percussion or from excessive tension, or in like manner: and it often happens in the armpits, or the calves, and in every place where nerves are twisted together: and it is a serious swelling. It is similar in color to the rest of the body, and it is found in various positions without pain: and when it is grasped with force, a numbness similar to that of intoxication is felt in it
It is not a swelling that is collected in the depths of the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not go forward or backward or downwards.
Because it is in the twisted parts, it is not necessary to suture it with iron.</start_of_turn>
Perhaps some contraction will occur against it.
And in that which is in the head, or in the face, find the skin with a spatula.</start_of_turn>
If it is a small swelling, then hold it with forceps and cut it off from its root.</start_of_turn
If it is large, then suspend it with a thread and scrape it off: then remove it and join the wound with a suture: and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
Concerning the section of the swelling which occurs within.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the section of the swelling which occurs within.</start_of_turn It often happens to many people in the depths of their bodies, and in the rest of their bodies, these things which are called Fungalia, because they are similar to fungi.</start_of_turn
When the root is slight and the head is large, and the lips are joined together.
When the root is slight and the head is large, and the lips are closed together.
And I saw a man who had two holes in his belly, which were larger than any other like unto mushrooms: there was no difference between them, neither in the white nor in the root, and they were closed together, and moisture ran out of him always.
I saw a man who had two holes in his belly, which were larger than any others like unto mushrooms: there was no difference between them, neither in the white nor in the root, and they were closed together, and moisture ran out of him always.
Many are expelled from its section with much blood: therefore if blood incites you, then cauterize it.
If you see the sickly and timid patient from the incision with the iron, then take a leaden wire made in the center and string it with it: which way is that which we have said, and discharge it in two days.
Then add lead to the stricture.
Do not cease to string the lead, whenever it prints in the wound, until it is detached, and falls away by itself without toil
If, however, the wound is large of the root, then in its incision is something of fear and weakness: especially because of that which is within.
But it is possible that you can cut through the middle of it.
Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then care for it, until the wound is healed
And be careful lest you presume to cut through the wound which is of a dark color, little sense, bad appearance: for that is a tumor: and I will remind you of cancer after this
Of the care of the belly wound.
Chapter 52.
The belly wound comes from many cuts.
Or from incisions of the flesh which are over the belly: and it exits from the opening in the side, or the intestines, according as happens in the rest of the ruptures
Or from the blood which flows from the vein, or from the artery, as has been said before
Or from swelling which is contained within it.
Or if it is because of a burst abscess, and the opening of the wound: then is the colour of the pus like that of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and appears in diverse places.
Or if it is because of the discharge of an intestine, then is its site as we have mentioned, with greater diversity of place.
When you touch it with your finger, it is hidden: then it returns, and sometimes there is a sound like that: and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and causes great pain
Or if it is because of moisture, it is soft: then it does not hide when you touch it with your hand, neither does it tighten, neither does it increase in size.
Or if it is because of blood, then it appears with these signs like a black clot at the edge of the wound
Or if it is because of dead tissue: then it is a thick, large, hard pus, and is formed according to the quantity of one thing.
Or if it is because of swelling, then its touch is soft. And the treatment for it is as you consider, if the prominence of the navel is because of blood in the Artery or Vein or swelling: then it is necessary to abstain from treatment for it
For in this case there is fear and danger, just as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of pus arising from an artery or vein.
Or if the prominence of the navel is because of an intestine or a bladder: then it is necessary to expel the sick person, as long as he continues to belch, and to keep him still lying down.
Then signs with encasement throughout the circumference of the belly.
Then command him to lie between your hands over his back
Then circle around with a broad spatula in the circumference of the belly over the place where you encased it.
Then stretch out the middle of the belly towards the upper parts, with a large hook
Then bind him firmly in the circumference with a strong thread, or with a silk cord: and let the knot of the ligation be firm.
Then open up the middle of the belly that was stretched out above the ligament.
If you find the intestines caught by the ligation: then draw out the encasement, and introduce the index finger into it, and push the intestine inwards towards the belly: and if you find a hernia, then grasp it with the hook, and cut off its excess
But if the artery or a vein is contrary to this: then circle it around a great deal
Then return to your operation.
And grasp two needles, and introduce them through two strong threads: and introduce two needles in the circumference that you made around the belly in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate
Then tighten the belly in four places over the needles: and if you wish, take out the needles and leave the place, until the extended flesh putrefies: and it will fall away by itself: or cut it off when it softens and putrefies
Then care for him with what is necessary from the unguents, until he is healed.
And if there is a swelling of the belly from flesh or from moisture: then it is necessary to concave the belly, as we said before
Extract blood, or moisture, as you find it in it.
Then care for the place with it which strengthens it
Care for the wound.</start_of_turn> Chapter 53.</start_of_turn>
I cannot cure anyone from it: neither can anyone else before me.</start_of_turn
And the operation in it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede it, and to solve the patient with black bile several times.</start_of_turn
Then make a phlebotomy if you find it with a visible swelling.</start_of_turn
Then prepare the patient with preparation in which he is placed with the operation.</start_of_turn
Then draw out from the cancer the nails that join it.</start_of_turn
Then cover the wound from all sides with the skin, according to the prescription, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not tear away the wound quickly, but express the place and evacuate the thick blood throughout, or as much as possible from the instruments.</start_of_turn
If, however, the procedure causes a large flow of blood from an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the bleeding ceases.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
(The next sentence is omitted as it is not relevant to the requested translation.)
(The provided text does not include subsequent sentences.)
We shall explain in detail the species of hydropsism, and how water accumulates: and the signs of each kind, and the treatment with physicians.
And what is cured with iron is not except the sole species of ascites: and it is not approached with iron the species of tympanitis: neither the species of hypospasm: for that is deadly.
When you are treated for this species of hydropsism of the tympani with physicians, and the treatment does not suffice: then consider that.
For if the sick person is accompanied by weakness, or is with another illness besides hydropsism: such as if there is with him a cough, or a solution of the intestines, or things like these: then do not treat him with iron for fear of that
If, however, you see the sick person full of spirit, neither is he with the sole illness besides hydropsism: neither young, nor old: then the mode of operation in this is that you elevate the sick person standing between your hands, and press his abdomen with your hand to drive out the water downwards to the lower part of the belly
Then take a sponge covered with thorns, according to this shape
Sit two acute angles, long, with acute extremities like a sponge.</start_of_turn>
Truth be told, there is something of slight shortness in it [the vein], which does not pass through with it to the operation until it reaches the intestine, and tears it.
Consider it then.
For if there is a generation of hydrosis from the part of the intestines, then it is necessary to lengthen with the section from the navel to the amount of three fingers, downwards in a direct line above the loin
If indeed the generation of hydrosis is because of the liver's disease: then let your section be left from the navel to three fingers.
And if the generation of it is because of the spleen: then let the section be on the right side: and it is not necessary also that there should be a section on the side where you wish to place the sickly person, in order that there should not be excess of blood to the place of weakness.
Then pierce with the instrument the whole skin.
Then introduce into it the section, and lift up your hand with the sponge between the skin, and wipe, as though you are scraping it: and let the quantity which is scraped be equal to the quantity of a nail, or somewhat less.
Then pierce the sponge, until the sponge reaches the place of weakness: and that is the place of water
Then draw it out, and introduce it into the hole of the instrument, which has this shape.
It is like a cannula: it is made of silver, or air, or gold, flexible, soft, with a small hole in the lower part, and three holes on the sides, two from one side and one from the other: and its extremity is cut off, like the incision of a needle, as for urine: there is an armil at the upper end of it
When the instrument reaches the water, it immediately sinks over the instrument, thus emptying half of the water in an hour.
If you empty it out more than is necessary, the patient may die in an hour from the collapse of his vital spirit: or there may happen to him fainting which approaches death.
Empty it out according to the quantity of virtue it has, and according to what is significant to you of the patient’s pulse and condition
Then draw out the instrument and retain the water.
For it remains immediately on account of the skin which retains the opening which is over the sieve: of which I have spoken, that you should perform it in the way I have said.
Then do it again with the instrument the next day, if you find the patient tolerates it: and also draw out from the water the quantity which remains. Do this for a few days without fear, and take care of yourself from error: until there remains from the water only a little bit.
If however you fear the patient, and you discharge from the water a great quantity: then care for him with burying in warm sand, and with great sweating in bath and sun, and expect upon the seat: and care for him with physicians who are experienced, until he is healed: and cauterize upon the stomach, and the spleen, and the liver, after the extraction of the water: as I have said before
As for the care of children who are born in places where the urinary opening is not pierced.
Chapter 55.</start_of_turn> When anyone is born from his mother’s womb, and his head is not pierced, or the opening is narrow, or is not in its proper place
It is necessary therefore to aid promptly when its perforation has occurred simultaneously with its birth when Spatumili is applied thinly upwards, according to this fashion.
Then place in the wound a lead weight thinly, and bind it: and keep it for three days, or four
When it wishes to emit urine, it is to be moved, and mixed together.
Then reduce it
And if you do not place lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not permit it to close
He whose opening is strict is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
He in whom the opening is not in its place, is treated with lead
Because from the matter which is born, the opening is at the end of the bladder: wherefore it cannot mix forward until the bladder is elevated by its hand to the higher parts Neither is there generation, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to the rule: and is a grievous wound upwards
And the method of treatment in this is that the sick man be supported on his back
Then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand by means of elevation, and cut the head of the bladder from the place of the penis, with a knife, or with sharp Spatumili: as if it were the cutting of a reed, or as you would a root, so that the middle of it comes out like the head of the bladder: and that the opening be in the middle according to what is necessary
And take care that there be no bleeding during your operation
Many things happen indeed.
Opposition to it should be made with that which binds blood, and care of the wound until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
As for the things that happen in preparation and the head of the wound, and corruption, bruising, and adhesion.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 66.</start_of_turn
Many things happen indeed in this wound of the ulcer, and it is the elevation of corrupted meat.</start_of_turn
And among these there are some which are malignant, and some which are not.</start_of_turn
The malignant one must be suspended with a fine thread, and cut off, until the whole of it is gone.</start_of_turn
Then put over it a covered coat of Egyptian unguent.</start_of_turn Then care for it with fine unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If the wound is malignant, having the colour of meat, then it is necessary to administer cauterium in it after its incision and at the same time.</start_of_turn
If however the wound is in the head of the ulcer, not circumcised, and is a part of the wound both within and without: then it is necessary to strengthen the wound which is within first, until it is consolidated, and then care for the exterior. For when you care for the exterior while neglecting the interior, the ulcer will burst.</start_of_turn
And in the testicles also, and blackening of the ulcer and corruption.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you drain away all that is swollen and which wants to corrupt, or which is already corrupted.</start_of_turn
Then line above the wound following that with honey which has been consumed with wheat and barley flour, and trefoil herbs of the kind which are cribellated.
Then keep it under care with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If blood should flow, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form.
A cautery is an ointment which has two properties: to stop bleeding and to heal wounds when corrupted
If the head of the worm has been corroded and all is destroyed in an hour: then it is necessary to introduce into the meat a lead cannula so that the poison may mix with the wound
In dealing with the covering of the wound with the head of the worm, and these two things are not joined together, except in that case where the covering is sound and no excision is necessary: and when it is necessary to excise, it should be done with a blunt spatula until the ligament is severed and the head of the worm is freed from all sides
If it is difficult to discern between these two things, then it is necessary to excise something from the head of the worm and from the covering
For in the case that the covering is subtle, it is perhaps pierced by its subtle nature or quickly
Then separate the covering from the head of the worm with fine linen cloth which has been made wet in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then keep it with balsamic vinegar until it is solidified On the treatment of children, and the care for an error in an accident.
Head Chapter LXVII.
Circumcision is not the completion of continuity, like other wounds: indeed, when it is done by our operation, by our will, and when its benefit is in children themselves, it is necessary that we sign it to indicate that we have performed a good operation, and that we have not thereby diminished the benefit.
I say therefore that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only by experience that we have learned it
Because I have found a greater part of the artifices, and phlebotomies, useful for purification by circumcision, with a knife, and with nails: and that they are used for the insane, and bound with thread, and incised with a nail.
And I myself have tried all these methods, and I have not found a better purification than by knife and thread
For in purification with a knife, much skin is often thrown away.
For the skin of the prepuce has two tunics: so perhaps the upper skin is cut, and the lower tunic is threatened: it is therefore necessary to make an incision to cut the other, and to avoid future pain
And when purification is done by the insane, that is, by digitalis, as the physicians do, the incision of the extremity of the penis is not secured: for perhaps it enters through its foramen
In purification with a nail, perhaps the iron will go through, and will corrupt your operation: and the skin of a child is short in nature, and many are born thus, which does not befit purification: and I have seen this
Purification with a knife and thread is a good experiment that I have undertaken: for the knives are proportional to the incision: because the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below
When you have finished with your hand, two acute angles are formed, and they meet according to the operation of one in the same time: and it makes a compression similar in figure, containing the skin of the limb from all sides, so that no error occurs at all.
The proper way to perform the operation is to estimate the extent of the wound, especially if there is someone who understands the matter, because you must not do anything unless you tie the thread in the limb itself: and you let it go until tomorrow.
Then make him laugh and be merry in every way that you can, from which he will recover his intelligence.
Then insert your hand into the limb and blow into the skin, and draw it up, until the head of the limb comes out.
Then loosen what is gathered in that cavity.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread.
Then tie the lower part with a little of the ligament alongside Then take hold with your index finger and thumb, the place of the lower ligament with a good hold, and cut between the two ligaments.
Then pull the skin up quickly and extract the head of the limb.
Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better thus) and put powdered sulfur on: and put a bandage over the place where the swelling has gone down, crushed with recent good salt: and let it go over it until tomorrow: and take care of the rest of the treatment until he is healed
The shape of the knife for cutting is thus.
Two blades extend at the extremities, and their convergence: do not extend into the substance of the nail: and let the length of the two be equal to the length of two thumbs together
The error which occurs in cutting is: perhaps the entire intrinsic skin or a part of it escapes at the incision. Therefore it is necessary that you extend your hand with your nail before the cutting of the place: and you cut according to the equality.
If you are unable to hold the hand with your nail, then extract the hand with your thumb and cut the place.
If, however, three days have passed and what is under the nail remains swollen, remove the nail: then leave it until the swelling subsides, and when it has become soft, remove it easily and cut it as has been prepared before: and take care that you avoid the head of the nail
It will not cause him any harm.
Therefore care for it as we have said in the treatise on powders: and if it occurs from the skin above the measure and goes upwards, it does not harm him even that
Therefore care for it as we have said until it heals.
¶ On the extraction of a retained nail from the nail bed.
Chapter 58.</start_of_turn>
The retention of urine in the nail bed arises from an operation made from stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or native flesh, or similar things from which we have spoken in the methods of treatment in general
If the bladder does not yield, and you suspect its retention is due to a stone in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that it be rendered infirm upon its knee.
Then you must place the foot of the limb above the back of the limb, and extend the belly from the upper part of the back, and bind the infirm limb with the thread as much as possible.
It is thought therefore that the stone in the neck of the bladder will be expelled towards the buttocks: which will cause the bladder to recover
If it does not yield even thus, and you believe there is something above the infirm limb: then you must perform an extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which is shaped like a silver awl, is subtle, flexible, and curved like the quill of a bird in the smoothness of a radius, as long as the breadth of a palm and a half: with a fine needle at its head.
The way to discharge the bladder is thus, that you take a doubled thread and bind in its extremity lanam or cotton, a good ligation: and insert the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and pierce with shears if anything comes out through the wool, but truly insert into the needle with certainty, as with a spear
Then wet the syringe with oil, or butter, and vinegar: and make the infirm person sit upon a seat, and support the bladder, and apply to the neck of the bladder oil with herbs and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the bladder with ease, until it reaches the root of the bladder.
Then pull up the limb above the navel. Then push the syringe into the limb, until it reaches the bladder, and the infirm person feels that it has gone to the source of the pain: and do not do this except in the case where the channel through which it goes is tortuous
Then extend the thread gradually with wool.
The thread shall follow the wool gradually.
Then draw out the thread, and make the gut run through the opening of the bladder: and repeat the needle, and do not desist from doing this until the bladder is emptied and the wound has healed. Concerning the quality of the bladder-wash with Clepshydra.
Chapter 59.</start_of_turn>
It is blunt, that is, closed.</start_of_turn
And there are three holes in it, two from one side and one from the other side, like a needle.</start_of_turn
And the concave place, in which that which drives it rests, be according to the quantity that it desires without addition, until when it is drawn with something, the humilities are attracted to it: and when it is driven out, when it is expelled far off: according to what the Clepshydra does, which throws out pitch, that is, Greek fire in battle.</start_of_turn
When therefore urine is to be thrown out into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the Clepshydra into the urine, and draw it out with that which drives it upwards, the urine is drawn into the concavity of the Clepshydra.</start_of_turn Then introduce its extremity into the bladder, as we said concerning the needle.</start_of_turn
Then drive moisture with it which drives out the other [moisture], and the moisture which remains behind adheres to the surface immediately, as a sick man feels. Form a soft enema which fills the belly.</start_of_turn>
Then insert a strong thread firmly through those holes like loops.</start_of_turn> Then gather the circle like a ball of yarn: when you have put in it what you wish of moisture, oil and water.</start_of_turn
Then bind it with an instrument: and do it like you did with the belly when expressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the belly.</start_of_turn
¶ On Lapide Extraction.
Chapter 60.</start_of_turn> We have spoken in the treatise on the kinds of Lapis, and their treatment by physicians: and we have spoken of the difference between the Lapis which is generated in the bowels and the belly, and the sign of the whole: and we have spoken of the Lapis in which the operation is performed with the hand and section: and it is the Lapis which is generated in the belly itself: and that which appears in the gut: I will speak of this with manifest explanation and abbreviation.</start_of_turn
I say, therefore, that the stone generated in the bladder commonly occurs in children.
And from its signs it is known that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its substance: and there appears in it white sand, and it irritates the painful area, and it works with it, and is often suspended Then it rises up and flows out with it through the anus in many cases.
And the healing of children from this is easy, from which time until they are fourteen years of age
It is difficult in old age.
In young people, however, it is middle-aged; in which there is between these two: and its intensity is such that the greater the stone, the easier the cure: and if it is small, the cure is more difficult
When we come to the cure, it is necessary at first to loosen the patient with a catharsis, which pulls out all the stool that is in his intestines: for it often hinders the discovery of the stone during the investigation Then the patient is taken with his feet and is beaten, and is moved downwards: so that the stone may go down to the depth of the bladder, or come out from its high place somewhat
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and your hands are under his buttocks, so that the bladder may be completely emptied downwards
Then ask him, and touch him externally.
If you feel the stone in the space, then act immediately with a cut above it
If it does not come under your touch at all, then you must remove the index finger of your left hand if the patient is a child: or the middle finger if he is an adult: and insert it into his rectum, and inquire about the stone, until it is under your finger: and gradually bring it up to the neck of the bladder.
Then immediately above itself with your finger, and push it outwards against the site of the incision: and command the minister on your left hand, that he cut away the flesh of your left hand from above; and command another minister on your right hand, that he extend your testicles of your right hand upwards; and another of your hands, that he move the skin which is under your testicles in the part from the place of the incision.
Then immediately insert the sponge, which has this shape.
And find in it what is between the uterus and the testicles, and not in the middle, at the side of the left hip: and let the incision be above the upper stone, and your finger be in the anus: and make the incision transverse, so that the external incision is wide, and the internal one is narrow, as much as is possible to prevent the escape of the stone from it not greater
Perhaps therefore it compresses the finger which is in the anus the stone at the incision, and it comes out without difficulty
And you know that from the stone there are angles and margins, because of which it is difficult for it to come out on account of that.
And from it is soft, like a gland, and round: and it makes its exit easy.
Therefore add to it those which have angles and margins, in the fissure.
If it does not come out like this, then you must take an instrument of good size over the upper part: or grasp it with your thumb which is like a crescent, which grasps the stone and does not slip from it: or that you introduce under it an instrument which is fine and flexible, curved at its extremities.
Or if you cannot do this, then widen the opening a little more.
If blood flows to you from it, cut it off with a cautery.</start_of_turn>
If there is more than one stone, push in the first one to the os vesicae opening.
Then cut above it (the stone).
Afterwards push in the small one afterwards: and do the same if there are more than two.
If the big one is wide, then ignorance is like cutting above it with a large section
For indeed, with two things a sick man is either dead or receives an excessive concentration of urine: because the place is not solidified at all
But give him an emetic until it goes out: or break it with forceps until you have removed it frustratedly
When you have finished the operation, then put on a sponge of wool, aloe and dragon's blood: and bind it tightly, and place above it a soaked bandage of oil and wine, or of rose water and cold water: so that the swelling will subside
Then keep the patient resting on his chest, and do not stretch the ligaments, until the third day.
When you have healed it, bandage the place with much water and oil.
Then care for it with rue ointment and balm ointment, until it is healed
If however in the wound there is added a soft swelling and pus, and similar things: like when blood congeals in the bladder and is prohibited from going out by urine: and it is known from the discharge of blood with the urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood clot.</start_of_turn>
For if it remains, it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.</start_of_turn>
Then bathe the wound with vinegar, vinegar, and salt: and oppose every kind of dressing with that which is suitable for the cure, until it is healed.
It is necessary throughout the process of treatment, as you bind two thighs together, and unite them, the cause of the medicines which are placed above the place
If the stone is small, and is in the urine passage, and is fixed in it, and hinders the flow of urine: then treat it with that which I mentioned before you reach the section.
Many are excused from the section for this treatment, because I have proved it to be good And it is, that you take a perforator of iron, which has this form, triangular extremities, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take thread, and bind with it the urine under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then introduce the perforating iron into the urine with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone: and withdraw the perforator from the stone little by little: and close the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side
The urine will indeed vanish immediately.
Then press your hand over that which remains from the stone from the outside of the urine passage.
It will break itself, and go out with the urine, and the patient will be healed
If, however, this treatment is not prepared for him, because of something which hinders it: then bind thread under the stone, and thread above the stone Then dry over the stone in the urine between two ligatures.
Then extract it.
Then suture the ligament and bind the frozen blood which is in the wound.
And it is not necessary to pass the thread under the stone, except that it does not return to the orifice: and another ligament must be passed above, except that when the thread is drawn out after the stone has gone, the skin should return to its place and cohere with the wound: and for this reason it is necessary that you should pass the thread above when you elevate the skin to its proper position, so that the skin returns to its original place and coheres with the wound, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
On the extraction of the stone from women.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 61.</start_of_turn
The stone is rarely generated in women.</start_of_turn
If, however, it should happen to any of them to have a stone, then its cure is difficult, and is prohibited because of the many methods.</start_of_turn
One of them is: perhaps the woman is a virgin.</start_of_turn And the second is, because you do not find a woman who confesses herself to a physician when she is chaste, or from having had husbands.</start_of_turn
The third is, because you do not find a woman who is well-skilled in this art, especially in performing the operation with the hand.</start_of_turn
And the fourth is the distance of the stone from the place: because it demands a deep incision, and there is fear in that.</start_of_turn
And if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a female physician who is well-skilled: and it is rarely found.</start_of_turn
If indeed you desire beforehand the secrets of this art, then seek out a learned and experienced physician, well-versed in women's matters, or one who has received instruction in this field. Do this immediately and especially request that he perform everything which he is commanded to do from the inquiry concerning the stone. Firstly, if she is a maid, he must insert his finger into her anus and search for the stone.
If he finds it, he should grasp it under his finger and then command the midwife to insert his finger into the lower belly of the patient and inquire about the stone, after placing his left hand over the flank and applying good pressure If he finds the stone, he must gradually move it from the opening of the bladder to the lower parts with all his skill, until it reaches the root of the hip bone.
Then he should place his hand above the middle of the belly, at the root of the hip bone, from whichever side is most convenient for him, and he will feel the stone in that place: and his finger should not be moved from the stone, holding it under pressure: and make a small incision at first.
Then insert the radium through that incision.
If he feels the stone, then add to the incision as much as the stone has gone out of it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. Among these there is a small one, a large one, a soft one and a rough one, a long one and a round one with a branch.
You know therefore the kind of stone, as it is signified by this above all that you desire
If blood flows there, then add in the hollow place a little of powder, and keep it for one hour, until the blood is separated.
If blood flows there, and you know that the evacuation of blood comes from the artery which has been cut: then put powder over the place, and bind it with fine threads: and do not move it: and let the stone go, and do not take it out
Perhaps the woman is weak.
Then take care of the wound.
When blood sits still after days, and the place putrefies, then return to the operation, until the stone comes out
Of the incision of the super Hernias of water
Chapter 122.
A swelling of water is not a hernia, except for the gathering of moisture in the white membrane which is under the testicles containing urine: and it is called a hernia. And when it is in the inner sac of the testicles which nature has prepared for it in the part of the urine until it is put out: which is another egg, and is the white membrane of the testicles between the white membrane and the urine, which we mentioned: and it does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of these hernias is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: from which this matter flows out.
And sometimes it happens from a blow to the testicles.
And this humidity has many colors. And it is of various colors, some being like the yellow of the setting sun, others like bloody red, or like dung, black, or like pure water, and this is more of it.
For if it is in white powder as we have said, then the swelling is round like a nut of about the size of a figure of the omega: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if it is in the natural membrane of the body itself, then the swelling is round with a part like the omega: and for this reason the man knows that it is another egg
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white powder, then it falls under the sense.
When you see the consciousness of the color of the moisture, then experience the color of the moisture in the swelling with the introduction of a square whose form has preceded it
According to that, therefore, as it comes out in the mark of the introduction, judge from that which is between them
When we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to expel the morbid matter from the patient, to perform phlebotomy if possible, and to fill the body with liquids
And then it is placed upon its back over the high part and put under it many sponges.
And then sit on its left side and command the attendant to sit on its right side, who extends the limb of its left side towards the two edges of the skin of the testicles and towards the part beyond the navel
Then take a broad spatula and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle towards the loin, until it reaches the navel: and make an incision according to the rule of the equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white powder encompassing: and scrape it out and observe, or cause it to bleed, in order to remove it: and do your scraping as carefully as possible from the part which hangs down with the egg more: and gradually scrape away with the scraping as much as you are able
Then perforate the full bladder with a wide perforation, and extract all the water. Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the bladder upwards, and do not touch the skin of the testicles comprehending them: and pierce the bladder as you deem possible, either completely, or partly, especially its wide base superficially.
For if you do not carefully scrutinize, in its incision there is no security, that the water will not leak out
But if anything exterior comes out from its cavity in the hour of your operation: then when you have completed the section of the bladder, reduce it.
Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it like the rest of the wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find anything corrupted from the blackness of anything else, then it is necessary that you bind the wounds, which are the suspension, fearing the flow of blood.
Then remove the testicle with the suspension, and extract the thing: afterwards care for it as we have said.
If indeed water is aggregated in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: dry therefore the other part equally
And if you make it equal, as for one operation, then do so: then drain the blood.
And introduce into the incisions a wet thread in oil, or in rose oil: and put outside the thread another thread which you submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over the two testicles, and look inside: and put over it doubled cloths, and they are sponges: and bind them up above with a ligature, which is having six according to this form
Then two cloths are taken and the wound is covered, and the carmine is applied according to this resemblance: and the extremities which are sent out from the hip, or wet wool, are placed together with the stricture in the lumbar region of the arms. One extremity takes over one thumb up to the loin, and the second extremity takes over to the part of the pelvis. And two extremities take over two lower hips, and two extremities take over two groin, and the stricture is gathered up in the lumbar region of the arms.
And when it is necessary to cauterize this wound artificially, with a knife at the place of the section with a iron: it is that you take the cautery with a fine handle and remove the skin of the testicles. And it is ignited, as we have said: until it is seen to detect the white fat containing water. Then take the cautery, according to this form.</start_of_turn>
The Greek letters are similar.</start_of_turn>
Then pierce with it through that fat, and it is ignited, until all the moisture has escaped.</start_of_turn
Then stretch out the fat with hooks, and scour with the cautery which is ignited with a fine flame, and cut through itself as much as possible, until you have removed all of it.</start_of_turn
And burn from outside, so that it does not touch the fire.</start_of_turn
And know that this operation is safer, and more lasting than the operation with a section.</start_of_turn
If however you make a mistake in the hour of the section, or in the hour of the cautery after the pus has become cold, or there is a flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary to cure the mistake which you have made from that with the treatment which is suitable for it, according to what has been said.</start_of_turn
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect such an operation on account of his horror: then I shall perform the perforation as I have narrated.
When you are certain that it is necessary to do so according to what we have said concerning the signification of the matter, which is that the water is slack: then you must make the patient sit on a raised seat
Then I shall perforate the lower part of the abdomen with a wide spatula: and I shall perform the perforation in the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until the water has flowed out completely
Then I shall place upon the place of the buttocks, and I shall ligate it, and I shall let the remainder of the water flow out: then I shall care for the wound until the wound has healed
If, however, there is an opposition to the flow of the water at the hour when I perforate: and this is not except because there is a white clot which hinders the exit of the water at the opening of the wound: then it is necessary that I insert a sponge into the wound, or an instrument with which the water of life is extracted, whose form has preceded: or that I make an addition to the operation of the wound by means of a small incision.
And you know that the water returns and accumulates after six months, or thereabouts.
When it has thus accumulated, then it is necessary to perform the operation again in the same manner, and the patient will be able to pass his days in peace.
¶ On the care of the carnosae branch.
Chapter LXIII.
You know that in the section above this Ramus, there is from excessive fear a cause of cowardice in many situations.
Therefore its discharge of salary from this is seen to be delayed
I am mindful of the operation and the kind of post-operative care.
Indeed, many post-operative complications arise in the bodies from which testicles are composed: and this is due to many wounds, namely.</start_of_turn> Or from acute or severe inflammation which oozes towards the testicles.</start_of_turn>
Or from blows.</start_of_turn
The colour of the post-operative condition is that of the body and not of pain: and it is a serious complication.</start_of_turn
And perhaps it is a stony post-operative condition, the colour of which is dark, and there is no sensation in it.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it is from the swelling of arteries and veins: just as it was mentioned above concerning its remembrance: or from the swelling of the veins.</start_of_turn>
And that is known by the arrangement of the post-operative condition when you press on it with your fingers.</start_of_turn
And it does not behove you to grasp it directly.</start_of_turn
That is because it is due to the swelling of the veins, it does not disperse from that by pressing on it with your fingers.</start_of_turn And it is possible that in this way an incision will be made over this kind and over the rest of the body: and it is as if you were cutting the skin of the testicles.</start_of_turn
Then extend the thumb upwards and extract it with a white bandage: and free the testicle from the scrotum, and ligate the veins: and cut through the scrotum after you have freed it from all parts of the thumb.</start_of_turn
If any bone is consolidated with these bones, then it is necessary to draw out the bone and cut it through. If an adhesion has taken place between some of the bones, or in that which is between the ribs: then it is necessary to free the whole adhesion and cut it through with a round incision.
If there is a natural bone in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut through the whole of it, and draw out the bone, as we have said. When the operation is complete, then put a sponge soaked in vinegar in the wound, and wine: then care for it with the rest of the care, until it is healed.
About the care of bones, which is with oil.
Chapter 122.
Inflammation is a swelling of the bone which is surrounded by swelling, like a bag, with softening of the testicles: and it makes difficult the walking and the exercise, and the gait.
And in the care of this ailment is fear, because of the remembrance of that which preceded it.
It is true that we must say that the operation is to be done as the first did it. I say, therefore, that it is necessary to make the sick man sit upon a raised seat
Then cut with a sharp knife of the kind which has a straight blade in the middle of the veins, until the veins are detected
Then from all sides remove the [excoria], as we said before in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temper.
Then dry them in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and extract what accumulates from the moist humours of corrupt faeces.
Then care for the wound with the care of the other wounds, in which one wishes to generate health, so that the bad things that feed one testicle may fall away
There is no bad thing for that.
But if the veins happen to be brought together by all the veins, then it is necessary to extract the testicles with the veins: so that they do not be deprived of nourishment by the incision, and that they do not become putrefied, or become black, and be useless with the wound
On the care of the intestines. Chapter 65.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle?
This rupture is either from the siphons or from the expansion of this
And these two kinds happen from many causes: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a cry, or from the elevation of a heavy thing, and the like
And the sign when it is from the expansion of the siphons
That which occurs gradually in a long time, and does not happen immediately, is an equal aftereffect throughout its depth: because it compresses the intestine.
When it is excised from the portion of the intestine which lies immediately beneath the surface of the skin, the pain instantly increases at its commencement: and the aftereffect is variable, being apparent on the surface of the skin immediately beneath: because of the extrusion of the intestine through the opening of the siphons
When it is extruded with the intestine, it is called intestinal hernia and swelling: and sometimes it is associated with swelling.
When it runs into the intestine, stool remains there: and this is with great pain: because it makes the pain severe, especially when it is pressed out.
And in the treatment of such diseases of the intestines, fear of death is present: wherefore it is necessary to guard against its occurrence.
The method of operation is to expel the major part of the intestine into the depths of the cavity, if it obeys its return.
Then it is returned over its column between your hands: and lift the limbs.
Then spread out the skin following the skin upwards, and dry the whole of the scrotum thoroughly
Then fix in two incisions the hooks of the section of the intestines, according as it is necessary to open the section with them: and the incision should be made according to the quantity, as much as is possible, so that it may be easily evacuated from it
Then cleanse the siphons and those which are under the skin until the white intestine is detected, hard throughout: then introduce your finger of indication into that which follows the testicle, which is between the white siphons, which is under the skin, and the second siphons, and the whole together with that which adheres to it at the back of the testicles.
Then move your right hand towards the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend a white patch upwards with your left hand: and elevate one with the patch towards the part of the section: and command the minister to extend one upwards: and you shall solve the adherence, which is the complete reverse solution.
Inquire your fingers, that nothing be there in the white patch hard or soft from the intestine
If however you find anything in it: then drive it down to the lower belly
Then take hold of a needle, which has a thick thread made of ten threads: and insert it through the back of the white patch, which is under the skin of the testicles which follows the section: then cut off the extremities which project from the thread, until there remain four threads.
Then make a figure-of-eight with some of them over some: and ligate with two threads, of which we have spoken, because it is under the skin of the testicles a strong ligament which does not permit anything to pass through it: so that there may not arise from this a cold abscess.
And place again a ligament outside the first ligament, long enough to be less than two fingers.
And after these two ligaments draw out from the white patch, which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the length of a finger: and cut off the rest entirely following the roundness, and take out from it one
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles section from which blood runs, and heal: as we have narrated above.
Then apply wet wool under oil, and put it in a wound: and administer the ligament which we have mentioned
And when the white fat is cauterized, after its incision, fear lest there be bleeding.
Much of the time, this happens.
Discharge the ligament until it falls away by itself.
If, however, its case is delayed, then it is bound with warm water: and place over that which we mentioned before, until it falls away.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the treatment of wounds, until it heals
Of a swelling wound.
Chapter LXVI.
In such a swelling, do not allow anyone to attempt to cure it with fire
And first of all they say that it is like what we have narrated concerning the swelling which is with the Vite.
That is, as a bandage is bound up after its section below the surface: then dry in the middle, and care afterwards with that which opens it up, until the fat falls away: and care for the wound, as we have mentioned before, until it is healed
Of the disruption which happens in the groin.
Chapter LXVII
When a rupture happens in the groin, as we have mentioned, and the place protrudes, and does not descend to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it descends, it is little, and returns in every hour: truly if this prolongates with time, there is added a fissure in the fat, until the intestines descend into the fat
And this happens from the extension of the fat, which is in the groin, as we have mentioned
When the swelling has been extended, it is softened, and the place relaxes, and it emerges.
Its care is with cautery, as it was mentioned previously.
And when it is cured with iron, in this way: the patient lies on his back between your hands.
Then dry the place of the rupture after it has relaxed and emerged, by cutting across its width, according to the quantity of three fingers wide
Then tighten the swelling and those which are under the skin, until the white swelling is detected, which is under the skin following the latter.
Then grasp the radium and place it over the protruding part of the swelling, and press it deep into the belly
Then take two points of prominence on the extremity of the radium from the swelling, and connect them with a suture: then withdraw the extremity of the radium.
And do not cut the swelling at all, neither tear any skin, nor anything else, as I told you in the care of intestinal branches Then care for this wound.
When you have finished cutting the thread, soften this and restore the wound, until it is consolidated
Let the swelling subside, and do not add to the prominence of the rupture
And cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to the vein.
About the softening of the skin of testicles.
Chapter LXVIII.
The skin of testicles is softened in many people, because the meat which is between them is softened, and the appearance of this becomes spoiled.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asking for care of his health, to make the patient lie upon his back, and to cut through the entire skin which has been softened upon the natural skin. And then two lips are to be gathered together with sutures: and if desired, blood should be let out at first from the surplus of softened skin by means of three or four sutures, and then firmly suture
And then care for the remaining wounds until they are healed, and the thread is cast off.
(The text continues with a section on castration.)
Chapter LXIX
You know that castration is forbidden in our law: and for that reason I will not mention it in this book: and it is not necessary to mention it, except for two cases.
Of which one is that it is in the science of medicine when it is inquired about: and to know its treatment when it happens.
And the other case is that we often need castration for some animals, because of our desires concerning them, such as asses, hinds, and cats, and the like of animals
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or by cutting off.
Or by incision, and cutting through
In which way, however, which is done by attrition, the operation is this: that we make the animal sit in warm water, until the testicles are softened and relaxed, and hang down: and then cut off the testicles with your hand, until they are resolved and do not appear to the touch
In castratione autem per fissuram et sectionem, oportet ut teneas animal, et premas cutem testiculorum eius cum manu sinistra.
And this method of castration is better than that by attrition: for the attrition may perhaps leave something behind from the testicles, which the animal desires to have coitus.
Then care for the wound, until it has healed.
There are two methods for caring for the hermaphrodite.
Chapter 70.
A hermaphrodite is from two [things] according to two methods.
One of them is that it appears in it what follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in which there is a figure like a woman's vulva, having hair: and sometimes urine comes from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one kind, which is the woman's vulva which is on the belly like the testicles of a small man, protruding outwards: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles
And the care of the three kinds, of two from the males and one from the females, is: because it is necessary to cut away the added flesh until the impression of them has fled
Then care for the rest of the wounds
As for the second kind of hermaphroditism, from which urine comes from the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, neither is there any care for it at all
On the incision of the Tentiginis, and the protruding flesh in the female pelvis.
On the incision of the Tentiginis, and the protruding flesh in the female pelvis.
The Tentiginis may perhaps be added above what is natural, until it becomes swollen and unsightly: and sometimes it is also greatly enlarged in some women, until it extends as far as the groin.
It is necessary therefore to ligate the superflous Tentiginis, either with a ligature or with a single suture, and to make the incision: and do not reach the deepest root, especially as the blood supply is liable to be disturbed
Then take care of the wound itself, until it is healed
But the flesh which arises in the orifice of the womb, until it has been expelled: and perhaps it comes out to the exterior like the tail: and for this reason some call it caudal fistula.
It is necessary therefore to make an incision like that of the Tentiginis, and to take care of it, until it is healed
Of the care of the Alratica, which is the unperforated vulva of a woman.
Of the care of the Alratica, which is the unperforated vulva of a woman
The Alratica is, as it is the unperforated vulva of a woman, or as there is a small opening.
It is either natural or accidental.
It is accidental from some ailment which preceded it: and sometimes it is caused either by the addition of fleshy tissue, or by fine sand or hair, or by swelling: and it may be either in the depths of the womb, or in the flanks, or above or below: and it hinders coitus and conception, and delivery, and perhaps menstruation itself
Knowledge of that is obtained by the aspect of the obstetrician, if the opening appears close at hand.
If it is not apparent, then seek with your fingers or with an instrument.
If however the opening is from a thin layer of fat, and is close to the two lips: then grasp firmly, and break it through.</start_of_turn>
And it is like putting over two lips little nails.</start_of_turn>
Then place your two fingers of both hands together, and the woman should sit with her buttocks expanded over her thighs.</start_of_turn>
Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the thin layer of fat is broken through, and the opening is made.</start_of_turn
Then grasp the lanet and soak it in oil, and place it on the place: and the woman should continue to press daily, so that it does not solidify in another place.</start_of_turn>
If however the layer of fat is thick and tough: then it is necessary to cut it out with a spatula like a broad leaf of myrtle.</start_of_turn
If however the opening is from natural flesh: then suspend the bleeding with hooks, and cut through it: and let there be with you physicians who can stop the flow of blood without causing harm, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus gather with alum or wool.</start_of_turn
Then administer a large lead cannula, so that the wound does not close up too quickly, keep it for a few days: and administer dry lint, then care for the rest, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
And when there is birth in the matrix of other meats: it is necessary therefore that they be cut through in this manner: as there is no cancerous tumor in the matrix, let there be no resistance with iron of any kind.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red kind in the veins of women.
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red kind in the veins of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed swellings of the veins of the rectum or anus, from which much blood flows excessively.
When hemorrhoids exist, there are two things which must be known: the kind of hemorrhoids and the signs of the disease. We will speak of the treatment of these things later; now let us speak of what is necessary and what is not
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which exist in the belly and not in the anus are not treated with iron
Those which exist in the belly above which there is no sensation are those which are cured
It is necessary therefore that the woman be put into a cold house
Then stretch out Athehelil with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut away the roots from them.
Then powder over the wounds with one of the powders mentioned above without causing damage: thus, as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour.
Then put her in cold water afterwards
If the bleeding persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumach, and nutmeg, and gall, and similar things
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back
If blood is still bleeding with this, it is good: and if not, make the swelling adhere to the skin, and butter, without making an incision
Then take wool and soak it in grease of lard, or in grease of arnica, or in grease of poppy seeds, that is, lanolin, wine of pontic, and cause it to adhere to the wound.
When the wound is quiesced, then care for the place with unguents until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
However red it is like heads of hair, and has a rough appearance.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary therefore that you cut away that which appears from it, as I have said previously: and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the perforation which happens in the matrix.</start_of_turn
Chapter LXXIV.</start_of_turn
Many kinds of wounds happen in the matrix, such as cancer, and stone abscess, and ulcer, and foreign bodies, and swellings, that is, herpes, fistula, and hemorrhoids, and piles, and tumors, and abscesses.</start_of_turn
And I have already said all these diseases and their kinds, and their signs, and their treatments in general: it is necessary to say in this treatise the abscess which happens in the matrix, when it is from wounds which join health, and how it is opened with a knife.</start_of_turn
You must consider this.</start_of_turn>
When the pain of the wound in its beginning is acute with percussion, flame, and fever: and you see it turning red: if it falls outside of your senses, then do not attempt to pierce it: care for it so that the acute pain of the accident subsides, until the cause of the pain has disappeared.</start_of_turn
Then it is fitting that you make her sit upon a seat which beats two seats, and that she recline, or that you support her upon her back, and that she bring her feet to the lower part of her belly: and that her knees be spread wide, and that she place her arms under her knees, and that you bind each ligament conveniently to that.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side, and manage the instrument with which you open the opening of the womb.
Whose form comes into being in the things that are afterwards
And it is fitting when you are about to manage this instrument that you place the liver with the rib of the deep belly of the woman: so that there is not that which enters from the instrument more than the depth of the belly, and that it does not damage the lower part
But if the instrument is greater than the depth of the belly, then you must place sponges upon the covering of the deep belly: so that the entrance of the instrument is not introduced into the depth of the belly: and you must place a sponge, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and that you keep the instrument firm, and that you rotate the minister of the sponge until the depth of the belly is opened
When therefore the exit appears, and the hand touches it, and it is soft and gentle: then it is fitting that you cut it off at its head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the blood is evacuated, then it is fitting that you place in the wound a sponge soaked in rose-water: or a sponge of green, in which there is some astringency: and put on the sponge and draw out the section from the depth of the belly.
And place externally upon the matrix, and upon the navel a wet towel soaked in water, in which there are bad bubbles.
Then it cares for two days with ointment which agrees with it until it heals.
When it has bathed the matrix and the wound, it is to be plastered with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the wound has receded inwards of the matrix, then it is necessary to protect it from its cure with iron, and to care for it as we said in the direction of the wound.
The obstetrical doctrine, concerning how to care for the embryos of women, according to an unnatural form of birth.
Chapter LX.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know in the first place the figure of natural birth.
From the signs therefore it is known that when a woman is pressed by the waters below and wishes to smell the air, and alleviates above what is above her from the birth, and hastens the issue of the embryo: then you know that this birth is natural, and is the issue above its head, and the second with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel When therefore these signs are present, then it is necessary to compress the womb so that the embryo comes down quickly
Whoever is beyond this birth is unnatural, harmful
For when the fetus comes out above its feet, and the body of it goes before the head, and the feet and hands together, or one foot: or the head and the hand: or the belly: and perhaps turns upon its collar, and similar things from the harmful figures.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to be prudent, cautious in all these matters, and to beware of error and decomposition: for I shall show every figure and how the temperament is in each one, and it is signified by that, and it stands above itself.
When the fetus has gone beyond its head during its natural egress, and the head becomes engaged above the woman, and delivery becomes difficult, and the power of its courage is being crippled: then let the woman sit down, or let the women hold her up: and let the vapor of her breath be driven away with fumigation of rue and with oily substances.
Then the Obstetrician inserts his fingers between the toes of the patient, and finds the second one, and seizes it with his nail, until he has drawn out what is in it from the moisture: and he presses down the belly of the woman until the fetus comes down.
If it does not come down, then it is necessary to instill the woman with a cathartic of rue with oil.
Then command her to drink after the catharsis, that she may compress: and make her lie down with her chin resting on her chest for an hour.
The fetus will come out immediately.
If two hands of the fetus come out at once, it is necessary to reduce them gradually with ease
If it does not obey in the birth, then let the woman sit down and elevate her feet above the ground: then press down on her seat towards the earth: and the woman shall be held, so that she does not fall from the concussion
If, however, the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut down the sides and extract the fetus: and bind up the hand with cloth, and extract it with evenness: for it will come out itself
The embryo's exit is above its feet.
When the fetus exits above its feet, it is necessary to drive it upwards: then gradually bend it: afterwards it will be even.
Then take hold of one foot and gradually extend it
When they emerge up to the hips, then command it to bend down, so that it will be crushed, and make it exhale with force: it will come out, God willing
And if it does not come out as we have said, then gradually reduce the fetus until you have set it according to its natural shape.
For it will come out by itself when its time comes.
If it is delayed as regards all that we have said: then take from the thick mucus above, and salt, and gum dissolved: and pierce all through in the belly with a good blow: then draw out with the woman's palm and the lower part of her belly
Then make it sit in warm water, until the afterbirth follows naturally
When its lower parts are softened by the heat, then make for it a sieve of myrrh: and hold it in place.
When an hour has passed since you put on the sieve, then make it sit on a seat.
Then make it exhale: and stretch its bones and nose: and press the lower part of the belly gently
For the fetus will come out immediately.
The fetus's exit is above the knees and hands
When it comes out in this form, then gently bend in its hands little by little.
Then the woman lies upon her pillar, and her feet hang down towards the lower parts: and she herself lies upon the bed, and she covers her hands.
Then she slowly raises her abdomen upwards
Then she pulls out what is under her feet from the shoes, until it is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then grasp her feet and move them with a gentle movement.
Then slowly press what is above the navel upwards, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts
Then insert your hands and gently deliver the fetus: and command the woman to press, until the fetus comes out
The lateral delivery of the fetus hangs from the hands
Skill in the reduction of the hand is required
If, however, it is not possible to reduce the hand, then lift up the woman and make her walk
If she is unable to walk, then make her lie upon the bed: and compress her limbs with a gentle touch
Then administer the liniment that you have prepared from the slime-coats
If she gives birth, then make her sit on a seat
Then study the reduction of the hand, and equal the fetus according to the natural figure: and command the woman to breathe steadily, and tell her to press herself, until she comes out
The fetus comes out upon her pillar, with her hands spread out, and her face is towards the back of her mother
The obstetrician must hold the hand of the fetus firmly, then gradually withdraw it, and equalize it with ease.
When it is equal, then place above its belly what we have mentioned from wax and mucus
Then command it to move gradually.
When you have done this, then make it sit on its seat, and command it to incline to the right side.
Then command it to compress: and make it breathe with composure.
The fetus is prepared to exit through the side
When it has descended to the birth opening in this way with the second finger, then cut the second with your nail, until it is evacuated from the moisture
If it is suspended on the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus inwards, until you have placed it according to what is required: and command the woman to compress herself slightly: it will itself go out through the easy exit.
The birth of twins, or of many fetuses.
You know that twins are often born multiple: and sometimes three or four are born.
It is an extraordinary thing, and is rarely found.
Five or more is a thing beyond nature, and does not usually survive: and they are retained together, although multiplied, by one: and they are separated by the navel, distinguishing between the cord of each of them.
And sometimes they go out like a single fetus through a natural exit, easily: and they go out through the difficult exit, as we have narrated If anything is difficult with regard to parts, and they approach that which we mentioned from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: and let the midwife be gentle, and let her do what she does with ease and delay, and she shall adapt according to every figure as she prepares for it from the guiding principle for health.
When one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb: and I have seen that a woman has aborted seven, and another fifteen, all of whom were formed
As has been done by the measurement of a wise man
Therefore all this must be known in the science of Midwifery Perhaps indeed it will approach like that: oppose to it what is necessary
Of the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with that which I said in the discourse on medication, and it does not go out, and you must perform an operation with the hand, then you must consider carefully
If a woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the things from which she is afraid that she will lose the child: then it must be that the woman lies over the bed, over her back, and that her head is inclined downwards, and her legs are elevated: and the midwife must hold the child from two parts, or it is bound to the bed, so that it is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus
Then moisten the os matrice from oily humids with mucilage of alum, and chaff, and linseed seed. Then the Obstetrix shall smear his hand with oil and mucus: then he shall introduce it into the matrix with ease.
Then he seeks the place where the nails of the fetus are fixed, and the convenient place for it
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head: then fix the nails in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its chest, or under its ribs.
If, however, the descent is over its feet, then in the loin and the middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he grasp the nail with his right hand: and he shall place his thumb in that which is between the little finger of the left hand: and he shall introduce it with his hand with ease, and fix the nail in some one of those places which we mentioned, until it reaches the desired thing
Then the extension should be equal, and it should not be extended only in a straight line, but should be moved to all parts, so as to alleviate its exit: as it is done with a tooth at its extraction
And it is necessary at that place between these, so as to soften the extension.
That if it is retained from that place, then the Obstetrix must smear some fingers with oil, and introduce them from the side, so as to rotate with what is retained
If, however, a part of the fetus comes out, then exchange the nails to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus comes out
If therefore the hand goes out before the others, and it is not possible to reduce it, because of its swelling: then it is necessary that it be covered over the bandage.
If therefore the hand goes out before the others, incides on the skin or in the joint of the limb, or in the elbow: and thus it is necessary that you make in the other hand, and in two feet.
If the fetus's head is large, or if it has become coarticulated in the birth, or there is water in its head: then it is necessary that you introduce between the fingers the Spatumile spinosum, and find it with the head, and extract the water: or break it with the instrument which is called the Almisdac, whose form is like that of the other instruments in the following chapter.
Likewise do in case the fetus has a large head of natural birth, then it is necessary that you remove the afterbirth: or extract it with a hook, as we have said.
Then grasp the bones with forceps.
When the head comes out, and is grasped at the collar: then it is found, until the moisture that is in the chest is drained out
When it does not become complicated, nor does it yield to delivery: then cut off the head roughly, as much as is possible to you
When the lower belly is apostemated, or there is fluid in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until the moisture comes out from it
If however the fetus is on his feet: then the traction of his belly is easy, and the direction of it towards the maternal bones is smooth.
If however it is coarticulated at the belly, or the chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with the bandage which you have put over your hand: and find the belly, or the chest, until it is drained out
If, however, the other members are removed and the head remains: then the Obstetrix inserts his left hand into the head. If the mouth of the womb is open: then he inserts his hand deeply into the womb and grasps the head, and pulls it down to the opening of the womb. Then he inserts one or two fingers into it and pulls them out with it.</start_of_turn>
If the opening of the womb is closed, because of a thick clot that has occurred to it: then it is not necessary to work above it, indeed it is necessary to manage an effusion of humors, fat: and apply plasters. And sit in waters which soften and moisten.</start_of_turn>
If the fetus is above its side: then it is possible to equalize it: then it is administered what we said in the fetus above.</start_of_turn>
If it is not possible to do this, then it is done by force, and it is extracted.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that you do not allow anything to go out from the belly altogether.</start_of_turn>
When you have finished your operation, then administer what we said in the postpartum period which occur in the womb.</start_of_turn
If there is a flow of blood, then descend into the waters of styptics, and administer the remaining treatment.</start_of_turn
And I myself have seen a woman in whom there was a dead fetus in the womb: then it was impregnated over her with another, afterwards another fetus also died.</start_of_turn
This happened to her after a long time the clot in her belly burst open: and it became swollen, until it opened: and pus began to emit.</start_of_turn
I am summoned here for his care, and I have been his physician for a long time: and it is not consolidated (healed).
I place upon him above some strong sticking plaster: and it has come out of its place from the bone
Then some days passed by, and it came out of another place from the bone.
I am amazed that there is no bone within.
I think that because there were dead bones of a fetus there
I inquired about the wound, and I extracted many bones, the woman being in better dispositions: and it has healed in the long term, and there comes out little pus from the place.
And I did not stabilize this externally, except that there is knowledge of it, and assistance with this, which the artificial doctor administers with his hand in care.
On the forms of the necessary instruments for the extraction of a fetus.
Chapter 77.</start_of_turn>
Here below is the form of the Strictor, with which books are equal, to which are equal two rings in the two extremities of two logs.</start_of_turn>
Truly, this vertigo must be finer than the strictor: and that it may be either from ebony or from seasoned wood.</start_of_turn
And the width of every log is like two fingers: and the margin of each of them is like one finger, and the length of each of them is palm and a half: and in the middle of the two logs are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are firmly fixed in both, of whose length is half of the palm and a little less: and the width of each is like two fingers, or less.</start_of_turn
Two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone, so that it opens when you rotate two vertebrae.
Two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone, so that it opens when you rotate two vertebrae.
Two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone, so that it opens when you rotate two vertebrae.
Two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone, so that it opens when you rotate two vertebrae
Two additional things are introduced into the matrix bone, so that it opens when you rotate two vertebrae. The length of each additional thing is like a palm, and their width is like two fingers.
When you have thus opened the matrix with these two things, then make the woman sit on a stool, with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
Then introduce these two things together into the matrix: and you hold the lower extremity of the instrument between her thighs
Then open your hand with the instrument, like you do with pliers, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the opening of the matrix, until the Obstetrix does what he wants.
The other form of the Vertebra is called the Form of Impulsion which drives out the fetus.
The form of the Almside which contains the small head. The form of the Vncini having a single spine.
The form of the neighbor having spines two.
The shape of the forceps having teeth serrated, with which the head of the fetus is held in place.
The shape of the spatula having two extremities to clamp the head
The shape of two spatulas also the handles.
These instruments are all used, and the more numerous their kinds and well prepared they are in the artificer's hand, the more rapid is the operation and the higher among men because of their quantity
There must not be disdain for any of these instruments, because they are prepared for you
Unnecessary is their absence indeed.
Of the extraction of the second (tooth).
Head seventy-eighth.
When the second is retained at delivery, then it is necessary to extract the lower incisors in order to retain its breath.
Then make a scar with the forceps: and stretch your hand over the bone of it, and keep your breath.
If it comes out through this, that is good
If not: then take hold of the bone, and pierce at the apex of the socket: and put in it herbs that soften the bone, such as rue, rhubarb, chamomile, and aloe, and poppy seeds, and saffron, and cassia gum, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and soak them in water, and put them over fire
Then put an embolus of bulrush over the socket of the tooth, and the other extremity in the bone of the jaw: and keep it there until the vapor has gone up to the cavity of the jaw
Then make the incision as we have said.
It will then come out easily enough.
If, however, it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then command the Obstetrician to put his hand into the belly and press with the thumb on the navel or with the thick mucus of the elder days. Then introduce the hand into the belly and seek with it the Second [a vein].
When you have found it, then grasp it and gradually extend it outwards
If, however, it is attached deep in the belly, then introduce the hand as we have said until you find the Second. Then gradually withdraw it outwards along a straight line, so that the belly does not tear from the pulling force: indeed it is necessary to change the position with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the degree of tension as required
The wound will then obey and will be cured, and will go away from the adhesion.
If the belly is closed as we have said: treat the wound with incision and with ointment with herbs
If it does not come out with all that we have said: do not be rash in your handling of the wound.
Indeed it is necessary that it come out to the opening of the belly from the woman's waist.
Then close the wound with four drugs ointment
The wound itself will putrefy the wound after a few days, and will dissolve and go away.
Indeed when it putrefies, it will emit a bad odor from the belly and head, and will cause pain which will bring on weakness
It is necessary therefore that appropriate fumigationations be administered for that.
Some of the ancients are experts in fumigation with naphtha and dry figs.
The manner of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated at the retention of the second and the menstruation.
Let it be like an umbrella from the back: or from the heel: and put the wide end over the flame: and let the fumigation be placed over the berries: hold it until the fumigation is consumed: and do it again
Concerning the treatment of the unpierced beast.</start_of_turn>
Chapter LXXIX.</start_of_turn>
Many children are born with their nails unpierced, whom I have seen to have been oiled with subtle saffron.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that the midwife pierce that with her finger: and if not, pierce it with the sharp spatula: and beware of tears, lest they touch it.</start_of_turn
Then put upon it infused wool in wine and oil.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with the nails, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If indeed they are oiled, then put in the hole a lead cannula for many days, and remove it when the child wishes to scratch.</start_of_turn
And indeed the oiling of the nails is also from the consolidation of the wound, or from the swelling.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be dried, then care for it as we have said concerning the treatment and lead.</start_of_turn Concerning the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.</start_of_turn
Chapter 8.
The fistulas which arise in the lower part are Nodatio and Grossitudo which happen close to the bones of the limb: either in the space of one part or in several.
When the Nodatio is old, it opens, and white watery moisture or fine pus runs from it
And sometimes these Fistulas are penetrating
And these are the kinds of Fistulas when they are penetrating until they reach the bone and the marrow of the limb
And they are penetrating until they reach the hip joint and the tail bone node
From this it is known that a penetrating Fistula until it reaches the limb is also not penetrating, as when you put your finger into the limb: and you put in a needle fine in the Fistula from the air or from the iron, when there is no swelling.
When there is swelling in this, then put in the needle fine from lead or horsehair until you feel the needle, or put in the hair in your finger
If you do not feel the needle itself, neither does it go out from the discharge, nor swelling, nor worms as I said: then you know that it is not penetrating: so proceed to the treatment then
And when the Fistula is penetrating until it reaches the bone or the bladder: then the significance of it is the discharge of urine from it, and the prohibition of this until it is consolidated with the physicians.
If the wound extends up to the hip joint or the hip bone: then its sign is that the limb will hang down, if there is no twist in it up to the bone: and there will be pain in the surrounding parts, and pus will always come from it; and no remedy will be of any avail, neither will it be consolidated with ointment.
In all such penetrating wounds there is no cure: the cure for them is toil and perseverance, from the stupid doctors on whom they are formed.</start_of_turn> But in those which are neither penetrating nor old, healing is hoped for with rest: as I have already said, and as I have shown: that the sick man should lie between your hands over his back, and elevate his limbs up to above his hips, and that his thighs should be inclined towards his belly.</start_of_turn>
Then introduce lead or air, if there is a twist in the wound, until you know where the limb hangs.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the sick man feels about his limb: then it is necessary to insert your finger into the wound.</start_of_turn
If you feel in your finger that the limb is being pierced by itself, as well as between your finger and the flesh, or bone: then you know certainly that it is penetrating: there is no labour in this, for it is not its cure, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
They say that in some people the wound heals by itself, and from the medicine which is expected to help: that is, to apply a gentle cautery according to the size of the wound, as has been said before, and to insert the cautery into the wound until it hangs around the limb.</start_of_turn
Then repeat that twice or thrice until you know that all those meats added to the filter are now soft like the quills of a bird.
Then keep it covered with butter with cloths until the meats have gone out: then keep it with the things which generate the flesh and solidify it.
If thus it is healed, that is good.
And if not, it will not be healed by any other treatment.
If it comes out and does not reach the finger which is in the anus, which is between the thumb and the great toe of the foot, and there is some thick flesh of meat between the thumb and the great toe of the foot, or fat: then make an opening in the skin following the line of the fistula, and dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula until the end of the fistula is reached, and you dry with the thumb which is in the fistula until the end of the fistula is reached, and the thumb will be freed and fall out
Then soften those meats which are like the quills of a bird which have been added to the filter, so that nothing remains of them
If however blood boils up and mixes with you and the operation, so that you must cut away those meats: then it is better that you cauterize with fire or with acute medicine.
For the cauterization with fire brings together good habits, brings about the softening of those meats which have been added, and cuts off the blood, and dries up the humours.
Then keep it covered with butter with cloths, or with bruised figs, until pus comes out, and the softened meats go out in the pus
Then keep it with the things which solidify and consolidate, which generate flesh firmly: and these are the medicines which have styptic and drying properties.
When restoration is complete, then healing takes place: and not by repetition. When, however, a fistula persists right through to the depth of the rectum, and is prolonged by excessive body fat: then insert your finger into the rectum and inquire concerning it.
If, therefore, you feel tension and between you and the fistula there is something soft, or fleshly, and it is close to the penetration: then there is no operation in that place, except according to the measure of trust and hope.
For in that case one must employ three methods: or one cauterizes the fistula itself, as we have said: or one severs the vein, until you have achieved the subsidence of its swelling, so that it is possible for you to insert instruments, and to effect a cure from the next time
And do not proceed too much with the incision, lest you cut through the membrane containing the rectum, and cause an excessive discharge of feces without your wish Then care for that which we have said. Perhaps indeed it will heal: or you will lengthen the vein which we have mentioned, and cleanse it after you have dried it up to the rectum, as we have said, or with the finger, or with some acute instrument.
Then remove the fatty tissues which are in the incision, until the bone is found with careful probing.
Then attempt to restore the entire wound with the incision, and the upper orifice where it is consolidated: and the fistula will remain open in the inner part of the rectum, and will be less painful
And when you suture the fistula in this way: that is, when you insert your finger into the fistula: and it is on the side of the rectum around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the rectum: then grasp the edge of the perforation, which is like a needle with a handle, that is, prepared to pierce the skin, in this shape.
And introduce into the loop the twisted thread from the five threads, and surround it.
And introduce the needle with the thread into the pocket, until it follows the curvature of the latter.
If it is piercing through the inner margin of the anus close to the rectum, then withdraw the thread from that hole: thus you will introduce your finger into the rectum, and withdraw the end of the thread, and gather together both ends: and tighten both of them, and let go of that day, or two days: and the more the thread has gone into the flesh, tighten it well, until those pieces of flesh which are between the two ends of the thread have fallen away: then care for the wound, until it is healed, and restored to health.
It is not to be, that you make it pierce because of the wound, lest you should damage it.
Then do as we have said, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Form a spindle-shaped bandage which is found in the pocket, whose curvature is acute above and blunt below, so that it does not damage that which is not necessary, like urine.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from the incision of them: and care of the split wounds.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 81.</start_of_turn>
There are hemorrhoids in two ways.</start_of_turn
Or they are within the rectum, similar to the stones of dates or plums: or as if they were like the seeds of wheat.</start_of_turn
There are both small and large intestines: and blood always flows from the intestines. They are one and there are many.
They are outside the belly and at their extremities.
Indeed those which are outside the belly are mostly small intestines, from which flows clear urine or a little blood slowly: and they are of the colour of the body itself
And the treatment of the one inside the belly is that you must urge the sick person to cough: and he will vomit, until the anus is expelled, and you will see little of it.
Therefore hold him back with hooks: or grasp him with your finger.
Then cut through his bowels at their roots
If they do not remain in the belly with the ligatures, because of the moisture of their own and their softening: then cover them with coarse cloth, or with felt from a bag of wool, and draw them out with your fingers
Then cut through the bowels, and sprinkle upon them after cutting whatever fine powder is warm, so that the belly may remain in its place like a burn
Or cauterize them according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization
Then care for the bowels until they are healed.
And if the anus does not readily evacuate, then instill the sick person with a cathartic in the belly where there is a little pain, so that he may evacuate more quickly, when he feels the urge to do so
If however little things are outside the anus, then the matter is light and easy: and it is as if you were to grasp the intestines with your finger, or grasp them with a ligature, and cut through them
Then care for them until they are healed.
And whoever shuns incision with the iron, then it is necessary to manage the suture for him in this way.
Take the thread that has been loosed, and pass it into the point.
Then withdraw the needle upwards, and make it penetrate with the point at the root of it from the opposite side: and pass through two extremities of the thread, in the lower part of the needle, and let them be parallel: and tighten the knot firmly
Then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle.
Do this with all the needles, and let go of one: neither leave it in, lest it cause excess bleeding.
Then place above the wound a soaked sponge in rosewater, or vinegar, and place it over the wound: and command the patient to rest.
Then let go of it until it falls off
When they have fallen out, care for them with unguents, and leave the treatment until they are healed.
(End of excerpt
Many times these occur from the evacuation of stool, and the constriction of nature.
When they have occurred like this, and do not yield to medical treatment: then it is necessary to grasp with the point of the spatula, or with your finger, until they become soft, and remove from the skin the outer layer which hinders healing.
Then care for them until they consolidate as they should
If, however, they do not consolidate: then repeat the process of grasping with the greater reason than before, until they bleed profusely, and are then cleansed with care until they are healed
On the treatment of boils [al-mirmar] of the flesh, and not of the flesh: and the treatment of simple carbuncles [athelil] and ants [formicae].
Then care for it: and if you wish you may cauterize it according to what has been said in its chapter
But as for simple carbuncles there is one which is a small, rough, filtered, round elevation above the surface of the body.
And they often occur in the hands of children
And the treatment of it is to extend the carbuncle and cut it out: or to ligate it with a silken thread or with hair until it falls out
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said above with fire, or with acute medicine: and thus the inward boils are eradicated, and not the outward ones with the instrument which I have mentioned As for ants there is also a small, filtered elevation, large, above the surface of the body, which swells inwards to the depth of the wound: and when it comes into contact with cold, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it happens throughout the body: and most of them happen in the hands
And the treatment of it is to take a thorn from the claw of a bird, or a strong bristle: and put it over the ant, until the circle of the bristle encompasses the ant.
Then withdraw your hand with the cannula until you have severed what is around the ant: and place the needle in the depth of the flesh, and pull out the ant from its root. Or if you wish, do this with an air or iron cannula, according to this form.</start_of_turn>
Let the upper part of the cannula reach beyond the root of the surds which are drawn out, so that it may relieve the pressure on the thumb and its withdrawal.</start_of_turn>
Or if you wish, burn the ant according to what is stated concerning the cautery of the Athelil in the chapter on cautery.</start_of_turn
¶ As for the forms of the instruments which are administered to the Clisteria in ailments of the veins and arteries, and the solution of the belly, and the colic.</start_of_turn
Chapter 83.</start_of_turn>
When the Clistera is formed from silver, or gold, or from blown glass, or hammered out.</start_of_turn
And when they are made from these instruments, both small and large, according to those in which they are administered.</start_of_turn
Thus what is administered in the treatment of young children with soft lungs, is small: and for those whose souls are weak or painful, thus also the Clistera of these.</start_of_turn
Large Clistera.</start_of_turn
Small Clistera.</start_of_turn
The cannula, that is, the upper part which is bound to the uterus, is to be wide according to this manner: and there should be a distinction so that the uterus is bound like water, and the lower part which enters the belly should be solid, that is, not open, soft, yielding, drawing towards thinness: and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole.</start_of_turn
The breadth of the hole should be according to the length of the rays, and somewhat greater; and let there be a socket in which to place the medical instruments from the animal's body: or from parchment paper, which is according to the form of the asofrat of a date.
When it is thus placed in the socket, it is bound at the head of the clips between two signs of constriction strong
And then clip it together with it.
This is the form of the circle which is here depicted, and of the holes. The quality of the clipping with it is: that you may implement both the belly, or the bladder from the medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance: and take care that it is not too hot or too cold, or too cold.
Then the patient is laid down on his back, and lifts his legs towards his chest: and put under it a cushion, that is, the skin over which men lie, or a linen cloth.
Then bind the extremity of the clip with oil, or with alum, or with barley mucilage, or like these.
Then insert the instrument itself into the hole with ease.
Then take hold of the belly with two hands and squeeze it, until it evacuates all that is in the clip into the intestine Then extract the Clistere, and elevate the patient's limbs towards the side. If the physician considers him to be at the point of death, then let him support him as much as he can.
If he sleeps throughout the night, this is his last hope for recovery
If, however, you administer the clistere in the bowels of the solution of the belly, and he shows signs of imminent death: then repeat the clistere until he is cured.</start_of_turn>
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the year, then let the clistere be gentle and soft, from the clisters which are given to children.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the gentle clistere which is over that which is strict of the skin.</start_of_turn
Of the treatment of wounds of the head without fracture of the bone.</start_of_turn>
Head wound.</start_of_turn
I have already spoken in the discussion of the treatment of wounds which agrees with the book, and I will now speak of the treatment of these with the hand and with the help of physicians according to the complement.</start_of_turn
I say therefore, that wounds are varied according to the cause of the wound and according to the place where the wound falls.</start_of_turn
The wounds which are caused by many things are like the blows of a stone: or the cutting of a sword or knife: or the percussion with a lance or stick or arrow: and the like.</start_of_turn
Wounds which are caused by the place of the body are like a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or an arm: and the like of these from all parts of the body.</start_of_turn
I am now going to narrate the treatment of certain wounds, so that I can set forth the ratiocination and rule concerning the rest of the wounds.
I shall begin with simple head wounds: for the memory of compound wounds will arise at the beginning of the third chapter
I say therefore.
When a simple wound occurs in the head, and there is no fracture of the bone: then consider, if it is from a stone or something similar, and if only the skin is split: then it is a large wound, and the time of healing is long for a wound of such severity: therefore do this: make an immediate cephalic bleed (phlebotomy): do not delay this; and extract from him from the blood according to the quantity of his virtue: if there is nothing to prevent it, especially if there is little blood flowing from the wound
And let the phlebotomy be from the side opposite the wound
And let the patient be careful from repletion, from wine, and from coarse food
If anything hinders the reduction (of the wound), then let him abstain from food, and not approach meat or drink wine
And apply upon the wound if it happens that there is a blood clot, a soft compress of saffron only, or with wine in which there is stypticity.
And if you are secure from the blood clot, then place over the wound, if there is still some blood in it, and it has not become black, the powder which I shall tell you of later: and if it has become black, then place over it some unguent, until it is healed
And if the wound is large, or is from a wound with a knife, or similar: and the edges do not adhere by themselves with little stitches, then unite them with sutures, according to what I shall narrate concerning the sutures of the internal wounds
If, however, a vein has been detected by the bone, and hangs loose, and its retention is not possible, except in a small suspending apparatus: then cut it off.
Care for the vein with the physicians, and restore it in the place of the skin, and command the patient to eat nourishing foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, until the pulse returns: and let them be similar.
If you find in the flesh putrefaction, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the putrefied part throughout, and throw it away: then care for the wound
If, however, in his wounds there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not severed by the physicians, then inquire about the artery.
If, therefore, you find it untied, cut it off with Spatumili, or ligate it.</start_of_turn>
If necessity compels you when it does not conform to what we have said, then cauterize it, until the blood is severed.</start_of_turn>
The manner of making powder of the flesh.</start_of_turn>
Olive oil one part, dragon's blood two parts, and unslaked lime three parts: mix them all together thoroughly, and grind them: and make from this a paste, and bind it with good constriction, until it adheres well to itself, and coagulates with the blood.</start_of_turn
Then bind it up with sponges, and send it away, and do not wash it until it remains, so that it does not putrefy.</start_of_turn
Until it is healed, it is not eradicated by medicine from that.
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that.
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that.
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
Until it is healed, medicine does not eradicate it from that
If the ulcer is deep, or it breaks into that sinus in its lower part, where pus is collected, then perforate it in a depressed place in that.
If an artery is cut in the ulcer, and its blood flow is consequent: then separate it, or dry it up, and ligate it: or cauterize it, if need be for that.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the cartilage of the gullet is broken in its entirety, and the fragments are close together: then gather the edges of the skin with a suture over the neck of the gullet, and do not touch the gullet, but rather equalize it, and reduce it to its natural shape.</start_of_turn>
Then bind it firmly with a dressing, and discharge it in a few days.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it with poultices which have astringency and drying qualities, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the ulcer has made an imprint in the bone, then inquire about it: then if there are fragments of bone in that, extract them all, or whatever can be extracted from it: and what cannot be prepared, discharge it, until the ulcer has healed, and the opening has closed.</start_of_turn
If the ulcer has been scraped, then powder over it the powder which I mentioned before.</start_of_turn
If, however, bone is seen in the ulcer, and a fistula has formed: then care for it as is mentioned in its chapter.</start_of_turn
Chapter 86.</start_of_turn>
If any blood proceeds from a wound when the patient desires to draw it out, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and is accompanied by its own blood: then you do not cauterize it in the first hour, neither do you ligate it, lest the blood be retained in its depth, and thereby cause the patient's death: but apply in it a strong dressing, and evacuate it in two days.
If indeed no dressing is present in the wound: then apply in the mouth of the wound a thick wool cushion, that it may absorb what proceeds from it from the humilities: and cause the patient to sleep over the wound, that the blood which collects in it may be cured
If indeed more than three days or more have passed from the wound and the patient has neither spasm nor bad tremor of the cord, neither bad congestion in the desire to urinate, and maintains all the other conditions: then you know that the wound is healed.
Treat it therefore with care and with medicines, and with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing is excused, and it always opens: then you know that a fistula has been made.
Treat it therefore from its head to its tail
And if the wound is from a cut of a sword or knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it as if it were large: or with powder if it is small
But if it has made an imprint in the bone, and has burst from it: then inquire about the wound, and proceed to extract the fragment, if they are separated.
But if they are not separated: then leave them alone, until the wound putrefies, so that the extraction of them may be easier.
The judgment concerning the remaining wounds on the other limbs is that of the physician.
Concerning the wounds of the belly, the intestines, and their exits
Chapter 87
The disruption that occurs within the belly is great, medium, or small.
From the great comes the evacuation of the intestines, or a number of intestines
Therefore the introduction of the bowels, and their suture, is more difficult and demanding
And the small disruption is also difficult in another way
Therefore, it follows that the reduction of these is more difficult if you do not immediately perform the introduction into its place: for it swells, opens, and becomes thickened: which makes its entrance difficult.
For this reason, the medium disruption is better: because with it the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, as it is with the small or great disruptions
You know that the suture of the bowels is done in four ways.
Two sutures are common in the suture of the belly, and in the suture of the rest of the limbs: and two other sutures are done properly with the rest of the wounds
However, there are other proper methods when suturing the belly: and I shall narrate them all with their exposition and their declaration. I say, because when a wound is small, and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it is difficult to reduce it: then this is due to one of the two methods.
Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: or because there is inflation in the intestine due to the cold of the air.
When it is thus, then it is necessary to heat it, so that you may immerse the sponge or wet bag in tepid water alone.
Or boil it in water with barley, pepper, and spicery, and embrace the intestines with these, until the swelling subsides.
When it has made the liquid in which there is stickiness: it is better than plain water in resolving the swelling
When the swelling has been resolved, then moisten the intestines with the water in which it has been boiled, or with vinegar.
For in this way it will soothe its entrance with a small thing.
If however it escapes after this treatment, then you will find it in slight disruption, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut off
The first treatment is better when it is prepared, than when it is forced, and does not cause a pressing of the cutting instrument beyond what is necessary and the defect of the instrument itself
Let one part be acute and the other not acute, and the outer part should not be like that of Spatumilis, but rather be somewhat blunt: and this is like a chick's foot, as regards the liquid
When the vessel has been strengthened and the intestine has been introduced, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its own place, if possible over that: for this is better
When the rupture is wide at the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary to make the sick man lie on his back, and place his knees higher than his head.
And if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place his head and chest higher than his feet
If there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the belly, then set your intention and consideration on this, that the part which has the wound be above the other part.
And thus it is necessary, that you should look at these things in great wounds and in medium wounds
In small wounds, set it according to what is prepared for you
Then make it present between your hands, your pious assistant who will hold the whole disruption of the hand: and gather its lips.
Then take from it whatever follows the suture something after something: and this is the method of common suture of one
And it is, that you take the needle, or the number of needles according to the quantity of the wound
Then send from the extremity of the disruption the quantity of the little finger, that is, the physician: and fix the needle once having passed it into the flesh in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of fat which is under the skin, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have gathered together the two extremities of the skin, and the two extremities of fat: and there are four orders.
Then string with a double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from two parts together, until two lips of the wound are gathered together with a decent aggregation.
Then send away the length of the little finger also, and fix in the flesh another needle: afterwards draw back the seam with the thread, as you did with the first needle.
Do not cease doing this until you have completed the constriction of the whole wound
And the needles are medium between the length and the thickness: because the fine needles slip easily through the flesh: and the thick ones are difficult to enter the skin: because of this it is necessary that they be medium in thickness, and long.<start-of-turn>
Neither should the needle be left protruding at two distant points of the skin near each other: for thereby the flesh will be more likely to split or tear before consolidation has taken place, and will even remain elongated even after stitching, thereby hindering consolidation.
Neither should the needle be left protruding at two distant points of the skin near each other: for thereby the flesh will be more likely to split or tear before consolidation has taken place, and will even remain elongated even after stitching, thereby hindering consolidation.
And thus is the kind of suture which is more suitable for small wounds.
For in stitching, one or two needles, or somewhat more, will suffice.
The second common kind of suture is that in which the four extremities are held together by two stitches: two of the skin and two of the fat with the needle in which the thread is wound being of equal thickness and size
And when you have penetrated with the needle through the four extremities, reduce the needle from the part from which you began, so that the wound may be held by the remaining thread: as is the case with the stitching of cloth by which cloth is bound, and put between every suture as much of the thickness of a little finger
This kind of suture is well known to men
And when I performed this suture on a wound which had been caused by a knife in its belly, which was ruptured through and through from the palm of the hand, and had burst out from the intestines almost two palms from the middle of the intestine, and there was a rupture in the middle of the belly
I reduced the wound accordingly after I had set the intestines outside the wound for twenty-four hours
The limb has been consolidated for about fifteen days and has healed: I have treated it and it is now cured. It has remained sound ever since, and has returned to its normal condition.
The physicians declared that it would not recover.</start_of_turn>
And miraculously, I cured it without medication.</start_of_turn>
Since I was in a place where unguent was not to be found, and there was no doctor there.</start_of_turn>
I put on the limb a warm compress twice a day, and I bathed it diligently with sweet water until it healed.</start_of_turn>
I used two kinds of stitches as described in the sermon.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to start with a fine suture: and you insert the point from the outside to the inside of the part.</start_of_turn
When the needle has penetrated the skin, and has passed through the tough part of the wound according to the length and breadth of the entire body: withdraw the point which you inserted at the beginning in the side where you introduced the needle, and make the needle pass through from the inside to the outside of the opposite side at the other end.</start_of_turn
When you have made the needle pass through, then make it pass again in the same place from the outside to the inside: and withdraw the point which is in this side, and make the needle pass through the opposite side from the inside to the outside: and make the needle pass through with the same direction as you made it penetrate in the point which is in the part, until it penetrates the whole thing.</start_of_turn
And then start from this side also, and join it with the opposite side, and withdraw the needle from the skin where it penetrated.</start_of_turn
Then reduce the skin to that same area, and scrape off the outer extremity which is on the other side, along with the inner one: and extract from the skin that which is from its part, and make it one with the other, and the other with the first: and make the latter one like the former, until the outer surface is complete according to that example.
The sum of all these sutures is that of the skin-stitches which are to be made for the skin: so that the scraped area may be made one with the remainder of the skin by means of the sutures which are to be made from the outer part of the extremity to the inner part, and from the inner part to the outer part, until the surface is complete.
The second kind of proper suture which Gale has mentioned.
This is how it is said that they should be made like the things which some physicians do, in order that every part may be gathered according to its kind: and that you should scrape off one extremity against the other, and the inner against the outer.
And this is done according to what I have told you.
The liver should be placed against the inner side of the outer extremity, and the skin should be pierced through from the outside inwards in that place: and extract the two extremities.
Then draw out the liver, and make the skin penetrate from the outside inwards through two extremities of the scraped area, namely both of them.
Then draw out both of them, and also make them penetrate from the inside outwards through the two outer extremities which are on the opposite side
This is the best way of stitching, and is the suture which requires the greatest memory
This is indeed what Galen has said.
And some have said.
The suture within is corrected with two squares.
When the suture is within, two squares are added. That is, you pass through the tissue with one thread: and begin with the needle that is towards you, and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side, following the direction of the suture which joins the tissues equally
And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the belly: then the suture of that is more difficult than the rest of the belly
The judgment of the ulcer of the wound is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
When you follow the wound along with its blood, before it changes itself: and you reduce the intestine, and bring it close, and fix it: then you put on powdered ochre over the wound
When the air has already changed the wound: then you put on over it some unguents which are present, until they make pus: and the threads fall out, and they are consolidated, and it is healed
And then care for it as for the healing of the rest of the wounds, until it is healed
But if there are no remedies at hand, then you put on over it immediately, from which point it begins to discharge pus, slightly fat: and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed
If however you fear that the wound communicates with the principal parts of the body in the lesion: then it is necessary that you immerse fine wool yarn in lukewarm water, or in rose water: and put it around the parts which are between the groin and the armpits
If he feels pain, or swelling, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens to him), then he must anoint himself with vinegar of wine, black and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already penetrated the intestine, and an opening has been made through to its cavity.
And know this, that which is from the great intestine is easier to heal: and that which is from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
But the intestine which is called the jejunum, does not endure healing from the wound that has happened to it throughout: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the greatness of their number, and because of the subtility of its body, and for its nearness to its own nature of nerves.
If, however, that which proceeds from the wound is pus, and you follow it, then reduce it according to your reduction which you make of the intestines equally.
If, however, it has passed beyond that space, and has become black or dark: then it is necessary to string it with thread above the place which has become defiled, in order that the blood does not flow out from it.
For in the pus there are veins and arteries.
Then cut through that which is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging threads from the lower part of the wound outside of it: in order to support over that which attracts it, and to extract it from the case of the pus, and to emit the pus of the wound.
Remember the wound that happened in the Intestine
When disruption happens in the Intestine, and it is small: then it is possible, in some people, that it may be healed: because I saw that which was wounded in the middle of the stomach by the blow of a lance, and the wound was ancient: and a fistula was made, and it went out from it egestion, and swelling.
I remain in attendance until he is cured, for I am not relieved until his health has recovered completely: neither do I cease until he is fully healed and his position is firm.
Once I have settled in his place, I fear over the patient, lest something bad should happen to him: and nothing bad has happened to him from that which might have happened to him.
I remain in better positions, eating and drinking, trusting and having hope, and I bathed him and exercised him in his diet.
And some of the experimenters say, when there is a wound in the intestines and it is slight: then it must be bound in this way.
And it is like taking large ants.
Then join together two lips of the wound, and put an ant on one of those which have an open jaw above two lips of the wound
When the head is over them, and it binds its jaw, cuts off its head, and it will adhere to it, and will not break
Then put another ant close to the first, and do not cease doing this until the wound is complete
Then reduce it, and its wound.
These heads remain annexed to the intestines until the intestines are fed and healed, and do not cause pain to the patient And it is possible to bind the intestines even with a fine thread: which has been taken from the intestines of an animal, and is annexed to it when it is introduced into the belly
And take the extremity of this thread from the intestines, and remove a great deal of it.
Then the ligament at its extremity is wrapped with a fine thread.
Then introduce the thread into the knot, and pass it through with the gut
Then tighten the knot. And thus is the manner of stitching with needles and gut, except for some cases of great confidence and hope.
You know that a large, wide vessel, especially if it is within a graceful gut: in such a case there is no skill except meticulous suture, and no healing is possible
With regard to care of wounds and fistula.
Chapter 88.</start_of_turn>
You know that every wound, or fistula when it has become old and hardened, and has become a ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus constantly, and does not heal: in such a case it is called universally in every part of the body a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.</start_of_turn>
And a fistula is indeed according to truth a filtered node, hard, white: which does not cause pain, which has the consistency of a feather of a bird: and for this reason they call some of them Risati, that is, feathers.</start_of_turn
And sometimes in certain hours it is wet, which emits pus.</start_of_turn
And sometimes the wetness may split in certain hours.</start_of_turn
And sometimes there is much of this wetness, and little: and it is large, and is soft.</start_of_turn
And as I have said previously in the discourse, when I said that every ulcer which does not heal, and which is not born in this flesh, is not because of one cause.</start_of_turn
When one is in a state of scarcity of blood in the body: or because of the malice of the blood itself: or because of the hardness of the flesh between the labia, which hinders the birth of flesh: or because of the abundance of pus and phlegm: or because the ulcer in itself is putrid, and the matter which discharges from it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is unsuitable for its treatment: or because corruption is falling in the region, and is a kind of pestilence: or by reason of property in the region, as for example in Caesaraugusta, in which there is great difficulty of digestion for ailment, and the healing of wounds is delayed by nature: or because in it is one bone, or a number of bones.
I have also mentioned all these causes and signs, and the treatments for them with physicians. It is necessary that you write here the treatment for fistula and swelling, which is done by one operation with the hand.
You know therefore that fistula can occur in all the members of the body.
There are fistulas which extend to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or fat: or to the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the bones: or to some of the vertebrae or to some of the compound joints: such as the hand, and the foot. And there are those which arise from proximity to the main limb and its parts of the same kind
For this reason, the fistulas are of this kind because of the difficulty of healing the ailment, and do not receive treatment, and are accompanied by labor and ignorance
If, however, any fistula does not reach this depth, and you hope and trust in the treatment of it, and wish to reach cognition of it, then attempt to drain it from the air, or from iron, if the fistula follows a straight course, and inquire about it with her/him.
If, however, there is a twist in the fistula, then you should investigate it with a fine lead weight.
Since lead is flexible with its body, it will curve around the twist
If there are many openings in the fistula, it is not possible to perform an investigation with a weight on a hook.</start_of_turn>
Explore the cavity from each opening through its own opening.</start_of_turn>
For moisture which you apply to explore will spread out over other openings and will run out of the cavity.</start_of_turn
Then inquire carefully in what way is it possible: whether it is a bone or a nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short: or whether it is a single fistula with many openings, and that lies throughout the whole, with the sum of your strength: with your questioning of the patient, and the finding of pain in compression with your hand over the place, and similar signs and symptoms accompanying the accident.</start_of_turn>
When you have stood in all these positions truly, then you can proceed to the treatment with confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is clearly adjacent or in a remote place from the junction, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of those places which I mentioned to you: then dry the fistula according to what has been said above, and remove what is in it from filtration, and corrupt tissues, which arise in its orifice from the flesh, or pus, and similar things: and treat it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If, however, the fistula is of great depth and is according to the rule: then it is necessary to dissect it as deeply as possible.</start_of_turn
Then expose the whole of its corrupt tissues.</start_of_turn
Then administer the ligature tightly in acute cases: and introduce it until you have grasped the fistula with the iron: do this repeatedly until the acute medicine has eaten away all that remains in the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with the sutures which generate healthy flesh, until it is healed
If, however, it does not heal by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
If, however, the cause of the fistula is bone, and you suspect this to be the case: then inquire about it, and dry it as I have said: if this does not suffice, or if there is any other limb, vein, or main artery which is opposed to this, as we have mentioned.
If, however, it is detected that there is bone in it, and there is some corruption and blackness: then burn it until the corruption of it is completely consumed
Then care for it with that which nourishes it, until it is healed.
That if it does not heal, and pus comes out as before: then you know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of the corruption
Observe it carefully afterwards, and make reason for it, and treat it with the utmost care and skill
Then restore it
If, however, it heals, that is good: and if not, you know that the corruption is in a profound depth of the body, which you were not able to overcome
It is not in this way that you will overcome it, except by resorting to the natural order of things.
If the small bone is corrupted, and you are able to do so, draw it out with fine forceps which are suitable for this purpose.
If many bones are present, then take care to make an attraction of them all, and do not send anything away from the bones with your force.
If, however, there is any moisture in the incision, and there is no fear of error, then cut through the moisture and the flesh there, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to extract the bones from their place at this hour, then put upon them something which will cause them to putrefy: and send them away, until they putrefy, that is, until the bones are freed from the flesh and moisture surrounding them
And keep the bandage so that it does not consolidate.
And let the incision be firm as you made it in your operation
And if you put upon it, if necessary, a bandage soaked in sulfur trioxide with oil: or a bandage soaked in Egyptian unguent, or any other unguents of your desire.
For when the moisture putrefies, and separates from the bones, it alleviates the loosening of the bones, and their attraction
If there is a large single bone, such as a thigh bone or a hip bone, and the like of them, which is corrupted, it is a great part: then take away that part last, until that black spot and corruption is removed from it.
Then restore the bandage.
If, however, that which is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already proceeded to the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to cut through it and open it right up to the place where the corruption remains: then cure it, until it is consolidated And I tell you this, which happened to me in my thigh: that you may take this as an example and aid in your operation.
A youth of about thirty years of age suffered pain in his leg, because something had become displaced from above downwards within the body, that is, from the interior, until it reached the leg, and there was great swelling: and there was no external cause of the matter.
The swelling had continued for a long time, with the error of the physicians, until the swelling was opened up, and many materials came out together with it
And after this the healing was delayed, until the leg was bandaged, and many holes were made in it: from which pus and moisture of the body issued out
The matter was treated by many physicians for two years, and there was no skill in their art to be found in this matter, until I was called, and I applied a remedy to the leg, and the matters which were running out of the holes greatly decreased: even all the swelling of the body disappeared, and its colour became pale yellow.
There was an introduction of the hand into one of the holes, and the hand went up to the bone.
And then I examined all the holes, and I found that they were all connected with each other throughout the whole leg I then treated it, and I applied a dressing over one of the holes, until I discovered a piece of bone: and I found that it was corrupted: for it was rotten, discoloured, and putrified, and perforated, until it had penetrated right up to the marrow
I saw that which had been detected was prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I concluded that there was no soundness in the bone except for that corruption which I had cut off and bound up
And I extirpated it.
Then I order restoration of the wound with the consolidated physicians in a spacious area.
It is not consolidated.
I attempted to restore it.
It is not restored
Then I restored it with the physicians, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and no further operation was necessary for this operation, and the section of the same, except for the disposition of the weakness of the patient, and his little tolerance, and my fear of death for him: because it was happening to him in every hour from the excessive evacuation of syncope.
He was healed completely: and was born in the place of the hard bone, and a good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he convalesced in his own dispositions: and did not make him contradict in walking at all
But if the prominent bone in the body is fractured: then it is necessary to bind it up according to this method: that you take the ligament, and bind the bone at the extremity of the prominent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament from a thick thread beside the first ligament.</start_of_turn> Then bind the ligament over the flesh, which is on the bone: and extend the extremity of it, so that you draw the flesh downwards: and you detect the flesh over the place where you wish to cut, so that it does not injure the flesh.</start_of_turn>
Place wood or a board under the lower bone in the center: for when you do this, it will not hinder that it will secrete the corrupted flesh.
The wound should be closed above the corrupted area without tension, so that there is no deformation of the bone's corruption: and it must not be visible in its appearance to the sense, and must incite to closure of its wound in another way. If the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, continue the part of it with the part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in the part itself: then remove the flesh from all parts of it whole
Then place wood under it
Then secure the wound from the first part where the corruption is, until the closure is completed from the other side: and let the wound be as far from the corruption as possible, as we said before.
If the corruption is at the junction, cut through the corrupted junction, and secure the bone where the closure is completed on the other side.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two junctions, then there is no wisdom in it except to burn it.
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot: then the matter is difficult to handle
It is true that you must inquire about the nature of the corruption.
And burn it, and cleanse it as you can in any way possible, and with any ingenuity: when it does not make opposition to the Vein or Nerve
You know that the forceps and scissors for cutting this bone are many, according to the position of the bones, and their preparation, and the size of them, and their fineness, and the magnitude, and the number of them, and their rarity
Wherever necessary, one must prepare an instrument suitable for each kind of operation.
Know that these operations are significant to you above the kind of instrument that you do not know well.</start_of_turn>
And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of healing: for then you will find for yourself what is suitable for all diseases from the instruments.</start_of_turn>
Form of the Saw.</start_of_turn>
Form of the other Saw.</start_of_turn
Form of the third Saw.</start_of_turn>
Form of the fourth Saw.</start_of_turn
This form of Saw is cut in the middle.</start_of_turn Let its arc be superior, its point from the iron: and its handle from the box, and let it be pyramidally cut in the middle.</start_of_turn
Form of the Scissors for joining.</start_of_turn
Let the head of this Scissors be according to the form of the head of the star-shaped key: and its points according to the form of the holes of the elish.</start_of_turn
And it does not fit, except when it is scraped with that head of the joining, when the bone is broken, or the limb is wide, and great.</start_of_turn
Form of the greater Scissors.</start_of_turn
Form of the medium Scissors.</start_of_turn
Form of Rasassa lati.
Form of Rasassa in which there is a cavity
Form of Rasassa of the latter kind of softer substance
Form of Rasassa of the latter kind of curved extremities
Form of Rasassa small, soft of tension.
Form of Rasassa with which bones are joined together
Form also of Rasassa large
This is like Radio, and the extremity is as a Saw: it appears in many places because of the reason of bones
Form of Rasassa which agrees with the reason of that which is perforated by bones.
Its extremity is triangular, and the extremity of it is acute
It is from India
And it is like this concerning all that we have said of Rasassa, and Incisor, and Saw
Concerning the incision of extremities, and the suture of bones.
Chapter LXXXIX.
Extremities become putrefied, either by an external cause, or an internal one
When therefore you have treated the disease with medical care, and the cure has not been effected: and when the disease has progressed to such an extent that it does not yield to treatment: then it is necessary to cut off that limb up to the point where the disease has ceased to progress, so that the patient does not succumb to the disease, or from the consequence of the defect of the limb.
And the sign of that is that the limb is blackened, until it is burnt: that fire has consumed it, or it has become putrid after it has become black: until that putrefaction has spread throughout the body
Properly therefore with the incision itself, and in like manner if the cause of the corruption is percussion of some venomous creatures: such as the scorpion of the sea, and spiders, and fleas, and their kin.
If therefore corruption exists, or percussion at the extremity of the digit, then incise the digit, and not leave space for the corruption, so that it may reach to the remainder of the hand.
And in like manner if it happens in the palm of the hand, then incise from the root of the bone, and not leave space for the corruption, until it has reached the bone of the forearm
And if it comes to the bone, then incise the arm at the elbow in its joint If however the corruption passes around the elbow: then in that is the mark of the infirmity.
And to administer besides this from the cure, is the quantity of ointment.
And in like manner do concerning the foot, when the corruption comes to the digit, then incise it at one of the nodes: and if it comes to the heel, then incise the whole foot
If however it reaches the knee, then incise the thigh at the knee joint
What if the corruption has already passed above the knee? Then it is not in that it is impotent, except for dismissal, and leaving the infirmity to die.
And the manner of incising the limb, or preserving it, is that you tie the ligaments below, which you wish to cut: and tie the ligament above in the place of the cut
And extend one minister of the ligament downwards: and extend the other minister of the ligament upwards
And you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is detached
Then it happens, or it returns.
Then it happens, or it returns. It is necessary to draw from all parts of the wound line, and not to touch the healthy area: and the wound will be added to the infirmity, and the swelling will become cold.
If blood flows inwards during the operation, then cauterize the place quickly: or put over it some powder which will absorb the blood.
Then return to your medicine until it is complete.
Then bind up the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals
And I tell you what happened in the foot, behold that this is what happens which I tell you.
Because it happened in his foot black, with a burning which assimilates with the heat of the fire: and the corruption happened first in his finger, until the whole foot was affected
He therefore escaped from his misfortune, after he had cut off the corruption from the limb with his knife, because of the pain, and the burning: and it happened at the joint, and he was healed
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption happened in the thumb of his hand. He came to me, and I attempted to recover the superfluousness with what I found on the hand from the doctors after the restoration of his body: and the superfluousness was not recovered, and it began to spread to another finger: until the corruption reached the hand itself
He called me to cut off his hand: and I did not do it, hoping for the return of the superfluousness: and I was also afraid of the death of his hand at the incision
Since the man was very strong over the case.
After he had departed from me in despair, he returned to his land: and he came to me because he was anxious, and he grasped my hand completely: and he was healed.
And do not believe this story, except that it be of service concerning this which has fallen from the kind of this disease: and that it be indicative of what is signified, and according to how it is done.
Of the care of limbs, and the quality of blistering with the physicians.
Chapter 90.
When swelling occurs in some limb with pain, and the extent of the swelling is prolonged until collection of pus has taken place: then it is broken open, or pierced, and the pus which is in it is ejected, and the place which was filled with pus is left like a cavity: and the skin which is above it is like a thin veil which has been stripped off: and it does not reach its ultimate corruption, neither does it affect the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it is called a sinus and not a fistula, although if its extent is prolonged, until corruption affects some parts of the limb, then it is called a fistula or swelling
And its care is that you cut through the whole skin as if you were rolling it: and especially when it is thin, and made like a veil: and trust that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and that there is no ultimate consequence from this: and if there is thickness in the skin from the flesh, then cure it with blistering: and consider it as a sinus
Then if it is large, and the pus which comes out of it is foetid in odour: then blister it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and alum, in equal parts, gathered up in fat: and boil them over a fire, until the medicine boils: and apply it to the swelling with honey
Then take from that which you need: dissolve it with water and honey, and instill it with that Sinum: and clamp its orifice, and send the medicine into it for two hours.
Then draw it out with expression: do this for several days until the sinus is healed, and the odor is gone.
And when it is instilled with aqua cineris, when it is not present this medicine: then take cineres of wood or cineres of ilex leaves: and sprinkle them on water.
Then close the wound, and instill it with that, until you are confident that the sinus has been closed
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine, neither aqua cineris, then instill it with water and honey, to which something of pounded ginger has been added
Or instill it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to heal and soften, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is excess of styptic and drying matter in the wine
When you have done this often, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has passed away: then instill it with that which makes new flesh in it
And it is good to take from dyafinicon ointment: and dissolve it with rose water and wine vinegar: or instill it with some medicine, and oil of other things whose properties are written in the treatise on unguents.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow, in which the cannula for instillation will not pass: then enlarge it with a small piece of iron: or place in the opening a pledget of lint soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged
Likewise, if the opening is large, then gather its lips together with sutures: and discharge from it the quantity which enters the abscess without addition.
Likewise, if pus runs from the opening, it is raised upwards: then dry it in the lower place which is in it, so that it runs from it downwards: for pus, when congealed in depth, hinders the generation of flesh in it
For if it is not possible to dry the sinus downwards, then try to prepare the limb by preparing it in such a way that it runs from it the pus with ease as is prepared for you.
Try that nothing of the pus remains in it: and take solidifying medicines which are placed over the mark, suitable for that which you wish.
And extend the ease over the edge of the skin.
And let the skin be of such quantity as to make communication of the whole sinus.
Then cut with scissors directly at the opening of the sinus, widening the opening of the sinus more
Then stretch out from the strings of intestines over the other skin, according to the quantity of the hole: and put it over itself in a long position from the opening of the sinus, so as to alleviate the escape of pus from it: and do not tighten the skin too much, except after a few days once it has healed somewhat.
He who is over the opening of the sinus must move in every hour, so that it may go out what is gathered in it from the pus: and you shall know whether it runs out much or little: or digested or undigested.
And when you have done this again, consider the place of the sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain there, or whether there is no pain there, or whether there is swelling there, or whether there is no swelling there.
When the medication has been administered as directed, and you see that the material issuing from the Sinus opening has ceased, then you know that the Sinus is adhered, or is close to adhesion: then you must remove it by hand, or on the third day. And when you have removed the clot, then exchange the bandage and renew the dressing. If, however, it continues to issue from the Sinus after a long space of time with a slight flow, then you must not despair of adhesion, for healing approaches, because there are people who are slow to form flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrariwise to this.
If, however, it continues to issue from the Sinus after many days with undigested pus, then you know that the Sinus is not adhered
If, therefore, the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and its condition persists: then add in the treatment the moisture of medicines, truly make the physicians perform this, that there be moisture in the substance and dryness in the air: like unguentum dyafinicon, when added to this there is an excess of moisture
And from the last thing which is to be cured, that is, to take unguentum dyafinicon and mix it with rose water, and apply it over the old liquid equal in quantity to the substance itself
Then keep it with it, and use it.
And it does the same thing as this action, when there is no unguentum dyafinicon present, honey, when you boil it, until it is reduced, and you use it with this.
Or take myrrh, aloes, and olibanum: all of these together, and grind it up on honey when it is over the fire.
Then smear over the bandage, and bind it over the Sinus: and smear with the honey which you boiled until it was reduced: and grind over it the spices, and put over the bandage, and bind it.
And when administered in that place, long aristolochia, and roots of celestial lily, and is lily: and seed of herb, and centaurea.
And use either singly or compounded with these, and powder of that which I have mentioned, and use that also.
If it prolong the condition of the sinus and does not recover with this treatment: then you know that in its depth there is corruption: or that it makes an imprint in bones, or in other hard members or ligaments: then cure the fistula itself, according to what has been said before Of the treatment of panaritis and drawn nails, and incision of the added digit, and section.
Chapter XC-I.</start_of_turn>
Panaritis is a swelling which arises under the nail of the thumb or finger, and perhaps in the other digits.
When it prolongs the condition of that, and is neglected, and swells with heat: or it becomes corrupted and emits pus, until it corrupts the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole thing, and perhaps the corruption extends to the bone, and there is a foul odor: and the digit becomes wide at the end, and its color becomes dark
When you have cured it with what we said before, and the condition does not recover: then it is necessary to cut off the entire superfluity that remains from the nail with a knife
Then cauterize the nail afterwards.
The cautery is to be made hot
If indeed the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the addition of the nail has already penetrated the flesh and begins to pierce it, and causes pain: then it is necessary to place a small radium under the angle of the nail which is piercing the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut the flesh with ease, and place over that which remains of the flesh from the physicians who have burned and corroded it until it is removed entirely
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, corruption has already set in the bone, then it is necessary to cut off the bone and extract it: for it will not heal as long as corruption remains in it.
If the swelling and corruption spread to a limb, then cut it at one joint, as has been mentioned previously concerning its sensation
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, there is attrition or percussion of the nail, and there is pain in it: then it is necessary to bleed the diseased part at first.
Then dry the nail with a sharp knife, cutting across from above to below to the tip
And be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for this will cause additional pain and swelling in that place
Then care for the place with that which rests pain.
The finger which has been added which is born in the hands of men, perhaps is altogether fleshy: perhaps there is something in some of its bones, perhaps in that there is the nail: and some of them are born in the root of the joint, or that is the origin of their nature in some part of the limb.
He who is born in some part of the limb does not move: and he who is born at the junction of the limb, perhaps moves
He who is born of flesh is easily cut through
As you would cut it at the root with a broad knife
As for him whose origin is in the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult
Abstain therefore from incision of it.
Abstain therefore from incision of it.
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Then bind the limb of the sick from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with an outturn.
Then draw up the limb in one place, or two, or three wide sections.
Then bind the limb until below: until the blood which you drew out has gone out from the limb in an amount sufficient, and as much as the sickness can tolerate.
Then bind the limb again: and command him to abstain from foods which generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are full, and it will benefit the sick man
The elevation of it is, however, done in this way.
The limb of the sick person, if there are many hairs in it
Then immerse the limb in a bath: or embroider the limb in the knee with warm water, until it turns red, and the veins swell: or perform an exercise of force, if there is no bath for him, until the limb is warmed up
Then bind the skin along the vein section: or at the end of it at the knee, or at the lower part of it at the heel
Then open the skin with needles, and scrape the vein from every side, until it appears sensible: and it is at the appearance of it that the blood will change from red to black.
When it has gone out of the skin, the blood will be like white thread
Then put under it radium, until when it is raised and comes out of the skin: suspend the limb with a bandage of lead wool
Then dry the other section close to that section by three fingers.
Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the wound until it appears
Then lift the tissue with forceps as you did before, and suspend it with another loop, as you did at first.
Then dry the other section, or several sections, if necessary.
Then lift up and divide the last section at the heel
Then remove the tissue up to the section that is above it
Do this until you have removed the tissue from the superior section, or from all the higher sections, until you have reached the end: then divide the tissue
If, however, you are unable to remove and lift the tissue: then introduce a strong needle with a double thread, and ligate the tissue, and remove it: or introduce it under the tissue: and draw the hand back over the whole part until it has gone away
And take care not to damage it
For if it is damaged, it is difficult to lift the tissue afterwards, and infection enters through that wound
When you have therefore removed the whole tissue: then place over the wound a soaked wool pad in wine or rose oil, or oil: and care for it, until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted, having a twist to which the blood supply is obstructed, and is not as we have described in accordance with the rule: then you must find on the tissue over all the parts the twist of the vein itself, and the place of obstruction.
Then suspend the tissue with sutures, until you have lifted the whole tissue: and take care at the site of your incision over the tissue that you do not damage the vein, or wound: for it is difficult to lift or extract the tissue from there
Beware therefore of your prudence.
Take heed therefore of your prudence.
Beware therefore of your prudence.
Beware therefore of your prudence, for it is neither cowardly like the rest of men, nor acute at the extremities, as to wound the vein: but it is great in flexibility, gentle: for if it were slight, it would wound the vein by its own softness. And indeed it is superfluous to have great flexibility, as we have said.
Concerning the extraction of the vein of the leg Chapter XCIII.
This vein originates in the legs in warm lands, like Alizegi and the Arabs, and in dry, warm lands, few in number, that is, in which no herb or tree grows
And perhaps it originates in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is also from the putrefaction which happens under the skin, as when serpents and worms are found inside the body, and worms which are generated between the skin and the flesh
And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that inflammation occurs in the leg with swelling.
Then the place is to be dried up.
Then the vein begins to come out of that place of drying up, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal
When it appears from that extremity, then it is necessary to cover over the lead with lead, whose weight is from a drachma to two drachmas and a node: and let the lead fall from the leg
Whenever anything is brought out from this towards the outside, let it be solidified in lead and bound.
If it persists for a long time, then its part must be excised, and the remainder solidified.</start_of_turn>
And do not cut through the root before the whole has gone out.</start_of_turn>
For if you cut through it, it contracts and enters the flesh: and causes the swelling to increase, decay in the place, and a bad ulcer.</start_of_turn>
Therefore it is necessary to handle it gently and extract it slowly, until nothing remains of it in the body: and from this vein it goes out in some people as far as the tip of the thumb and the little finger.</start_of_turn
And indeed it has come to me that it has come out from the urine of twenty palms.</start_of_turn>
If, however, this occurs at the time of your medication: then introduce radium into the cavity of its wound, and pierce the wound through and through with the body, until all that is in it is evacuated: and administer treatment for the wound with physicians for a few days.</start_of_turn Then care for the swelling.</start_of_turn
And this vein often has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there are many outlets for it, and it goes out through every outlet branch.</start_of_turn
Care for it accordingly, as we have said before, and as is proper.</start_of_turn
About the cutting of the worms generated under the skin, and it is called Bovine Disease.</start_of_turn
Chapter XCIV.
Chapter XCIV.
And it proceeds throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and is perceptible to the sense during its walking from limb to limb, until it is ruptured at every place where it is ruptured in the skin in its place.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors.
Like worms and serpents, that is, lice and worms in the belly
And they are fearful of its malice
Because when it itself proceeds into the body, and ascends to the head, and comes to rest in a place: then perhaps it will open in that place, and depart, and destroy the eye: and that is what often happens
When therefore one wishes to cure it and extract it, then it is not done except during its walking and the appearance of its sense.
It is necessary therefore to string what is above it and what is under it with strong ligation
Then dry over it, and extract it.
If it has gone deep into the flesh, and you do not find it: then put on the place above it a cautery with fire, until it dies
And greater than that which is feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said. If however you find that it has come to rest near the eye in the head: then string under it over the eyebrow with good ligation.
Then dry over it, and extract it
And it is necessary that the sick person should take care of the purification of his body, with physicians resolving the bad humors.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction
On the section above the navel.
Regarding the section above the navel
The pain located above the navel is called Nakir in our land: it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, and then changes from one part to another.
And I myself have seen it happen, as I will tell you.
I was called to a woman who was sick in some village
And I saw her arm swollen, and I found an inflammation of the vein of the arm
And after an hour had passed, I saw another swelling appear with a worm, which went up towards his shoulder more quickly than is possible: just as silver flies from one place to another
The pain therefore departed from that place and settled in the shoulder
And after a while it went away throughout the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm
And she told me that it returned to its whole body, as I saw it
I am amazed at the speed of its change from one limb to another
And I myself had never seen such a pain before like this in the same way as this
But I have seen many people who have had pain changing from one limb to another: and I had never seen anything like that before in a woman.
I do not believe this is possible, except that it is because of the women of those regions who are known for their swelling veins: from there therefore appears to be a change of sensation throughout the body.
It is necessary that they do not appear according to this ratio in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, and in secret veins.
When therefore the physician sees that the patient feels pain, and if it is evident to him that the ailment appears to the eye, as we have said, then he must bind over that part above and below quickly: and dry above that part until the swelling subsides: and cauterize the place.
If however you do not see it with your eyes: then care for it with the exclusion of the body, and with that which ejects the swellings, and calm it with poultices of rue, and of saffron, and the like.
(The provided text does not include information regarding the extraction of Sagittarum, so I cannot translate that portion.)
Chapter XCVI. Sagittae are varied according to their kinds and the places from which they are extruded from the body.
And their variety is such: because some of them have large teeth and few: and some are concave and others are convex
And there are those which have three angles.
And those which have tongues
And those which have stars
As for those which are according to the members from which they are extruded, it is according to two kinds
Either the members are from the main bodies which are concave, such as the brain, and the heart, and the spleen, and the lung, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and things of that kind
When therefore it falls into any of these members, and a sign of death appears to you, which I will tell you afterwards, then it is necessary to extract that arrow from the body, for death follows the wound in many arrangements
And when these signs do not appear, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it, and care for the wound.
When these signs do not appear, and the arrow has not penetrated the bone, then extract it and care for the wound.
And perhaps blood will flow from the nail or from the flesh.
And perhaps the flesh will be severed and the bone will be broken
And from the wound will come out a white moisture like pus
And from it will come out something like the moisture of meat
If these signs appear, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow that has entered the cord are: that it is close to the left breast: and that it feels as though it is fixed in something hard, not in something soft
And perhaps the arrow will move like the pulse: and blood will flow from the wound.
And following this will be cold extremity, and cold sweat, and fainting
You know therefore that death approaches with doubt
The sign of an arrow that has pierced the lung is the exit of bloody foam from the wound: and the breath that follows the head becomes thick and changes color like that of the sick person
He expires greatly and with difficulty: and he seeks the attraction of cold air
If the arrow falls into the chest, that is near the ribs: then there is great pain with breathing, with sighing: and all the limbs of the arms move violently
If an arrow should fall into the stomach, it may possibly emerge from the wound through some undigested food.
If an arrow should fall into the belly and settle there: something of stool or vomit or intestine which has been ruptured will issue from the wound.
There is no hope for its cure, neither in the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and comes out with urine: and something proceeds from it outwards, and the pain is more severe: then you know that it is deadly
As for the rest of the members, such as the face, and the neck, and the gut, and the spatula, and the attendant, and the rib cage, and the backbone, and the shoulder, and the hip, and the thigh, and the like of these members, if they do not find the arrow in the artery or nerve: and if there is no venomous arrow.
I tell you, concerning these arrows, that I have heard of none of them, except as a sign of your desperation concerning your cure.
That is because I have heard that an arrow once fell into the tear-duct of his eye, or in the root of his nose.
I extracted it from the other side, under the earwax of his ear: and he was healed, and no harm remained in his eye
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was hidden, and I did not find its tip until I had cut through its wood: and it was a large arrow, such as those which the Turks shoot with their bows, with lead in it, in which there are no ears
He was healed of this, and no harm befell him in his eye And I extracted another sausage from the Christian's belly.
And it was an Arab sausage, which is like that which has ears.
And so I went above and beyond two ribs: and it was submerged in his belly.
I was careful with it and brought it out: and the Christian was healed
And I extracted another sausage which had burst inside him: and we thought that it would die from it.
After that, for thirty days, nothing changed in his condition concerning the sausage: and I saw that it had healed, and I extracted it: and he was healed, and nothing bad happened to him.
And I saw the man from whom the sausage had burst in his back, and the wound was closed with a bandage over the sausage
And after seven years, the sausage was extracted from the root of his hip bone
And I saw a woman whose sausage had burst inside her: and the wound was closed with a bandage over the sausage, and the sausage remained inside her: and no change occurred in her condition from her natural operations
And I saw another man whose sausage had burst on his face: and it was closed with a bandage, and it remained, without causing him much pain: and similar things happened to many people
And I extracted a sausage from the belly of the King, which had burst in the middle of his nose, and it had declined to the right side: and the sausage was completely hidden
I was called to care for him after the bursting of the sausage until three days later
I found the arrow stuck quite tightly in the flesh.
I grasped it with a fine hook, and did not feel it: and indeed I found the point of the arrow and the pain from its side on the right hand
I supposed that it was the point of the arrow at the extremity of the arrow.
I plastered the place with a plaster which was moist and sticky, confident that the place would be relaxed, and that I would see the sign of the arrow, that is, that it would leave its mark above the wound: and this did not happen in the place where the arrow had followed the place of the wound.
I remained with the plaster on for many days: and it did not happen that anything occurred, and the arrow remained stuck in the meantime: and he remained sick from the extraction of it until he felt the arrow one day enter his nose.
And he told me this.
I put on him a sharp, corrosive medicine on that place for many days: until it opened: and when I grasped it with my hook, and I felt the extremity of the arrow slightly which adhered to the wood.
And I added in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine until we saw the extremity of the arrow clearly: and we passed it out with it in that space of time for about four months.
And when the wound had healed, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and to move it, and it did not obey the coming out: then I did not cease to grasp it with a fine hook, and to fashion above it with the wisdom of experienced men, until I was able to grasp the arrow with forceps at the end, and I drew it out
Then I restored the limb.
And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored.
I restored it therefore itself, and the limb was consolidated, and the illness was healed completely: nothing was left of it
And I tell thee the quality of the extraction of some arrows: so that thou mayest know the rule and the signification of that which I have not said
For the parts of this art and the distinctions of them are not comprehended with the narration: neither doth this book comprehend them, and a prudent artificer compares them with little to much: and with that which is present, with that which is absent: and he finds a new operation and an new instrument among the descent of the things of this art when they happen.
I say therefore that arrows do not go out of the limbs in which they are fixed, except in two ways. Either by attraction from the place from which it came in.
Or by turning back the other part
And that which goes out from where it came in, or the arrow proceeding in the fleshy place: it is attracted and goes out.
If it does not obey the going out at the hour in which it fell: then it is necessary that thou shouldest let it go a few days, until the flesh which is around it is putrefied: and the attraction of it and its going out will be removed
And in the same way if it is caught in a bone, and it does not obey thee at the going out, then thou shouldest also let it go a few days: and repeat it every day with the attraction and the motion, until it goes out
If it does not obey thee at the going out after days, then it is necessary that thou shouldest perforate round about the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine thread, until the arrow be amplified
Then draw out the abscess, and extract it.
If however the arrow is fixed in the head of a bone, and has proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears from the sickly parts some of the accidents which I mentioned: then abstain from the drawing out of the arrow, and leave it, until it be equal to its former state after a day.
For if the arrow remains in the brain, the poison does not prolong its duration.
And if the arrow is not fixed, except in the body of a bone, and does not penetrate as far as the brain: and remains sick for some days, and no accident happens to him from these things: then think of the drawing out of the arrow and its extraction.</start_of_turn>
If however it is fixed firmly, and does not obey you in the drawing out: then apply a poultice round about the arrow, as I have told you before: then keep the place still, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If however the arrow has vanished from its place in the body, and is hidden and concealed from sense: then inquire about it with care.</start_of_turn
If you feel it, then draw it out with some instruments which are suitable for its drawing out.</start_of_turn>
If however you are unable to do so because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in its depth: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor blood vessel: then find above the wound until you can amplify the wound, and it be possible to extract the arrow.</start_of_turn
When there are ears which hold the flesh fixed in the bone from all sides, from every ingenuity which you can think of, and you think of freeing them, if you cannot make the evacuation of the flesh from the fracture of the ears, and the twisting of the ears, until it becomes easy.</start_of_turn
When you administer the extraction of the Sagitta, in whatever place it is, then use a twisting of your hand with the forceps to all parts, until you have made it go away: and under the last subtle degree, that it does not break the Sagitta, and that it becomes difficult for you to draw it out, and for the extraction itself.
If you are unable to accomplish this in one hour, then delay the procedure for a few days, until the surrounding parts have decayed.</start_of_turn>
Then repeat it: if indeed it opposes the flow of blood, then administer what we have mentioned in its chapter: and preserve your virtue from the incision of the vein, or nerve, or cord.</start_of_turn>
And administer with all possible wisdom the evacuation of the Sagitta: and let this be with ease, and tranquility, or with slowness, and firmness, as I have said.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that you do this when you draw out the Sagitta, that the patient is according to the figure, according to what was with the Sagitta itself in this case.</start_of_turn
For thus is the art of healing.</start_of_turn>
If indeed this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the figure.</start_of_turn
The Sagitta which comes out from the opposite side, or which proceeds from something to the exterior: or it makes a swelling of the extremity of the Sagitta by means of the sense from the superior part of the skin close by, and it brings up the swelling: dry therefore above the swelling, and make the incision according to the quantity that they grasp in the forceps.</start_of_turn
Then draw out the Sagitta: for itself is made easy to come out.</start_of_turn
If it remains in the bone, then twist your hand according to the circumference, until the arrow has been driven into the bone, and will thereby be increased: then draw it out.
If not: leave it for a few days: then repeat the process until it has departed.
If the arrow-shaft is in it, then push it out with that itself.
If however the bone has fractured, and you wish to apply a force: then introduce into the wound an instrument with a concave surface, so that its curvature may engage with the head of the arrow: then push out the arrow with the instrument itself.
If the arrow is concave, then push it out with the instrument entering through it
The arrow will thereby be driven out through that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove the entire piece of flesh in which the poison is contained: if this is possible
Then take care of the wound as is appropriate to it
If the arrow has fallen into the chest, or the belly, or the arm, or the side: and is close to that which you touch with your hand, and it is possible to dry over the wound: then dry, and burn away from the wound, the nerve or bone, and draw out the arrow.</start_of_turn>
Then keep the wound covered with a bandage, if necessary, and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
This is the manner of the forceps, by which arrows are drawn out.</start_of_turn>
The extremities are like the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not relax it.</start_of_turn
There are many kinds of wounds, large, small, medium, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow, the density of its substance, the breadth of the wound, and its constriction.
The wound is of a concave shape.</start_of_turn>
The wound is of a blunt shape.</start_of_turn
This is the shape of the extremities like a Radius, so as to facilitate the entrance of the arrow into the concave sagittam, and it is driven by it.</start_of_turn
The extremity of this wound is concave like the beak of a bird: so as to facilitate the entrance of the arrow into itself and the driving force of it.</start_of_turn
About the cutting of veins.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 129.</start_of_turn> The veins which it is customary to cut in the body are thirty in number.</start_of_turn
Of these, there are six in the head: two pulse veins which are behind the ears, two Herbae veins, two Arteries which appear in two temporal regions, and two veins which are in the two lachrymal ducts of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead: and a vein which is at the extremity of the nose.</start_of_turn
And two Guidegi veins which are in the neck.</start_of_turn
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth.</start_of_turn
And two veins which are in the lower lip.</start_of_turn
And these are the veins which are called Algecherich.</start_of_turn
And two veins which are under the tongue.
And the veins which are phlebotomized in the arms, are five veins in every arm.
One of them is the Cephalic, and it comes from the side of the collarbone: and it names the vein of the head.
And the Fusca.
And it is the Median vein, and it is composed of the branches of the Basilic and Cephalic veins: and it names the vein of the body
And the Basilic, and it is placed on the domestic side: and it is also called the Titillicaris.
And it names the vein of the belly
And the Radial, and it is placed over the elbow: and it is that from which phlebotomy is made, and that which appears above the thumb with a visible mark
And the Palateal: and it is a vein which is between the ring and little fingers: and there are two branches to it.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot.
One of them is which is under the curvature of the thumb from the side of the collarbone.
And the second is the Saphenous: and its place is beside the calcaneus from the domestic side
And the Popliteal: and its place is beside the calcaneus from the side of the collarbone
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to these
Of the phlebotomy of the two veins after the Golden Age
Phlebotomy of the two veins which are after the Golden Age is useful for ancient cataracts, headache, haemorrhoids, and a bad headache of the head.
And what is the quality of a phlebotomist according to what I have said?
And it is, as I have said, that the phlebotomist should cause the head of the patient to bleed: and he should grasp the head of the patient at the two veins near the rough cloth with good friction.
Then he should tighten the patient's neck with a cloth, until two veins appear.
And their places are behind the ears in two depressed places of the head
Ask therefore easily with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of the veins under your finger, there will be a sign with the cautery.
Then take the phlebotomist's knife, which is called Incidens.
Then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone.
Then raise your hand with the vein and skin towards the upper part, and cut the vein with the incision of the phlebotomist.
And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two joined fingers, or thereabouts: and let blood flow out as much as you wish
Then tie up the wound with threads, and let go of the wound, until it is healed.
And thus it is in the beginning of the book that the incision of the ears and their cautery are mentioned
Of the phlebotomy of the two veins in their times
The two veins which are in two times of phlebotomy are esteemed for old migraine: and for strong swelling, and for the excessive flow of acute matters towards the eyes What quality of bleeding is easy according to what I have told you?
The bleeding is easy when the patient's neck is much constricted, until two veins become evident to the sense of touch: and the pulse of these veins is shown under your finger.
Then there is a sign with a haematemesis.
Then raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and make an incision below, and elevate the vein upwards.
And cut the vein like you did in the two veins above: and cause the blood to flow according to the quantity you need Then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour.
Then place over the neck and the pulse, and tighten it up from the constriction: and release it when it is healed
And remember the application of the bandage, the incision of the vein, and the extraction of the clot at the beginning of the book
About the bleeding of the front vein after the cephalic phlebotomy.
The after-effect of phlebotomy of the front vein after cephalic phlebotomy is for the old pains of the face: and for headache, and redness: and for wounds and ulcers.
And the quality of bleeding of this vein is, according to what I have told you
The patient tightens his neck when he is sick, until the vein becomes evident to the eye
Then take the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
Which has this shape
Place the apex of the incision on the head of the Fossorius bone above the vein, and pierce above it with the needle, or in any other way as you please: and let the blood flow out in accordance with the quantity you desire.
Close the perforation of the patient, and tie off the vessel, until healed.
And when opened with a wide lancet.
It is not proper that the phlebotomus be of acute extremity, like the rest of the phlebotomies, but rather of broad extremity
The phlebotomy must be performed according to the passage of the vein: for the bone is close by: and perhaps in this the phlebotomy will be fractured when it is slight
As for the phlebotomy of the veins in the two lacrimal bones.
The sign of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal bones of the two eyes, is at the eye from scabies and redness: and swelling in the eye, and pains of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of them is that it tighten the limb of the patient with the thumb
Then the phlebotomy is easy: and you stand over his head.
And do the phlebotomy according to the passage of the vein to a small length, with a small needle, broad rather than narrow, for there is no flesh in the place
If the phlebotomy is slight of extremity, perhaps it will be fractured.
Then let the blood flow out as much as is necessary for you
And put over his wound the coat, and tie up his limb once at night, and close it
On the phlebotomy of the veins of the nose.
The veins of the nose are to be bled in acute fever, excessive sweating, and facial ailments such as migraine and redness of the face, especially when they are of an old standing.
And the quality of the bleed in this case is such as to tighten the patient's neck
Then take the left thumb of your hand and make the phlebotomy beneath the nail, long: and fix it in the middle of the nose itself, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its direction.
For the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood immediately begins to flow.
And it is necessary, that you should immediately remove your last hand with the phlebotomy: and cause the blood to run outwards according to your need
Then bind it up at night once
The nose will itself restore itself soon.
Note: The next section of the text is not included in the provided text, so I am unable to translate it.
However, as regards the phlebotomy of the veins of the guide, it is useful in constriction of the breath, and the commencement of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and itching and ulcers of the bad kind, and corrosive, that is, those caused by worms in the bowels.
And the quality of the bleed of these is such as to tighten the patient under both cheeks of the neck with a ligature: and let the artificer stand over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting over his seat.
Then bleed the vein to the length of the wide phlebotomy immediately above.
Then extract from the blood the required quantity, or according to what you need for that.
Do the same with the other limb./Then do the same with another limb.
Afterwards suture the ligament and tighten two limbs with the middle suture: so that the diseased part is not injured./Afterwards suture the ligament and tighten two limbs with a middle suture: so that the diseased part is not injured.
And keep it quiet until morning./And leave it quiet until morning
The wound is healed./The wound has healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the phlebotomy of veins according to Algeberich.</start_of_turn>
The veins of Algeberich are phlebotomized because they cause swelling in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, cracks in the lips, bad ulcers, also those that are in the nose and in the surrounding area.</start_of_turn>
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these veins is that you make the patient sit facing you and tighten his collar with a loop.</start_of_turn
Then pull down his lip and look at two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left side: and the sign of both is by their blackness.</start_of_turn
And this is true: because in the circumference of these there are small veins, black.</start_of_turn
Cut therefore each of them according to the incision.</start_of_turn If however you doubt and do not know which of these is to be cut: then take resort to the greater incision of both of them, and their mark.</start_of_turn
And do the same with the two veins that are in the upper lip: and most of them run together with this: and cut two veins that are in the lower lip.</start_of_turn
From a phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after the phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein.
From a phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after the phlebotomy of the Cephalic vein.
And as for the quality of the phlebotomy, let the patient sit between your hands facing the sun: and lift up his tongue, and look under the tongue from one side with one hand, and from the other side with the other hand: and the colour of both should decline towards blackness.
The phlebotomy must be performed on both sides: and take hold, do not hold your last hand in the phlebotomy.
For under the tongue there are arteries, and perhaps blood will flow from them.
Of the three veins in the elbow
However, three veins are usually phlebotomized in the elbow
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways.
Either by grasping with a large needle: or by lancing with an awl to the point of slight bleeding: or by cutting with a knife, which is called Alnesil.
This is its form
Thus Alnesil is when it agrees to the section
There are broad and narrow species according to the width of the veins and the tension of them. The form of phlebotomy with the large needle is broad, like oil
It is suitable for opening wide, full, protruding, apparent, large, and those containing thick blood
This phlebotomus is of smaller width and finer extremities.
It is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins which contain thin yellow blood.
Of the phlebotomy of Albucasis.
Basiliae, however, which is one of the three veins mentioned for phlebotomy, is an instrument. Because it draws blood from the swellings which are under the jaw and the collar, from the part following the chest and the groin: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist because of its resemblance to the phlebotomus of the veins, so that it should not cause fear that there is an artery beneath it
If, therefore, it err, and the puncture of the phlebotomy should happen, the artery will be injured, and the flow of blood will be interrupted
Therefore it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy with the phlebotomus at the same time as the puncture: but rather let it dry with Alnesil.
If, however, Basilica does not appear visibly, then it is necessary to seek it elsewhere: either by means of other veins or by inquiry of another person; or to perform the phlebotomy in another place, such as the elbow vein
For it is itself evident, and should be left dry with the Anesil, as we have already said.
If, however, you wish to perform the phlebotomy on itself, then before you tighten the band around the limb, touch the place to recognize the place of the pulse.
Then mark the place with a scar, afterwards the limb, and dry the vein with the concave section of the phlebotomus using the Anesil, as we have already said.
And let the blow not fall outside the space of the artery.
And when you ligature, when you tie the string, the inflation in the place that you marked with the cautery, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery: you must therefore do the thing.
And if you see blood escaping at the phlebotomy, like the urine of a boy, and it is pale, red: then you know that it is from the artery
Then do you act promptly, and place your finger over that long space, and then remove your finger.
If blood is therefore shed (for it is often shed), then tighten the arm, and let go of it: and let the patient be still: and keep above fear of him.
And do not move him for a few days, until he is healed.
But if blood is not shed, and you are doubtful: and there is no physician present at your time, then cut the artery if you see it
For its extremities are tense, and blood is shed.
Or take a piece of the skin of the buttock, and find it: take the middle third, and tighten it above the place of the constriction below, with string and threads until another day.
Then if blood is shed, that is good.
And if not: then care for him as one who remembers the location of the bleeding vessels: and the bleeding of the artery is not difficult in many positions, because of the smallness of the wound, and the possibility of tying the artery from the arm.
¶ On phlebotomy of the forearm.
Veins of the neck are the instruments of phlebotomy, as they draw blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because they are composed of the basilica branch and the cephalic branch, as we have said.
It is convenient for the phlebotomist that there be some distance above the site of phlebotomy, for under that is the nerve
If therefore any one adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, and finds the nerve, there will result in that state of stupor, and the healing will be difficult, and perhaps will not take place at all
And this nerve is supplied to sensation.
And if in any one it is hidden, and is slight, and is not visible: then it is necessary to put in phlebotomy beyond the place where you phlebotomize, with Alnesil, and to divide the nerve with care
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in its length.
Of the cephalic vein.
Phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is an instrument, as it draws blood from the head and supplies it to the eyes.
It is necessary in this vein alone, if you will, to phlebotomize with the olive-leaf needle, or with the Myrtle needle: because it is safer for the veins of all, because there is neither artery nor nerve under it Indeed it is convenient to you in phlebotomy to ask for the soft parts [of the head] with the first blow, and to seek a softer place: and it does not harm if it is not found with the first blow, as it will return with subsequent phlebotomies. Perhaps the swelling may disappear in some individuals when the percussion does not take place at the first attempt, but it does not harm them in any way.
Regarding the use of phlebotomy and precautions to be taken in its performance.
The quality of phlebotomy and the accidents associated with it, concerning which you must reflect
Firstly, know that phlebotomy is not to be undertaken except for the preservation of health, and for the cessation of ailments, and for the prevention of diseases.
It is to be performed in the cubital veins, that is the Cephalica, and the Fusca, and the Basilica.
It should be performed in the spring after Lent, in the summer, and in the autumn, and in the winter after meals, when there are signs of fullness
It should be performed on the first or third day after the lapse of three hours
Phlebotomy for diseases has no fixed time: but when it is necessary and convenient, day or night, at any hour and at any time.
It should not be performed in children until they are more than fourteen years of age
Neither should it be performed in a pregnant woman except from the fourth month until the seventh month
Nor in an elderly person who has passed the age of sixty years
When anyone wishes to undergo phlebotomy for whatever reason: it is necessary to administer a laxative before phlebotomy if there is much stool retained in the intestines: in order that they do not adhere to the main veins during phlebotomy, causing harm to the body
Neither the patient's vomiting nor the nausea itself should be forced, neither by pressure nor from drunkenness, until the cause of the former has vanished from the body.
Neither with hydrophobia shall the patient be left
And let another bloodletting be performed after the colic passion, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent urination, sexual abstinence, rest, exercise, joy, and fasting, which dissolve strength from the body or the animal
Then consider the sublimity of the humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and with physicians: if it is possible for him.
Then let a bath be introduced, if it does not forbid it: or let some exercise be performed, in order to temper the blood.
And let a phlebotomy be made of him in the chest, about the third day: as we have said: and endeavor that he evacuate his chest from all these bad things: such as envy, wrath, fear: and from all bodily things, such as labor, suffering, and superabundance, and such like these.
And make his food be present with things which are customarily used by men from fragrance, and odor, and delight, and the like, as much as is possible
Then let the phlebotomist sit above the patient's heel, which is higher than the heel of the phlebotomist: then he shall extract his arm and wipe it with his hand twice, or three times.
Then tie the ligament with a bandage, and wrap it twice around the limb twice.
And let the restraint be temperate, for when the restraint is unequal, or through excessive restraint, then it hinders the course of the blood: or in softening, then also it hinders the course of the blood
Then after the stricture has been passed, it is necessary that the phlebotomist should immediately seize both hands together and hold them close to the belly, until the veins have filled up and the sense has returned.
Then let the phlebotomist take hold of the vein with a slight grasp, as before.</start_of_turn>
Then he places his finger on the index finger of the left hand over the vein at the place where he wishes to make the phlebotomy, slightly: so that the vein does not slip away, and that the percussion is set.</start_of_turn
For from the veins is more to be feared like a flying cord during phlebotomy: and from the blood that is filled with air: and when you place the phlebotomy on the vein, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is struck, and the vein is not opened by the phlebotomy: and if it is opened, it is a stricture: because of this, it is necessary that the phlebotomist should be firm and attentive in all these things.</start_of_turn
Then he lets go of the phlebotomy.</start_of_turn
And if not, then repeat it with another vein nearby, or above that with force: if the place does not recover.</start_of_turn
And if it recovers, or if the patient becomes pale, then send him away on the first or second day, and do not tie the ligament.</start_of_turn>
Perhaps indeed the swelling will subside.</start_of_turn
Neither must you put in a poultice.</start_of_turn
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.</start_of_turn
If the opening is small, or blood runs slowly: take care that it does not escape from the blood more than is necessary. Then repeat the phlebotomy in the same place according to custom, and add a little more to the operation.
Do it with speed, before the place is closed. For the place is split in many people during the operation itself
If therefore you see that the matter is already closed, do not go over it again completely, for this may excuse you for anything. And place upon it some of the fat of oil: because it will soothe the running of the blood.
It is better in this place than pure oil, and than any other oil.
And do the same with the fat of oil in all your phlebotomies, which you do on account of the running of the blood: and they will make it like tyriaca alfarach, and sage, when you place one of them upon the place
The blood will become thin and dissolve, when it is thick
If therefore it happens in the place of the phlebotomy that there is a large opening, namely in many people who are not phlebotomized except for this wound, or because the opening is small of the vein, then be careful and place upon the place a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed up slightly: and bind it for an hour: because it will dissolve
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has escaped from the vein, with the addition of some of its own, or from another vein.
Many wounds also occur at the knee and hip joints among the phlebotomists of the Basilica.
Put your hand over the area and if you find suppuration beneath your compression, then that swelling is bad
Therefore, do as we have said concerning that thing
For perhaps blood flows from that artery.
But make a plaster over it with something that has styptic power, so that the place is closed.
Then care for the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary that every man should draw out of blood according to the quantity of his virtue
And that which appears from the color of the blood above the blood itself.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it becomes red: and in the same way if you see it thick: then let it go out until it becomes thin: and in the same way if it is acute: then let it go out until the sharpness is gone
And it is necessary for the full, strong, and indigent person to take only one draw of blood, so that the phlebotomy may be ample and the phlebotomist wide: and in the one who is feeble, let him do the opposite of that
And it is necessary to draw it in vessels and that the opening be strict: and better is that which is administered in phlebotomy than a puncture, that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, from the incision of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by breadth and length
Whoever remains standing near the phlebotomist during a syncope must provide the patient with bread soaked in wine before the phlebotomy: or dry bread, if he is feverish. And take from him from the blood in three or four doses.
If the patient is pale, take before the phlebotomy bread soaked in pomegranate juice, or in honey syrup scented with spices, or in scented rosewater.
If it happens that there is a syncope during the phlebotomy, and the cause of this is the escape of much blood: then it is necessary to take in the pot a little meat broth, and aromatic syrup of low degree: and let it be flavored with spices, and cool the patient with it: and do all that we said in the chapter on syncope in relation to emesis.</start_of_turn>
Whoever wishes to stop his arm and solve his blood by a second bleed: must take what has escaped from the phlebotomy because of much emesis, and be weak, so that he gradually solves the blood by the amount of weakness in the days following.</start_of_turn>
Whoever wishes to stop his arm and solve his blood by a second bleed, and his body is strong: then do this after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.</start_of_turn>
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body in the opposite direction to which it flows: must do this in the second or third day.</start_of_turn
In whose body there is much hot blood, which is acute and causes fever: must be drawn out of him from a vein, and take from him in great quantity: and augment it by opening until syncope occurs: after which you will have restored all the conditions of the phlebotomy, and put your hand over the pulse of his wrist near the course of the blood, so that there is no more risk of syncope.</start_of_turn
Many times, this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglectful.
It should not be when one wishes to solve the arm and solve the blood second, when the orifice of the vein is closed, and there is difficulty in the exit of the blood, as it comes before to that with haste and extends the swelling sooner
For indeed that is bad, rather let it go, until the phlebotomy is done second time
Or move it with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that which has clotted in the orifice of the vein, and put over that something of salt dissolved in water.
And put over that something of thyme alopecarum, or sage, and put on it gentle compression, until the blood comes out
If indeed the vein is already clotted, then let it go, and do not tighten it, until the clot has settled down.</start_of_turn>
And if necessity compels to solve the blood second, and it is not excused, then either perform the phlebotomy above the place, or in another arm in another vein.</start_of_turn>
But indeed the vein of the arm is phlebotomized in the place of the cubitus, and of the basilica, when they are not found, and are hidden, because they are composed of bones.</start_of_turn>
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it lets the patient put his hand into warm water, until the flesh turns red, and the vein appears clearly.</start_of_turn
Then it should be bound over with a ligature of moderate constriction.</start_of_turn>
Then the phlebotomy should be done second in a transverse direction gradually, not latitudinally, neither in length: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be like that which you make over the palm of the hand that is near the wrist.</start_of_turn
And mostly it is put into practice that the course of blood is let into warm water in the cold season.
And the letting of blood of this kind is more useful than all other methods, because there is no pulsating under this kind of letting, neither nerve
The letting of blood from the right hand is beneficial for the jaundice of the liver.
And the quality of this letting of blood is that you must bind the wrist of your hand with a ligature or your finger, after you have introduced your hand into the warm water, until the hand swells and the sense of cold disappears.
Then let the blood flow across.
And if you cut the blood entirely, it will not cause any harm to him in any way.
And be careful not to cut your hand too close to the phlebotomy
Under these there are naked nerves of the fingers from the flesh
Then re-wet your hand in warm water, and let the blood run off into it
For if you do not re-wet your hand in warm water, the blood clots in the mouth of the vein, and is prohibited from flowing.
When you have therefore drawn out from the blood the quantity necessary, then put on the hand oil and salt: that it may not harden too quickly.
And in the like manner it must be done with every limb that is strict
The dressing of the left arm from the phlebotomy is thus: because it is appropriate for the ailments of the spleen. Do the same in the phlebotomy as you did in the second time equally.
The dressing of the phlebotomy of the saphenae is for ailments that are in the lower parts of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, retention of menstrual blood, kidney disease, ulcers of the buttocks and ancient crura, and similar ailments
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it lets the patient put his foot into warm water: and make above it friction, until the veins are bursting: and tie above the juncture of the foot with a bandage.</start_of_turn>
The veins are at the heel, appearing under the thumb: and are pulled out from it on the face of the foot many times.</start_of_turn>
The phlebotomy is therefore to be done in the greater branch of the vein, or at the heel in its collection: because this is better and safer.</start_of_turn>
If the phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then take care of the nerves that are under it over the face of the foot.</start_of_turn
And put your phlebotomy through from the side, like you wish to cut through it: and let the phlebotomy be of the Nesil type.</start_of_turn
If, however, the blood is prohibited from coming out, then do it again with the foot in warm water: and let the blood flow out through the vein, until it is evacuated.</start_of_turn
If the phlebotomist has made a mistake in the first attempt, then do it again with the phlebotomy towards the upper parts, for the place is safer, and does not cause harm, when you cut from the nerves, as we said.</start_of_turn
Likewise, with the other foot of the saphenous vein.
The vein of Sciatica is located, as we have said, at the heel from the lateral side of the anklebone.
The sign of the vein is its swelling, when there is congestion of cold blood in the anklebone area.
The quality of the vein is such that it inflates a soft swelling, and is quick to disappear: it tightens the ankle from the side of the ankle up to the heel for four fingers, with a fine long mark below, which does not appear except in this case.
When it appears, then the vein must be evacuated by whatever means is possible, or by stripping: and it is better either to cauterise it by incision, or to ligate it by section
Its place is harmless, and in many men it is hidden under the skin.
If you do not find it and it does not appear to the senses: then you must evacuate some branch of it, which appears in the back of the foot and below the heel: and cauterise from nerves, and make run out blood as much as you desire.
Then loosen the tension, and place over the site of the phlebotomy a layer of skin, and tighten the area.
It heals quickly.
Note: The next section continues the discussion of the saphenous vein and its variations.
Chapter 103.</start_of_turn>
Veins are derived from the bodies of blood vessels, from the air, and from the veins themselves.
And the sensation of the veins is of two kinds
When the incision is made, and blood is drawn out: the other is the administration of medication without incision. And this administration of medicine which is without incision, is according to two ways.
Or it is with heat.
Or it is without heat
And the medicaments which are administered with incision and blood-letting are fourteen in number in the body.
These include Ventosatio Alnocrati, which is the most posterior of the head: and Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck: and the unguents Alhagdahim, which are two layers in the neck from two parts together: and the unguents menti, which are under the mandible in the lower part of the mouth: and the unguents duarum spatularum: and the unguents Alachosos on the tip of the tail: and the unguents duorum focilium, which are in the middle of the two arms: and the unguents duorum crurium: and the unguents duarum cauillarum
And indeed the medicine which we call Ventosatio does not extract blood from small veins scattered through the flesh, but on account of this it does not cause a loss of blood like phlebotomy does
Neither is it necessary that the medicine should be administered with heat or without heat in any ailment which comes from congestion, until the whole body is evacuated
If indeed necessity demands that we should use medicine for an ailment, or because of custom, we shall administer it at any time in the beginning of the month, in the end of the month, and in the middle of the month, and at any other time as needed
For in men when they are multiplied in blood, until they grow weary of it, they find in their head a great swelling and a raging headache
And from the eye there is one who increases the swelling and redness in his face, head, and neck.
And from the eye there is one who increases itching in his face, forehead, and eyebrows, and haziness and dimness in his eyes.
And from the eye there is one who scratches the area of moisture of his eye. And from the eye there is one whose laughter increases
And from the eye there is one who increases the taste of blood in his mouth: either the tongue swells and expels blood.
And from the eye there is one whose sleep increases
And from the eye there is one who bleeds in his sleep, redness, and moisture, and spots and things that are like them When we see anything of these things, and it has been more than two or three hours since they appeared, we then order that the moisture be driven out The ointment of the night is beneficial: because it causes a weight in the head and what flows down to the eyes.
