After I have finished with you, my son, this book which is the last of my works on medicine, completed with the aid of your contributions, I have reached the end of my studies and pronouncements, and I have undertaken to complete it with this treatise which is a part of the art of surgery, that is, medicine with the hand.
Since surgery in our age is a work of the hands which is being neglected in our times, and since its secrets have vanished from the world, except for brief accounts in the ancient books which have become altered by the hands of men: and there has arisen from this an error and hesitation, until the intentions of the art have been closed and its spirit prolonged: It is necessary for me to bring together in this treatise the order of this art according to its position and pronouncements, and its abbreviations: and to explain the forms of the instruments of cautery and other implements of surgery, in accordance with the pronouncements and their preparation which is necessary.
The reason why one does not find a perfect artist of this kind in our age is that the art of medicine is vast, and the author must be exercised in the science of anatomy before he can understand the movements of the limbs, their forms, and their connection, and their separation, and to have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and lacerations, and their number, and their exit, and the pulsation of veins, and quietus, and the loci of their exits
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name is great when the work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is ignorant of what we have said concerning anatomy will fall into error, and will cause harm to men: as I have seen many of them who have learned from this science and practice it without science or experience
What is this, because I saw the doctor seize the scrofula from the woman's throat and it caused some arteries in the throat to burst: why did the woman's blood flow until she died between her hands?
And I saw another doctor who presumed to extract a stone from the bladder, which was in the bladder, and the stone was large.
It came to pass that he extracted it with the bladder's husk
Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself was called to extract it: and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took charge of a certain Duke of our land because of a disease: and it happened to a black slave who was with him, a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor, with his ignorance, bound the fracture with nails and pins, and did not allow the wound to drain.
Then he died according to his desires.
Afterwards he dismissed him for a few days, and commanded him not to loosen the ligament: and he remained like that until the bone of his leg and his foot were completely decayed, and he came to his end
I was called to him again: and I advised him to loosen the ligament: and there was peace, and he was freed from his pains
But indeed corruption was confirmed in the limb: and I could not restrain it.
Therefore the corruption ceased to walk in the limb until it perished
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous tumor: and it ulcerated after days, until the malice of the disease increased with the master himself.
When the cancer is pure and exudes from melancholic humour, it is not permissible to leave it with iron altogether, except in the case where it is in a member that can tolerate it, in which case it should be entirely excised.
And thus, my son, you must know that an operation which is associated with safety is divided into two parts: that which is associated with health, and that which carries the peril in various positions. I am excited about all the places in this book where the operation is mentioned, which is fraught with terror and fear
Therefore, you must be cautious about this, and be humble: so that you do not speak arrogantly, and become dishonest
Accept now measure with humility and protection, and the sick with facility and firmness, and utilize the gentler method which carries greater benefit, giving thanks to God for the success and praiseworthy outcome: and dismiss the terrifying diseases which are difficult to heal: and take away the spirits of those who fear them, so that there should arise in you trust in your work and comfort in your soul For in this world there remains a lasting memorial to your glory, and a fragrance in this world, and finally in your numbers.
Galen thus said in some of his admonitions. You do not cure a bad disease: do not give a bad name to the doctor
First Chapter.
Concerning incision and perforation, bleeding, and packing, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and matters of a like nature: and the whole of this chapter is arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Third Chapter.
Concerning restoration, and dislocation, and the treatment of torsion, and matters of a like nature: this chapter is arranged from the head to the feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
Glory be to God.
The Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part I.
Concerning the application of a dressing, and the use of the cautery: and in what complexion it is suitable, and when: and if with iron or gold.
Chapter I
But before any operation is undertaken, it is necessary to state the quality of the dressing and instruments to be used: and in what complexion it should be displayed
I say, therefore, that the discourse concerning the quality of the cautery dressing and its instrument is a lengthy, subtle, scientific, and secret discourse.
And it has been said by many learned men, and they have differed in their opinion: and indeed little is sufficient from their discourses, fearing the length of the matter
I say, therefore, that the cautery is applicable to all complexions, that is, with matter and without matter: except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter
In the hot and dry complexion with matter they disagree
Some have said that the Cauterium is used for incisions.
Others have said the opposite, namely that the Cauterium is unsuitable for wounds due to their heat and dryness: for fire is by its nature hot, and it is unsuitable to heal wounds by heat and dryness when they require warmth and moisture.
And some have said the opposite of that: that the Cauterium makes incisions in all wounds which arise in the bodies of men: for when you compare the body of a man to the heat of the fire, you find the body of a man to be cold to the touch
I myself have observed in practice that it is often useful
It is true that in some cases the Cauterium is useful. However, it should not be used without prior experience and a thorough understanding of the various types of wounds, their causes and symptoms, and the time required for their healing.
Except in the case of very severe wounds, there is no reason to fear the Cauterium: and especially in wounds that are cold and wet. I have observed that all doctors concur in their use of the Cauterium in such cases.
Note that the Cauterium is safe when used with fire and promotes healing along with medicinal herbs: for fire is simple, and its action does not extend beyond the part which is cauterized; and it does not harm any other connected member, except for a slight burning sensation.
The medicinal properties of the burn do not extend beyond the part which is cauterized: and it may even cause difficulty in the healing of the wound, and even death.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive. Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its matter, does not do this unless it is excessive
But that is done in few.
But that is done in few.
But that is done in few.
But that is done in few But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few
The method of cauterization is as follows: first of all, the physician should evacuate the patient with a solution of urine that will alter the head for three nights, or four, as the nature of the patient's ailment, age, and habits demand.
Then command him to make a circular burn on the head with a needle
Then make him sit between your hands, so that his hands are placed over his belly
Then put the root of your thumb on the root of his nose between his eyes Wherever his middle finger reaches, that is the place to make the burn. Then ignite the Cauterium Oil: thus is its shape. Then place it on the designated place with the burn, with a gradual descending movement, until your hand is grasped, and then withdraw it.
Then quickly lift your hand and look at the place
If you see that there is already a quantity of hair equal to the head or the nails, then lift your hand immediately
And if not, repeat the process with the iron alone, or with something else if it becomes cold: until you see the bones, as I have told you
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and drink it, and put it on the place: and keep it there for three days.
Then put on it a buttered dressing, and remove the burn from the place until the eschar is destroyed by fire. Then care for it with unguents until it is healed.
They have said that the more a wound remains open, the more pus it emits: which is better and more advantageous.
Some have said that the skin should be cauterized until the bone is reached: and the cautery should be retained until the substance of the bone has hardened
Then it is withdrawn after that which has been cast off from the bone, and it is cured.
Others say that the cautery should be continued until it makes an imprint in the bone, so that the bone breaks, like the form of a chisel, or like the instrument which women put into the bath with a small letter: and they say that from this place arise vapors of the head, and the wound remains open for a long time.
Then it is cured, until the fracture is consolidated
I, however, do not approve of two kinds of cautery in general, except in some people according to their fear.
And I send it away, for with me it is better for the health of the patient.
The head grows weak from the continuity of its natural solution: as we have witnessed in the rest of the limbs: and especially when the head of the patient is weak by nature: and the first kind of cautery is more safe and better for me than the other, and it is useful: to work with it for the health of the patient
In the case of cauterizing the head in the case of general pain of the head.
Chapter 3.
When there is chronic pain in the whole head: and it persists in the patient, and boils, and abscesses, and headaches, and ointments, and applications are used
If, therefore, the burn has been cauterized with one cautery, as we have said, and nothing further adheres to it: then consider.
If the patient's head is strong in nature and not weak, and he experiences a feeling of heat: then reburn with another cautery under that.
Then burn the entire circumference of the head with the cautery, but do not pass through the skin, and uncover the quantity of bone as we have said.
Burn the cautery once on the back of the head in the place which is called the uas: for that is the place where the bone is placed. Raise the burn upwards in this way, and do not uncover the bone.
The patient feels pain because of this heat, and different from the pain of the other cauteries of the head in general.
I say this: The cautery is to be applied in this place: the horns of the head are to be cauterized with one cautery, while the back of the head is to be cauterized with a finer cautery.
This is its form.
In the treatment of hemophilia, both with medicinal herbs and with iron.
Chapter III.
When pain and swelling occur in any part of the head, or if the pain extends as far as the eye, and it evacuates with physicians who apply soothing remedies to the head, and the rest of the treatment is administered as I have said in the treatise on diseases, and nothing more: then the burning in this case is done in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with iron. The burning with acute burning medicine is as follows: take a tooth of another, and burn the area with it, and remove the extremities from both sides
Then sever the place of pain at the time with a wide lancet, until it be made in that place under the skin, where the teeth capture.
Then insert it thus into the very under-skin, until it is hidden: then tighten above it with a thread of constriction of a fair measure, and keep it bound for fifteen hours. Then take it away, and evacuate the wound for two or three days. Afterwards place above it the lower part of the limb submerged in butter, until the place has yielded pus: then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you do this with some physicians who are learned in burn injuries, whom I have written about in the twelfth tractate on physicians who are learned in burns.
The cauterization of it is like this with iron.</start_of_turn>
The iron for the cautery, which is like this in shape.</start_of_turn>
And it is called Claudius: because the shape of its head is like the shape of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.</start_of_turn
Then place it above the place, and hold your hand: and withdraw the iron gradually with speed: and let the quantity which is to be cauterized from the thickness of the skin be like half of it.</start_of_turn
And raise your hand, so that it does not burn the artery which is beneath, and that the flow of blood does not increase.</start_of_turn
Then soak the limb in salt-water, and place it above the place, and leave it for three days: then place the limb in butter: afterwards care for it with ointment until it is healed.</start_of_turn And if you wish, cauterize this half-circle with the second extremity of the cautery.</start_of_turn
And indeed from the incision of the artery in this hemisphere, not in the former manner.
And indeed from the incision of the artery in this hemisphere, not in the former manner.
And indeed from the incision of the artery in this hemisphere, not in the former manner.
When you are treating a hemiplegia, when you have done what we said concerning the treatment of preceding diseases, and when you have said concerning the methods of treatment, and it does not suffice: then you must cauterize the tissue with a needle until it turns white when you touch it at the place of the pain with a line whose length is half of a digit, or as much as that: and lay your hand aside and grasp the needle until you have cut through the artery, and hold it until you reach the bone. It is true that you must take care that you do not cause the continuation of the mandible to move during mastication, neither to become hardened, or the nerve which moves it, from which the spasm arises.
And be careful of the safety of the flow of blood in the artery that has been cut
For in the cutting of it there is fear, and especially for him who is ignorant of this and is not studious, or not an expert: and he departs from the operation at once.</start_of_turn>
And I come with the reminder of the regimen of the flow of blood that has occurred from the artery according to its custom, and in its place here in this book.</start_of_turn>
If you are aware of the disease that does not suffice with this Cauterium, and if you are aware that the body of the patient tolerates Cauterium in the middle of the head, as we have said, then take care of the wound, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if necessary, administer Cauterium, as we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with Cauterium having two blades.
It is better to cauterize than to leave it open. As to the cauterization of the ear in pain.
Chapter VI When it happens in the ear pain from cold, and it is cured with solutions, and the rest of the treatment as we have said in the previous discourse, and the pain is not relieved, then ignite Cauterium: and that is what is called the Punctum, which has this shape
Then burn the Punctum with this after its ignition around the entire ear, as it is rotated: or around both sides, if the pain is in both.
And prolong it with Cauterium to the root of the ear beside, after you have marked the place with the burn: and let the quantity of Cauterium be ten points in each ear, and as much as that
Then care for the place, until it heals.
As to the cauterization of a burn
Chapter VII
A burn which is cured by cauterization is not except from those which arise from phlegm, as we have said in the discourse on diseases And you must cauterize the species which arise from exiccation and nervous spasm.
When you have cured this species of burn with urine, and saffron, and blisters, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the diseased part with three Cauteriums: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little lower from its edge, and the third at the junction of the two lips
And place your cautery from the opposite side of the lower part which is diseased.
For the softening does not take place, unless in the part which appears healthy.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize with the cautery itself at the direct extremity of the upper ear under the horn of the head somewhat: and at the same time in the temple: whose length is as long as the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of middle part of the thickness of the skin is burned
This is the form of the cautery, and it is like a knife, whose shape is like this: truly it is not finer than that of a needle: and it must be that the knife is in that place somewhat superficial Then care for the place, with that which went before: until it is healed
Thus the cautery is to be used in ancient apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When the ancient apoplexy has become chronic, and when your medicine has not been of avail, and the sick man does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over all the horns of his head, and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cautery in the back of the head, as we have said before: and the manner of cautery is as we have said before
It is also to be cauterized with the cautery over the bones of the stomach: and this is the last method.
Then care for the patient, as we have said before.
Thus the cautery is to be used in oblivion.
Chapter IX.
The head should be placed in the first place in the bath, and the nourishing pills should be given to the brain.
Then the whole head of the patient should be washed, and upon the crown of his head should be placed a compress of rue described in the treatise on compresses: and let him put it on several times. This is the manner of the Cautery: and do this according to the order which I have said above. If therefore he is healed by this, it is good.
If not: then make for him three cauteries on the back of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and put between every cautery the breadth of a finger
Then take care of the cauteries, as has been said before.
And if you wish to make an addition, and the patient is able to tolerate it: then make for him a cautery in the middle.
And if you wish to make an addition: then cauterize the two horns.
Then take care of it, until he is healed: and let the cautery be done according to its form, as has been said before.
Thus cauterize in Paralysis, and for mollification.
Chapter X.
You must proceed in the treatment of the head with oil, and as has been said above
Then wash the head of the patient: then cauterize the middle of the head, and the cautery on every horn of the head, and the cautery on the back of his head, and three on the bones of the neck.
If, however, the digestion is difficult in the inflammation of the body because of the numerous bodies, and the patient is tolerant, and the inflammation is strong: then burn it with four burnings over the spines of the back, and the last one with the fourth, until it is consumed from the utmost part of it, and lift up your hand.
Then care for it until it is healed: and thus burn olive oil.
In the manner of burning in epilepsy.
Chapter 11.</start_of_turn>
An epileptic patient is not to be burned, except for that in whom the epilepsy proceeds from phlegm.</start_of_turn> It is necessary therefore to temper the brain of him in the first place with herbs, and with the rest of the treatment as we have said in the preceding discourse: when the patient is great, or is tolerant in receiving the medicines.</start_of_turn
If, however, he is a child, who does not tolerate the medicines, then is administered a gargling and nourishing of the brain with food for many days before the benefit of the nourishment of the body.</start_of_turn
Then temper his head, afterwards burn it with one burning in the middle of the head, as we have said before in the manner: and with another burning on the back of his head, and over all the hair of his head burn with a third burning.</start_of_turn
And if the patient is strong and is tolerant, then burn it with burnings, which I have said in the case of paralysis, and mollification of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back: and let the burning be with olive oil as before.</start_of_turn If, however, the patient is a child, then place the burning under cover, according to this method.</start_of_turn
On the method of cauterization in Melancholia.
On the method of cauterization in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries, as we have said in one having paralysis
When the cause of melancholy is excessive coldness and leads to melancholy, and the body of the patient is soft and wet, then take from it in the belly what will temper the brain of the patient: as it has been said before in the explanation. Then cut off the head of the patient and make a circle from the entrails of the intestines.
Then put it in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting upright is to be held fast from all sides
Then apply linimentum. And it is better from old butter or oil
And heat it over a tempered fire, as the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it.
Then evacuate it in the middle of the head in a circle, and keep it until it is cold to the touch
Do this to the patient every week once, with the rest of his treatment being good, until he is healed
Or if you will, cauterize it by making many small punctures of it, besides which you will hold the hand with the cautery: for it will smell badly.
For these are the qualities of cauterization which humectate the brain.
Then put over it a bandage soaked in butter, or fat from a hen
On the method of cauterization in descending water to the eye
Chapter XIII.
When the water in the eye is declared ready by the signs which I mentioned previously, then begin and instill the potion, with that which will modify its head.
And keep it away from all moistnesses, and make it sit in a warm bath for a few days.
Then command it to raise its head, and cauterize it in the middle of its head. Then cauterize it over two tempora with two cautery instruments: if there is an incipient descent of water in both eyes simultaneously: or from one side only, if there is an incipient descent of water in only one eye: and cut away with the cautery all veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let there be blisters in those which are long in the width of the tempora: and burn from the flow of blood.
And if anything escapes from it, then immediately cut it away with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting away of them, and care for the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized in the pupil, under two bones, with two last cautery instruments.
Thus cauterizing in the ancient tears.
Chapter XIIIII.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, thick: and are upon the veins and arteries which are in the exterior of the head, it is verified that this is from excessive cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same instrument which I mentioned in the beginning concerning the incipient descent of water, the cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cautery instruments over two tempora, and with two cautery instruments in the pupil under two bones
And if digestion is insufficient, then cauterize it throughout all the sides cautiously around the eye, over the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
In the eyebrow region, cauterize cautiously around the eye, over the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 15.
When you are treating this and it does not yield to medication, as we have mentioned previously, then cleanse it and give the patient three baths at night: then remove its head and cauterize it with a middle-sized cautery, with olive oil cautery.
Then cauterize it with two cauteries of claws, over the two eyebrows under the hair somewhat
And keep away from the artery, so that you do not damage it.
This is the form of cautery with claws
In the softening of the Palpebrae (eyelids).
Chapter 16
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by heat or moisture: then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery, like a lunar cautery
And if you wish, cauterize it over the two eyebrows somewhat with two cauteries in all parts: and extend from two points for two times: and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not put your hand too close to the cautery, but according to the amount that is to be burnt of the third of the eyelid.
And this is the form of cautery in this manner of lunar cautery.
When the hair is burned by the incandescence of the eye. Chapter XVII.
The cautery is of two kinds: either with fire or with burning medicine.
In the cautery with fire, the patient must precede the instrument, so that it may expel its hair, if there are any that move in the area, until the hair is prolonged and even If, however, it pricks them at their root: then compress their eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move, until they are healed.
When they are healed and even, then place the patient's head in your lap: then mark over the eyelashes with charcoal, according to the figure of a myrtle leaf: and this is the beginning of the mark, close to the hair
Then put on a soaked cushion on the edge of the eye: or on the hair of the eyelashes over the eye.
Then burn the cautery, which is of this shape.
Then burn over the figure which you have marked gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin is burnt, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, throughout.
The sign of the completion of your work is that if you press the eyeball the eyelashes recoil from the puncture point.
Then withdraw your hand: and let it go in three days.
Then put on the cushion again with butter, until the eschar has disappeared
Then care for it with unguent until it is healed.
If any hair remains after an hour, and the eyelashes are softened: then repeat the cautery in the same place as before
If, however, the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it itself, until they rise to their natural place: and make even so that they do not puncture the eyes.
In such a case, cauterize with the burning medicine in the same way
Chapter XVIII
It is necessary to command the patient to discharge the hair, until they grow long and be made even.
Make from parchment a form like the leaf of myrtle.
Then take from soap known, and from chalk not soaked from any liquid whatsoever a weight of an ounce or almost like that: then smear it together well, and do this with care, so that it does not freeze
Then take from the palm of your hand the thing which you made like the leaf of myrtle and put it over the eye or eyes.
And put under the eye a bit soaked in albumen or oil: and keep the patient's head in your hand.
And put your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly.
And you move it whenever the patient feels the biting of the medicine: because its biting is like fire.
When you have finished this, then discharge the medicine, and move it with your finger.
When the biting has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Consider then, if the eye is raised towards the contraction like that which happens with fire, or with an incision, it is well done: and if not, then repeat the medicine over the place where the medicine does not leave its mark, and does not irritate, until your operation is complete and the eye is contracted
Then place above the aforesaid Cotum with butter, until the skin of the wound is eradicated.
Then care for it with an ointment of diaphanicon, or something like it, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that you should keep guard after the operation, lest anything from the medicine should fall into the eye.</start_of_turn
If the eye becomes soft after a day, and something from the hair has fought its way into the eye, then repeat the medicine upon the place that is softened from the eye itself, as you did at first.</start_of_turn
Then care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.</start_of_turn>
And you know that the eyes of men differ in size and in shape.</start_of_turn
Therefore you must take this into consideration: and do not hide the truth of rectitude from her who is skilled in this art.</start_of_turn
As regards the cauterizing of the fistula of the tear duct.</start_of_turn
Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
When you are treating the fistula, when it is not responding to your treatment: then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.</start_of_turn
Command the patient to place his head in your lap, and hold his head between your hands like this, so that it does not move or be agitated with his head.</start_of_turn
Then place a soaked Cotum on the white of his eye, or in the mucous of his hair: then apply the Cauterium, which is shaped like this.</start_of_turn
Sit concauum, sicut forma cannae pennae, et si uis sit penetrans usque ad extremitatem aliam, et si uis sit sursum sic tenta.
Sit concave, like the shape of a quill pennaceous, and if the vein is penetrating until the other extremity, or if it is above, then grasp it thus
Then place the cautery upon the wound, which is kindled with heat.
Hold your hand parallel to the Cautery from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not move, or irritate the patient: and place the Cautery on the fatty tissue of the eye, and burn it through.</start_of_turn>
If you proceed with the Cautery from the beginning until the bone, it will be good.</start_of_turn>
And if not: then repeat the Cautery once or twice if you deem it necessary: and leave it for three days.</start_of_turn>
Then place a bandage with butter, and care for it with an ointment of exsiccation, until it heals.</start_of_turn If after forty days it has not healed: then place upon it a sharp medicine corrosive until the bone is exposed: and remove it according to what is written in its chapter.</start_of_turn
And there is another method of Cautery for fistula, which some of the first said.</start_of_turn
Aim at the location of the fistula, and find it: then place under the fistula a thin cushion, that is, a cannula, which has this shape.</start_of_turn
And mix in it the quantity of lead that is equal to a drachma of liquid lead, and hold your hand with the cannula firmly retained, and do not move the patient at all, so that it does not run, or cause the liquid lead to reach the eye.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to place upon the eye of the patient a bandage soaked in albumin or in water.</start_of_turn
The lead will consume the location of the fistula, and will heal it with a miraculous healing.</start_of_turn
If the fistula is healed, with the Cauterio and treatment mentioned earlier, it is good.
If not, it is necessary to administer a nose opening, and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, as it comes in its own place.
In the manner of cauterizing in lip fissures.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XX.</start_of_turn>
Many times, acid occurs in lip fissures, which are called Pili, and especially in the lips of children.</start_of_turn
When you have cured the fissures, when the treatment which we mentioned in the discussion of ailments has not been of use, then you should burn the little knife with the cautery, according to this shape.</start_of_turn
And let its curvature be according to the sharpness of the knife.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with a bandage, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
In the manner of cauterizing in the ear fistula.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXI.</start_of_turn
When swelling occurs in the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus forms, and it bursts: afterwards it becomes inflamed, and pus comes out, and a fistula forms: then you must cure it, and if no use is made of the treatment, then it is necessary to burn with the cautery according to the quantity that is in the fistula.</start_of_turn
Then insert the flame into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand, until the iron is burnt through to its very bottom, and its tip: do this once, or twice more.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself afterwards, until the time when you are cured.
If he is cured of the wound and is healed, it is well.
And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place, and take out the corrupt bone according to what comes to pass in his head.
Regarding the cauterization of the gums, and the softening of teeth.
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
When the gums are softened by moisture, and the teeth are mobile, and you care for it with the physicians, and do not fear: then put the head of the patient in your lap.</start_of_turn>
Then apply the cautery, whose form will come after this, so that you place a canula over the tooth: and introduce into it burning Cautery quickly: and hold your hand firmly, until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
And lift your hand: then repeat the Cautery several times, as you wish.</start_of_turn
Then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, and keep it for one hour: and then spit it out.</start_of_turn
The tooth will then be firm, and the gums will be softened and relaxed, and the moisture will be dried out.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXIII.</start_of_turn
When the toothache is due to cold, or if it is cold itself, or if there is worms, and the care does not suffice with the physicians: then the Cautery is to be applied in two ways: either with butter or with fire.</start_of_turn
The cautery is like butter, for you take up a piece of butter and apply it to the swelling, or to the veins.
Then take hold of the cautery and apply it to the edge of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Then immerse it in butter: and place it upon the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it is cold: then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
And if you wish, immerse wool, or cautery in cold butter, and place it upon the painful tooth: and place upon it a burning iron, until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
The cautery is like fire, for it extends to the marrow of the bone, or the iron.</start_of_turn And be careful in its handling, lest its heat should reach the sickly bone.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of the cautery, whatever its shape it may be: and place it upon the tooth: and hold your hand until the cautery is cold.</start_of_turn
Do it several times, for the pain will subside, or on the same day, or on another day.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to press upon the cautery impression, so that it may fill the diseased bone with butter, and hold it for an hour: then remove it.</start_of_turn
This is the form of the cautery.</start_of_turn>
Use it with whatever limb you wish, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the cannula.</start_of_turn
On the method of cauterizing in the Strophulis.
On the method of cauterizing in the Strophulis.
When the Strophulae are filled with phlegm, and are cold from moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, and you wish to expedite their digestion: then you must use the Cauterium in its concave form, which is like this in shape.
Having two open extremities, like a flame issuing from the other end of the Cauterium: put the flame on the surface of the abscess once, and again if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the abscess
If the abscess is small: then put the Cauterium according to the size of the abscess.</start_of_turn>
Then remove it after three days, and put upon it a bandage soaked in butter, until the burn caused by the fire has healed.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it with oil of the teeth, until the abscess has healed.</start_of_turn
¶ On the method of cauterizing in raucedine uocis, and constriction of the anhelitus.
¶ On the method of cauterizing in raucedine uocis, and constriction of the anhelitus
When the wind brings moisture upon the channel of the lungs, and especially when it is with the coldness of the complexion: then it is necessary to evacuate the morbid matter first with the aid of medicinal solutions.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize in the night at the root of the epiglottis in a depressed place: and burn, so that you do not reach the gut with the Cauterium, nor the skin, unless something compels you to do so.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize again with another Cauterium at the junction of the neck in the last cartilage of its kind: and let the Cauterium be fixed according to the mode which went before.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself until you are healed.
In the treatment of wounds of the lungs and chest, and the tussi (coughs).
Chapter XXVI
When coughs and pulmonary wounds are from cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, nor an old wound: then cauterize with two cautery irons above the rib in the depressed areas, at the angles, and on the veins.
And cauterize also in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery iron be like the shape that preceded it.
And if you wish to make a cautery puncture with the cautery, which is called Punctum, which has the shape that preceded the puncture of the pain of the ears: and let the punctures be from thirty punctures up to almost as many
Then care for yourself until you are healed. And if the cautery has three branches: according to this shape
Therefore the surrounding area is relieved when doing this with three cautery irons at the same time.
In the treatment of titillation, in dislocation of the humerus.
Chapter XXVII
When the head of the humerus is dislocated due to moisture, and does not settle back in its place within an hour of its dislocation, until it has become accustomed to its return, then it must be reduced by a small movement, as we have seen it happen in other cases: then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation immediately.
Then the patient is laid on his back, or on the healthy side
Then elevate the skin, which is inside the Tililian space to the upper parts with the left hand digits: and if the joint is dislocated inwards.
Then have the cautery with two prongs. Which is this shape like?
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and will come the shape of the cautery with four cauteries.
And when it is cauterized with a cautery having three prongs, because of this the shape of the cautery will be six cauteries: and these are the second ones following the thickness of the attempt
This is the shape of the cautery having three prongs
And when one more is added above in this way, because there are eight cauteries in total
Then put above the cautery crushed sponges with salt
Then make the patient adhere calmly, so that the limb does not move at any time, until it is comfortable
And if the dislocation is upwards, and this is rarely the case, then cauterize the upper part of the humerus with the cautery of the claw, or with many punctures
For the joint becomes firm, and the moisture is driven out: and the patient is healed.
In this way cauterize the stomach
The head of the eighth
When cold and much moisture happen in the stomach, until they are expelled from their combination, and multiply catarrh to it, and take care of these things diligently, and do not confer: then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back, extend his limbs, and move his hands
Then cauterize with three cautery instruments, a cautery under the breast of the pectoris of quantity equal to one digit with a cautery nail, and two cauteries below from two sides of one cautery, until the figure of the cauteries is triangular.
And prolong between each one so that they do not join together, when they make pus. And the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And let the figure of the cauteries be in this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: let there be one cautery which is like this one according to the figure of a circle according to this form
And cauterize the stomach by pricking it with that which returns from this cautery: and it is that there are signs above the stomach at the puncture according to quantity, as much as you wish with encasement: then cauterize itself with the cautery of the puncture: then care for it with care which preceded until it is healed
In this way cauterize the Epar with cold.
Chapter XXIX.
When it happens in the Epa that there is pain from cold and wetness, or from large wind, until it escapes from its natural composition by excessive emission, and the patient is cured, as we said, and does not progress in it: then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his heels, and that signs be made with three cautery instruments according to this figure and this quantity below the hypochondria, where the elbow of a man rests: and let there be space between every two cauteries according to the thickness of a digit: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body of the rectum: and do not press your hand too much with the cautery
And let the quantity of the ointment which is applied to the roughness of the skin be not added to the middle quantity: and let the patient be standing on his feet.
And if he is not standing, then he is lying down, who has extended his limbs and raised his arms This is the form of cauterization.
And indeed it is possible that you burn these carbuncles with a cautery knife, when there is skill and prudence in the art
And take heed, that you do not proceed too far in the cauterization, and that you burn the roughness of the whole skin, for which the whole body is burned, and that it reaches the intestines: for the skin there is thin, as you know well
Concerning the cauterization of the after-effects of the liver.
Chapter XXX.</start_of_turn>
When the discharge occurs, and you wish to write, if the after-effect is in the liver itself, or in its membrane: then if it is in the liver itself, there is pain, and severity without acuteness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with acute pain that is severe: and know that I say this because it fatigues the physicians of this cure
It is necessary therefore that the patient lie down on his belly
Then the figure of the after-effect with the cautery: then you burn the ointment which is assimilated by the rays.
And this is its form.
And cauterize with one cautery, until the whole skin is burnt, and it reaches the spleen, until the whole body is healed: then care for the discharge of the after-effects, until the patient is healed.
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation.
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation.
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation.
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation. The ancients say that cautery with the roots of aristolochia should be used for cold pleurisis in this way.
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation. And it is thus that from the dry roots of aristolochia one should take a long root, which is found from among them, and let it be as thick as a digit
Neither is it proper that any surgeon of this sort should use cautery without having diligently studied the art of medicine for a long time: for it is by the experience of many that these diseases concur with this operation. Then plunge the root into oil and ignite it with fire.
Then cauterize with one cautery at the place between the continuation of the collarbone and the jaw, and with two small cauteries under guidance slightly depressed to the part which is under the beard
Then also with two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs depressed downwards to the rear part: and with one cautery in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach
Then also with three cauteries from behind: one at the place between the two ribs, and two cauteries on the two sides of the chest, the lower cautery being between the two ribs
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely. Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely.
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely.
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely.
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely.
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely
Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely Neither must you compress your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be open and smelling freely
Then care for the cauterization after it has been discharged so that pus is emitted for many days: for this is more conducive to recovery than all the other treatments that follow the care.
In the treatment of hydrops, care must be taken with the cauterization so that pus is emitted for many days: for this is more conducive to recovery than all the other treatments that follow the care.
The head is the third part to be treated with cauterization
The cautery does not suffice in hydrops unless the vein is severed at the same time.
When you are treating hydrops with the methods of care that we have mentioned in the previous section, and the cure does not take hold, then it is necessary to cauterize the four veins surrounding the navel, one above the stomach, one above the spleen, one above the liver, two behind the ribs between the vertebrae, and one in the direct region of the chest, and one in the direct region of the stomach: and the amount of depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin
Then discharge the cauterization openly so that pus is emitted over a long period of time.
Do not remove the diseased part from the care after the cauterization: for this will bring two results together: and will hasten the healing with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery when it is used for the belly is like nails: as it has been described before: and the shape of the cautery when it is used for the back is like olives as it has been described before
Regarding the treatment of the legs and feet with cautery. The head is the thirty-fourth part to be treated with cauterization
When swelling appears in hydrops, and the abdomen is filled with citrine urine: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the ankle and the heel: and hold your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it: then raise your hand: and do not move it at all
The urine is yellow, and the cautery should be performed in this fashion.
Then make upon each foot two incisions on either side of the ankle, and perform the cautery with the tip of the cautery knife: and perform the cautery along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other below the other ankle, approximately in the middle of the leg: and make upon every buttock two incisions: and withdraw the cautery without closure for a long time: until some urine is excreted thereby: then care for the rest as we have said.
Thus perform the cautery in the solution of the belly. Chapter 5.
When the solution of the belly is from cold and moisture until the toughness is relaxed and digestion is finished, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cared for with the methods of care and not healed: and the sick person tolerates the excessive heat of the cautery, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach, according to what was done in the cautery of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four cauteries around the navel, under the ribs, and a cautery on the navel itself, or two cauteries.
And if the urine moistens the excessive heat, and the sick person tolerates it, then cauterize him with a cautery on the loin, and a cautery on every hip: and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
There is indeed a useful cure for this, whose method does not err
Chapter 6. How to cauterize hemorrhoids
When the solution of the belly is from cold and moisture until the toughness is relaxed and digestion is finished, which are in the stomach and intestines: and it is cared for with the methods of care and not healed: and the sick person tolerates the excessive heat of the cautery, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his stomach, according to what was done in the cautery of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four cauteries around the navel, under the ribs, and a cautery on the navel itself, or two cauteries
When there are many or one old hemorrhoids, and they are from thick, cold or moist humours, and they do not yield to treatment, then cauterize three times with cautery over the lower part of the spine below the almond-shaped prominence and triangularly around it, and cauterize under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is hardened, and his food is not digested, and his face is pale and sweating, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery, as before: and cauterize over the liver and also over the spleen, with a cautery like a nail: and leave the cautery open for some time: then care for him until he is healed.
In this way, cauterize the anal opening after its excision.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 7.</start_of_turn>
When you excise the anal opening, then burn cautery that absorbs heat.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the burning cautery into the excised anal opening: and pull your last finger until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice.</start_of_turn If there are many anal openings, then cauterize each one as we have said.</start_of_turn
Then care for them, with that which we have said, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over the cushion, this is the last thing to do.</start_of_turn
In this way, cauterize the fistula in the anus.</start_of_turn
Head Chapter XXXVIII.
When the diseased part does not obey the section and the work which we have mentioned in its place, and returns to its original position, it is possible that it will heal with cautery.
When this happens to any fistula, and it becomes old, pus flows from it, and it softens the corrupted matter
Therefore it is necessary to explore it with a fine hook.</start_of_turn>
Then recognize the depth of its cavity with the hook.</start_of_turn
Then apply cautery, which is like a rod.</start_of_turn
Then enter the flame itself into the fistula and the quantity in which the clamp has entered.</start_of_turn And repeat the cautery over the part, until all the corrupted bodies are consumed, once, or twice, or three times, according to the necessity.</start_of_turn
And guard against the burning of nerves, if there are any, or great veins: or if the fistula goes to the belly or to the intestines, then guard against these places.</start_of_turn
Do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshy place: and remember that it is not penetrable.</start_of_turn>
Then take care of the place until it heals.</start_of_turn
If, however, the place is sealed and the matter is removed from it, and remains thus for a long time: then you know that it is fully healed.</start_of_turn
And if the matter is not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrable, or that there is a broken bone in its depth, or something like that: of which memory will come to its place.</start_of_turn
On the method of cauterizing the Renes.
On the method of cauterizing the kidneys.
When it happens in the kidneys that there is pain from cold or from great swelling, and that it diminishes because of that what is diseased, then it is necessary to cauterize the latter over the marrow above the kidneys, cauterizing all the kidneys with the cautery of the claw, which must be preceded by recollection.
And perhaps we must also cauterize the latter in the same marrow.
For there will arise three lines.
Therefore will there remain two behind the cautery mark
On the method of cauterizing the bladder.
When there is pain in the bladder from cold or from great swelling, and that it diminishes because of that what is diseased, then it is necessary to cauterize the latter over the bone above the bladder, cauterizing the whole bladder with the cautery of the claw, which must be preceded by recollection. When pain affects the bladder, and swelling from gravel and moisture persists until the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the lower part of the belly above the bladder where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right side of the belly and from the left side of it: and let the length of the cauterization be according to the quantity of the thumb node. And cauterize the lower back, or two cauterizations if necessary: and let it be as the previous cauterization was.
When pain affects the bladder, and swelling from gravel and moisture persists until the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the lower belly above the bladder where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right and left sides: let the length of the cauterization be as great as the thumb joint. And cauterize the lower back, or twice if necessary. When pain affects the bladder, and swelling from gravel and moisture persists until the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the lower belly above the bladder where the hair of the testicles begins, and cauterize from the right and left sides: let the length of the cauterization be as great as the thumb joint. And cauterize the lower back, or twice if necessary.
When pain affects the bladder, and swelling from gravel and moisture persists until the patient is unable to retain urine, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in the treatment of the bladder, and also cauterize the lower back, or twice if necessary.
When pain affects the bladder, and swelling from gravel and moisture persists until the patient is unable to retain urine, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in the treatment of the bladder, and also cauterize the lower back, or twice if necessary
When pain affects the bladder, and swelling from gravel and moisture persists until the patient is unable to retain urine, then it is necessary to cauterize three times around the navel, as we have mentioned in the treatment of the bladder, and also cauterize the lower back, or twice if necessary
When moisture of the mucous membrane flows down to the knee of the Ancha, and this is the cause of its displacement from its place: and the sign of this is that one thigh is prolonged over the other, when compared to the normal: and the dislocation is found in that part.
It is necessary therefore that the cautery be applied to the diseased part above the Anchae nut with a cautery of similar size in a circle: when you have signed with the cautery around the circumference of the nut, as it is wont to do: and that the nut itself should fall into the middle of the circle.
The cautery should be of the size which was previously mentioned in the cautering of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present, then you must cauterize with three cauteries, with a large olive cautery: and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin of the whole
Then care for it until it is healed
Regarding the cautering of the sciatica.</start_of_turn> Chapter 43.</start_of_turn>
When pain occurs in the nut of the Anchae, and the cause of it is cold and moisture: and the disease is cured with that which we have mentioned in the treatise, and no other remedy is of use, and the disease persists: then it is necessary to drain the diseased part from the gross humours with poultices of stench, or with artificial pills, or things of that kind.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize it.</start_of_turn
And the method of cautering in these two ways: either with the cautery and the burning of drugs, or with fire alone.</start_of_turn
The cautery with fire is in various methods.</start_of_turn
One of them is that you cauterize above the Anchae nut with three triangular cauteries, in this shape.</start_of_turn
And make the depth of it well, or little.</start_of_turn
And there shall be space between every burn of quantity equal to the length of a finger: and let the burn be of olive oil.
When, however, the burn is made in the middle above the head of the arch of the same.
Because there are four burns.
And if you burn with a circle, whose form precedes the burn of dislocation of the arch, one: so that it encloses the whole arch
And burn the thickness of the whole skin
This is the manner of burning in Sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the arch itself, and does not extend until the cox and thigh
If, however, it extends until the cox and thigh, then burn with two burns on the cox, on the place where the sufferer feels the pain there, and with the fourth burn four fingers wide on the lower side: and let the burn be with a knife And let the depth of the burn be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin
And if the sufferer says that the pain extends almost up to the toes, then burn there where the pain is felt with a single burn, or three, or four, or as many as are needed there
And if he says that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then burn there with a single knife burn
And burn in all your burning, so that you do not reach the nerves or great artery, and that you do not draw down the diseased matter over the sufferer's body, or cause contraction.
I also know of one and another who have burned above the foot, and have finished their burning, and the thigh has swollen, until the whole foot has become swollen, and has burst open, and become corrupted throughout: then there has followed a solution of the belly, and a black fluid has appeared after that.
If pain exists in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
And some wise men have said concerning cauterization of the anus, that this is the method.
Make a mark like that from iron, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and be at the orifice according to the thickness of the kernel of the thumb, or less: and there be within it a third of itself.
And there be space between every mark according to the quantity of the thumb knot: and the marks be opened from two parts: and their height be like a knot, or two knots: and make a handle of iron adapted to the center of the marks
This is its form.
Then it is ignited in fire, until it turns red, and spits out sparks: then it is placed over the abscess inflamed over the healthy side
Thus do three cauterizations round about in one place
Then leave it for three days.
After that apply butter with ointment: and discharge the wound opened for many days.
Then care for it with unguents, until it heals
Albucasis says, concerning this kind of cauterization, we rarely use it, because of the terror of its appearance: and because of this, few people expect it over it
Indeed, from the good ones it has its place.
The cauterization with physicians is confirmed, so that you make two marks having a perforated arm, in which the kernel of the wrist comes down from the air, or from iron, the length of the wall: whose height be two knots, or like those.
And there be space between each two quantities of the length of a finger, and there be openings below and above: and there be that which contain themselves against each other, according to this form.
And lay the thumb upon the heel of the foot, the sick lying upon the broad side of the sound foot
And compress your hand upon the heel of the foot much
And pour between two circles of hot water, which be heated with fire lightly, and keep it for the quantity of an hour of time: and the sick shall endure the biting of it, and the biting of him, for he himself finds the biting like fire, until the biting ceaseth.
And lift up your hand with the instrument, and wash the hot water from the whole foot with sweet water: and send it away for three days.
And put upon it butter, until the black of the wound be removed: and send it away for a few days, and there shall come out of it pus.
It is in the end in the healing.
And care for it with unguents, until it be healed.
If the pain extend unto the hip, or the thigh: make for him a bath in which there be water equal to that which thou didst make in the foot.
And this is the manner of hot water: and I have written concerning it in the treatise of the rectification of medicine.
Take alkali, and burnt lime of both an equal part: mix them both together and put them into a new vessel, of which the lower part be pierced with a small hole according to the quantity which enters into it: and put under the bottom of the vessel another vessel filled with water: and pour over the alkali and the lime from sweet water, which shall cover both by a finger: and when thou hast compressed them with thy hand well: and send away the vessel, until the acute water of the lower part of the treated vessel descend.
Then add the whole water and throw the upper heel over the lower heel: and withdraw until it returns.
The heel is then made strong and acute, which is administered in many medical operations, and in cauterization of the remaining limbs.
For it does the work of the fire itself.
And among the physicians, those who cauterize extensively, such as tessies, and beech gum, and nutgall, and lime with soap, know how to mix both of these together
And Galen himself reports that a certain ancient physician, who cured the pain of an ingrown nail and sciatica: and praised his skill.
He also said that it is unnecessary for any other treatment, and that he was cured by a single bath, until he returned, for he himself perhaps dipped into the hot bath, and came out of it already cured And it is taken from the green barley of the seer: and if it cannot be found green, take it dry, pounded: and take it often with some fat, and apply it to the ankle, knee, or thigh: and bind it, and leave it for three hours, or for as long as the patient feels its soothing effect
Then put it into the bath.
When the body is softened by the bath, put it into the bandage
For the pain disappears, and it is cured
And you know that no other cauterization should be used along with these physicians, except after the evacuation of the body.
Dioscorides also reports that when goat dung is cauterized with the nail of a sciatica, it gives relief: and it does cauterize in this way.
Let a lancet be taken, and let an ancient oil be drunk, and let it be placed upon the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and between the heel, and is closer to the heel.
Then take dry goat dung and burn it, until it is charcoal
Then place it upon the lancet and let it go, until it is extinguished.
Do it again.
Do not cease to do this until sensation returns through the middle until the pain has ceased
And this method of cauterization is called the cauterization of the Vaccinum.
Of the cauterization of the pain of the back
Chapter 44.</start_of_turn>
When pain occurs in the back from a wound of many, or from a fracture, or from excessive evacuation, or in like manner, from the infusion of cold and humid material: and the cauterization is not useless, except in this kind alone, which is made from the infusion of cold material.
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the patient with foul pills and like things, to make three lines upon the back, where the pain is, according to the width of the palm of the hand, after having signed with the cautery in every line five burnings, or more according to the quantity which comes from the patient's tolerance or the extent of his suffering: and let the cauterization be made with the cautery needle.
And if you will, cauterize three or four times with the middle caulking needle, according to this form.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the swelling of the knee
Head Chapter XLV.
Many times this ailment occurs in young children.
And the sign of its beginning in children is that it occurs with a tightening of the bowels in inspiration towards elevation, and movement: and you will find it in the last rib and the nodes of the back, which begin to bulge over the rest of the ribs.
When you have done this, and you wish to make it, then burn it with a cautery in the shape of a circle around this form
And take the cautery and burn it equally over every part of the ribs: and if you wish to burn around the ribs with a point cautery, make two or three points close together.
Then care for the place, until it heals as we have said
And be careful, lest you administer the cautery to the swelling, which is in the spasm of the nerve.
In the same way as for cauterizing in podagra, and for joined pains. Head Chapter XLVI
When the pains of the joints are from cold humors that flow upon any part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call this Podagra
When it is cured by cold causes of Podagra, with the methods of treatment, and not by removing the pain, then the cautery will remove it
And it is to be done after the evacuation around the joints of the feet with many cauteries: and let the cautery be of Olive oil
This is its form
If the point has become softened upon the foot, then make as with the cautery of the point.
If pain rises up to the knee, or if the other bands remain, and this often happens, then cauterize the whole knee with three cauteries, or four from all sides, with the same cautery of Clauili. If indeed further cauterization is necessary, then cauterize it.</start_of_turn> Do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather keep the thickness of the skin around it.</start_of_turn>
If pain rises up to the knee and the back: then perform what we said concerning the cautery in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
If the pain is in the hands only, then point the cautery around the nails, as two lines are twisted together.</start_of_turn
If, however, there remains pain in the toes, then point the cautery on every knot of the point, and on the nail of the hand.</start_of_turn
If pain rises up after a day to the elbows or the shoulders, then cauterize both from all sides.</start_of_turn
Do not burn the patient from the regimen of good treatment, from the recovery of physicians.</start_of_turn
For if there is a good regimen and the phlegm is evacuated, the patient will be healed by the aid of God with this cautery.</start_of_turn
About the cautery of ruptures.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLVII.</start_of_turn
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestines or bladder descend towards the testicles, and this is at the beginning close by: then it is necessary for the sick man to vomit immediately on that day.</start_of_turn
And as it descends from the belly, it is softened by the [use of] gentle [instruments].
Then sit between your hands over his back: and command him to hold his breath, until he emerges, or until you see a wound or an intestine
Then draw it out with your fingers and sign over the fracture below the ribcage, with the sign of which extremity is similar to the middle of the circle towards the upper parts of the body.
Then burn the cautery, which has this shape, until it turns white, and throw away the black matter.
Then reduce the intestine or the wound to its cavity.
Then put your hand over the place, so that the intestine does not go out: and I will open between the ribs, and put under it powder, and a servant over his ribs, and another over his chest which holds his hand
Then put the cautery over the sign, your hand with the cautery standing upright
And hold it until you reach the bone: or repeat it with it once more if you did not achieve it with it from the first time until the bone
And be prudent in observing the exit of the intestine during the cautery, that you do not burn it, and that it comes out through that over the patient or the blood, or great malice
And you know, that when you do not achieve the bone with the cautery, your operation is useless.
And it is necessary that the cautery be fine for children, according to their measure.
Then care for the rest of the wounds, until they are healed.
And if a patient lies upon his back for forty days, until the [healing] sign appears.
And it must be provided that you give him nourishment throughout the duration of his treatment, so that it softens his belly: that it does not remain empty alongside the ailment and cause evacuation.
Then when the sign appears after forty days, then administer the ligature of the navel done, and keep it for another forty days.
For when you use this regimen, it will heal completely.
When however ruptures occur in the rest of the belly, and are in their beginnings, and you wish not to add them, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity: and let this be until it has hardened like a third of its size
Then care for it as we have said: and do not add to it.
And some people say: cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this shape
When the sign appears with encrustation, and a line is drawn which is through the width at the upper side of the rupture, and a line which is lower And place your hand in the middle with the cautery nail.
But the first cautery is easier and better. In the case of pains caused by a fall or blow.
Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn>
When an accident happens to some part of the body, either from a blow or from a wound, and the pain persists for a long time and does not subside with treatment from physicians: then it is necessary to cauterize with the Puncti instrument.
The cautery must be performed according to the size, shape, flexibility, and toughness of the part, and according to its position and the degree of pain arising from it.
If, therefore, healing takes place from the first cautery, that is good
If not: then repeat the cautery over it again
For in the case of these kinds of pains, it is customary to pass from one part to another that approaches them
Therefore one must follow them with the cautery until the patient is healed
Concerning the cautery of Lepra.
Chapter XLVIX
Leprosy, however, must sometimes be cauterized with the greatest intensity.
And especially the kind of leprosy that arises from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: in such a case one must carefully consider the cautery of it
If, however, the leprosy is severe and does not yield to treatment as we have said above, and does not subside: and times over the patient extends over the whole complexion of the body: then burn over the head five times: one in the middle of the head, and the second below it at the end of the hair, and two over the two horns, and one behind the nape of the neck
And finally touch your hand with the cautery lightly, until it makes an imprint in the bone, and the cortices are dislodged from it: so as to allay the emission of foul vapor from it. And cauterize also the spleen according to what has been said before
If however leprosy has become sparse on the diseased person and is clearly visible: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with these cauteries which we mentioned at the head, and with cauterization on the extremity of the nose, and with two cauteries on two maxillas, and with two cauteries on two spondyles of the neck, and six on the spondyles of the back, and one large one on the flanks near the great buttocks and one above the very belly: and two on the ankles: namely one on every ankle, and two on the knees, one on every knee, and two on the humeri, and two on the cubits, and two on the tendons of the chest. And cauterize it over every joint, from the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and from every heel of the feet.
And cauterize them from the nerves which are over the back of the heel, so that you do not burn those. And when cauterizing is done with a cautery over the rib cage, and another over the stomach, and another over the spleen.
And know that the more you add cauteries, the greater the damage, and the greater the risk.
And you know that the sick person does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they do not feel it in health: because the body of him is already stupefied.
And it is necessary that the cauteries should be of a suitable size, and in number according to the parts and joints: according to what precedes from the kinds of instruments.
Head L.
When any limb is stiff and does not recover with physicians, oils, and plasters, then cauterize the stiff limb with cautery, according to the size of the limb or its hardness.
And let your cautery not pass through the thickness of the skin lightly.
Then care for it with unguent until it heals
And when cauterized for some stiffness of the hand or foot, in the vertebrae of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb: then the stiffness will be removed
But do not presume this without knowledge of the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move the body
In this manner cauterize in Albaras.
Head LII
When Albaras is old and does not improve with any treatment: then cauterize over the deep cautery with a great cautery, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color is changed
Then care for it with barley flour, and lentils with rose oil, and arnica leaves, and columbine blood, and hyssop blood: take a part of each of these things: mix them together and apply them over the wound, and they will adhere to the place until it heals.
In this manner cauterize in cancer
Head LII
When cancer is beginning and you wish to make it stop: then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it turns around
Wise men have said, "The last cautery should be done in the middle.
I do not see that. For I fear that it will cause damage. And I have seen this happen many times before. It is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said, or with many cautery instruments. Concerning the cautery of Adubelati.
Chapter LIII.
When someone has Adubelati and it is delayed in maturation, or because of excessive swelling, or because of old age which makes the blood weak, or because of time, and you wish to speed up the maturation of Adubelati, then cauterize around it with many small cautery instruments by pricking
Then remove the swelling
For it will itself speed up the maturation.
If you wish to perforate it with the cautery, then make a small incision with the cautery instrument.
And place it in the middle of Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin: and let the cautery be distant from the infirm from that which follows.
Then care for it until it heals
Concerning the cautery of a running wound. Chapter LIIII
A running wound is not except for a corruption in a movable limb, and it consumes it: like fire consumes dry wood
If you see a running wound in a place where you can apply the cautery with fire, then make many small and large sparks, according to what is convenient in the place where the running wound is
Then burn it thoroughly from all sides until you have removed the entire corruption, and let nothing remain of it inside. Leave it for three days, and place above the burned area sulfur in powder mixed with oil, until all the carbuncles are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
Care for it with nourishing poultices of flesh.
If, however, after three days, new flesh has grown in a healthy state, without any corruption, that is good
And if not: then burn again the parts that remain of the corrupted areas
The wounds are treated with acute medicine as needed
The burn itself disappears from the place where it was made.
Indeed, the burn is faster with fire: and I have already said that the cauterization of that is with acute medicine in its entirety: take it there wherever you wish it, when you wish it there
In this way, burn in Clauis and Verucis. Chapter LV.
Many times this disease occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a gross, oozing thing that spoils the foot And the cauterization of it is in two ways: with fire, and with hot water
As for the fire, make the cauterization of the concave surface like the nail of a lizard: which is done with iron, according to the quantity that it contains the limb from all sides: and let it be fine along the edges
Then place the burning iron on the limb Then draw the hand back with the cautery around the circumference of the nail, until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail: and leave it for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then cover it with wool plugs and bandage it with salt: and leave the bandage on it at night. It will itself disappear from its roots.
Then take care of the place where the tissue has been burned, until it heals
If they are not congealed, and many of them happen in the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then apply in it the cautery with warm water: and take a needle from the air, or iron, or from the quill of an ostrich: and place it over the nail, or the splinter
Then pour a little quantity of warm water into the needle: hold your hand firmly, and draw the needle out with pressure, so as to impress the mark of the needle at the root of the nail, and find the warm water at the depth, at the root of the nail: and expect the patient to wait a while above the application of the warm water for an hour.
Then leave it, for the nail will be eradicated with its roots
Thus do with one after the other, until you arrive over all those which are in the body from the cautery
Then take care of them after they have been eradicated, with what is generated from the cautery of the flesh
In this way, cauterizing in Tremore.
Chapter 66.
When it happens to anyone to have a tremor from the cold in a nerve, or from a quartan fever, or from something else: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize with the cautery, and in the belly of it cauterize, and over the stomach of it cauterize
The tremor ceases when the olive oil cautery is applied, and health returns to the cold ailment. The tremor subsides when the olive oil cautery is used, and health returns to the cold ailment.
Chapter 57.
When the bad blood is expelled from the body of Albathir, that is, pus that arises from corrupted matter
Therefore, in the first place, when they appear, they must be cauterized over every head of the pus with fine cautery made of the branch of myrrh, whose extremity is kindled with fire
Or with the root of long aristolochia.
Or with lenticular cautery And when they are cauterized diligently, at the beginning of their expulsion, in this way: and they do not grow; they are broken down by excessive flow, and health returns from the heat.
However, it is necessary to perform this after the expulsion with phlebotomy.
How to cauterize in the flow of blood from an artery to a wound.
Chapter 58 When there is a great flow of blood from an artery that has been cut at a wound, which happens either externally or at the base of the wound, or by cautery of a limb, or similar things: and this makes it difficult to close the wound
When this happens to anyone, then take hold of your hand at the orifice of the artery, and place your index finger above it: and tighten it much, until the blood stops flowing from under your finger, and does not flow out from there again Then put on the fire a few small olive stones and many more in number: and blow over them until they are ignited.
Then take from the jar one, or a few, or many, according to the wound and the place, where the artery is ruptured, and place the cautery on the very wound: after which you withdraw your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood is clotted
If it is expelled with the withdrawal of the finger from the orifice of the artery, and you extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those which are prepared in the fire. Do not cease to do this until the blood is clotted.
Be careful, lest you burn the nerve which is there, and do not add anything else to the wound. And you know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop it: especially when the artery is great, except with four fingers.
Or with the cautery, as we have said before.
Or by extraction, when it is not extracted For when it is extracted, the extremities recoil and the blood is clotted
For when it is extracted, the extremities recoil and the blood is clotted Or it is bound with a strong ligature
Or are placed upon it medicines which have the property of clotting blood, and are bound with a tight constriction
Whoever performs an excision of it with a ligature, and a tightening with a bandage, or with fire, or other similar things, does not give it sufficient pain, except rarely.
If however it happens to anyone of these, and there is no physician present, neither medicine: then begin with the position of the index finger over the orifice of the wound, as we have said, and constrict it tightly until the blood is overcome from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery
And the finger must not be moved, but rather let it rest upon the ice-cold water until the blood congeals, and then it will swell up and be separated. Meantime, consider what is needed from the cautery or from medicine in this case.</start_of_turn>
(End of first part of the treatise.)</start_of_turn>
Book of Surgery by Albucasis, Second Part.</start_of_turn> Concerning Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and things of a like nature.</start_of_turn
We have already said in the first chapter that every ailment which demands the use of either cautery or burning medicine, and which has its causes and its instruments, and the forms of cautery.</start_of_turn And I shall treat of the chapters following from the head down to the foot.</start_of_turn
And I shall proceed in this chapter in the same way: as a seeker of knowledge demands.</start_of_turn And before I begin this, let me remind you, dear son, what was said in the first chapter concerning cautery.</start_of_turn
Therefore, you must be cautious in this operation, for in this chapter there are many instances where blood flows out excessively with the opening of the vein, or the incision of the skin, or the opening of an abscess, or the draining of a wound, or the extracting of an arrow, or the incision of a stone, and such like: from which all these things are associated with tremor, and fear, and cause a loss of blood in many.</start_of_turn
And I warn you, do not be afraid of this, for in this art as in the art of healing the sick, there is always some danger.</start_of_turn
He who is angry with his ailment is like the sea towards him: because of his expectation that he will find from his illness and the length of his suffering.
When an ailment is accompanied by fear of death, it is truly terrifying
And from him who takes care of his ailment, and who hopes for his recovery, his ailment itself becomes harmful. It is not right that you should consent to the arrival of him from whom comes his ailment.
Be wary of excessive expectation, rather than of love and rapacity
Do not presume that you know more than is proper from him, except after you have learned the certain science which reveals to you what is useful and what is harmful
Utilize all the means for the care of all sick people, for prognostication and for the indication of what is beneficial to health
For in this lies your help in acquiring fame and glory, and in memory and praise
May God inspire you, his son, your intellect, and do not take away from you direction and inspiration: for this is in his hand.
And I, too, have set this chapter apart by chapters, following the order of the Cauterion from the chest down to the feet: so that I may relieve you of the burden which you suffer from, and of which you inquire
Of the treatment of water which collects in the heads of children.
Chapter I.
You know that this ailment often occurs in children at the time of birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without lubrication.
Whenever anything happens, even from an occult cause which is not discerned.
I have not observed this ailment in others besides children: and concerning all those from whom I have learned, the sea has always been sufficient for them; therefore it seems to me that it is necessary for me to defer the operation in this case.
I have observed among children that when their heads were filled with water and their heads grew large every day, they could not sit on their own because of the size of their heads, and there was an increase in moisture until they died
Moisture of this kind either collects between the skin and the bones or accumulates under the bones over the flesh
If there is moisture between the skin and bones and the swelling is slight, it is necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head, about the length of two knots, in order to drain the moisture.
This is the form of the sponge.
If the moisture is much increased and the swelling is great, two incisions should be made, according to this form
If the moisture is under the bone and its sign is that you see the edges of the head open from all sides: and the moisture is drained out when you press your hand inwards, without it being hidden: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this manner.
And after the incision drain out all the moisture.
Then cover this with oil and vinegar until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligament and care for the wound with tension and attention.
Do not suspend the tying of the head with equality.
And bind the diseased limb with little moisture, until it is comfortable and healed
And another method of incision is when you consider where the swelling of the abscess is great, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is at the back more, or in the cheek, or in the right, or in the left.
Therefore ascend gently with the incision where you see the abscess and the collection of water: and cut that as much as you can.
Observe, that you do not cut an artery, and there is increased flow of blood, and the diseased limb will die from that flow with the evacuation of the moisture
Of the incision of the arteries which are behind the ears
Chapter II.
When any swelling occurs to the eyes or to the chest, and it grows old, and no remedy of medicine helps: then the last remedy is the incision of these two arteries
It is necessary therefore when you wish to cut easily, that you draw out the diseased head
Then rub the place with a rough cloth, so that the arteries appear
Then bind the diseased limb with anything that you wish
Then consider where the vein beats.
And the places where both of them are, which are behind the ears depressed: and they are rarely hidden, except in some people
Then sign with a burn on each side: and cut each one with a needle as sharp as possible, cutting through to the bone: and do this for the width of the head.
If necessary, introduce the sponge inside the vessel and cut the vein above with the incision.
The length of the incision should be like two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with a pulsatile flow, which jumps inside frequently
If the artery does not appear to be sensible, then it is necessary to measure from the ear to the quantity of three fingers
Then mark with a cautery, and find until the bone.
And that which must be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less is emitted from it The whole of this is according to the quantity which appears to you from the suffering of the patient and the refilling of the artery.
Then consider the wound
Then if there remains anything to the bone from the soft parts, then cut that, so that no thick swelling remains: then bind up the wound with strips of linen cloth
Then care for the wound with oil, until it is healed
On the extraction of arteries, which are in their time
Chapter 3.
When it happens to a man that an ancient hemorrhage occurs, or an acute catarrh because of acrid humilities and heat in the lacertis of the times, or an old soda, or urine, or similar things: and it is medicated with the methods of treatment of medicine, and it does not suffice: then we are experts in these ailments of the arteries of the times, or in cauterizing them, as we say
And the method of the operation in the extraction of these is that the sick man grasps the hair which are in the times, and directs it towards the visible artery in the time.
The pulse itself is often observed to betray its secrets, and is rarely hidden except among a few men or in cases of great cold.
If it is hidden, the sick person tightens his head with any garment he has: then he rubs the place with rough cloth.
Or he vaporizes the place with warm water, until his pulse reappears clearly. Then take sponge, which was before like this form Then cleanse with it the skin with ease, until you reach the artery.
Then draw out the thread to the outside, and pull it out from above, until you have drawn out the thread from the skin, and made it retract from the tunic which are under it from all sides
If the artery is fine: then loop the thread with the end of a needle
And then cut from that part according to the quantity of which the extremities are elongated, and tighten, and the blood flow does not occur.
For if it is not cut, and if it is not tied off, the blood does not rise fully Then evacuate from the blood about six ounces, until three ounces remain
If the artery is large: then it is necessary that you bind the thread in two places from a double thread, strong, from silk: or from horsehair, so that it does not become putrefied before the wound is consolidated, and the blood flow is restored
Then cut off the surplus, which is between two ligatures.
Do this in an hour, or after an hour And if necessary, cauterize the thread with a cautery until it reaches the bone, with a surgical knife: until the extremities have receded from it, and the place of the work is stable.
It is better work if the patient does not have a fever, or if their complexion is flushed.
For indeed the cautery is an agent which brings about the drying out of humors.
Therefore it is better to treat the patient.
And it is necessary after the extraction of arteries that the place be closed with a cautery in its former state: and that there be placed upon the latter part of the thread which has been made in the middle
And after the closing should be cared for with dry medicines which cause the generation of flesh, and with sponges, until the wound is healed
Should blood flow from the artery meanwhile while you are working, then immediately stop it with the cautery, or tie the place with silk: and press your hand, until the blood is stopped
If nothing of these is present, then put over the place your finger, until the blood congeals.
And embroider the place with cold water, until the pain has ceased, and then bind as seems necessary.
And concerning that which is easier and more convenient for the extraction of an artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two blades: and that the pain of the two blades be similar to an almond
Indeed their pain is much less than that of two blades
For if they are acute, like two blades, both are subject to cold: and they do not cause the flesh to tear with speed
And because in the air there is a little of the size of a barleycorn, it is held in the air of the fire and is severed more quickly: with this work is better in all respects, and is easier, and more convenient.
And let there be space between two knives equal to the length of a finger, after you have marked two points with the cautery: and lay both of them alight until they reach the bone, and they shall penetrate in two places: so as to lengthen that which is between their extremities.
For this cautery does not coagulate deeply.
This is the form of the cautery.
About the care of acute tears from the eyes.
Chapter III
When tears are acute and flow from the eyes which are above the outer part of the head: and do not cause any medicine with the physicians, and the tears make the face of the patient red, and he feels walking in front like ants: and his eyes are swollen, wet, as if they were eaten away by the scales: and his eyelids are inflamed from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients deemed it necessary in their treatment for these tears to perform an operation, and they called this treatment "Ens.
And it is necessary to shave the hair on his face for the patient.
Then make three incisions on the forehead equally distant according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of the lower part of the jaws, and the third from the other side: and burn from the arteries which are in the two sides: and extend your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let there be space from the incision equal to the length of three fingers together: and let there be a sponge prepared, or dry cloth, with which to soak up the blood.
Then introduce the sponge-bag of two acute extremities, whose shape follows.
From the incision from the temporal side to the second incision: and scrape the whole skin between the two incisions, with the sponge-bag, which is above the bone Then do the same from the middle incision to the second incision
Then withdraw the sponge-bag and introduce another instrument into the first incision, which is called the acute knife, from one side gently, not acutely from the other side.
This is its shape.
And place the acute edge of it towards the meat attached to the skin, and the gentle side towards the bone: and press it in until it reaches the middle opening: and cut through everything that descends from the head to the eyes: except that which continues from the skin.<start-of-turn>
Then do the same in the middle opening until the other opening.<start-of-turn>
And after it has bled out an equal amount, express the place from the clotted blood.<start-of-turn Then place on every incision a bandage of old cotton, and place over that soaked sponges in wine, and wax or vinegar.
And take care that there be no formation of a soft swelling.
And on the third day suture the ligament, and give a plentiful infusion with warm water.<start-of-turn>
Then care for the wound from the marrow, and leave the other wounds to heal: until they are healed.<start-of-turn>
As for the care of the acute tears and catarrh of the eyes from the inside of the head.<start-of-turn>
Chapter V.
When acute carbuncles occur, the area, edges and surrounding parts are affected: and the eyes become swollen, small and languid; the aspect is therefore distorted: the palpebrae are ulcerated, hairs fall out from the skin, and there is acute pain in the depth of the head, causing sneezing. Then take note of these signs, for these matters do not arise from carbuncles alone, except from numerous ulcers.
The best treatment for these is to take note of these signs.</start_of_turn>
It is also proper to shave the patient's face.</start_of_turn>
Then make an incision one finger's breadth in the middle of the face, or on the other side across the width, and begin the incision from the left ear to the right ear: and keep the incision down to the bone: and stretch your hand from the edges of the wound, which move with chewing, until the bone is reached: and you will have excised the whole blood with the sponge.</start_of_turn>
Then separate the two lips of the wound with coarse cotton wool, or with strips of linen.</start_of_turn
Then bind up above with threads: and soak the threads with wine and oil, so that there does not form a thick scab.</start_of_turn
And when you have finished with this, and the swelling of the wound has diminished: then it is necessary to compress the bone, until new flesh begins to form in it.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself with a regimen of nourishment that promotes the healing of the wound: thus as if you were taking from wheat flour two parts and from barley four parts: and prepare from these ingredients a plaster, and administer it to the wound until the flesh has healed.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of that which falls into the ear. Concerning the care of that which falls into the ear. Every thing that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a mineral substance, like stone, or something like stone, such as iron; or it is vegetable, like cicer and beans; or it is a flowing substance, like water and vinegar, and wax like things; or something animal.
When such things as stone or other substances of like nature fall into the ear, they expose the ear to the open air: if oil is poured in, let some of the oily liquid be drained out of the ear with the finger or with a tube.</start_of_turn>
Then extract it and make the eardrum taut with conchs; anoint the nostrils above the eardrum, after you have put around the ear a bandage of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards.</start_of_turn>
Many things go out with this care.</start_of_turn>
If they do not go out, then extract them with tweezers, which are fine like needles: their form is like this.</start_of_turn
If they go out with the tweezers, that is good.</start_of_turn
And if they do not go out, extract them with a blunt needle of small size.</start_of_turn If they do not go out by this, make a tube of brass, and insert the end of the tube into the ear very much, and pour oil around the tube with soft wool, so that there be no air except the tube: then draw out with your hand.</start_of_turn Many things go out with this treatment.</start_of_turn
If it does not go out in this way: then take from the helkalimbat, or from the moisture, that is, prepared gluten, with which birds are captured, and put it on the extremity of the radius after you have wrapped around it above the ankle that is positioned downwards: then introduce it into the ear opening with ease, after you have expelled the wax from the moisture.
If it does not go out as we have said, then prepare to make an incision, before the swelling becomes hard, or spasm.
The way of making the incision is like a vein-cutting in the head: and extract from it from the blood according to the measure of its virtue.
Then make the patient sit between your hands, and bring round his ear to the upper part, and find the opening of the ear at the root of the ear towards the cartilage in the depressed place: and make the incision in a semicircular shape, until you reach the bone: then remove it with the instruments
Then sew up the incision quickly and diligently, and care for it, until it heals
If anything falls into the ear from a seed that grows and swells: then administer the extraction of it.
If it does not come out for you, then take a small sponge, fine and subtle, according to this form
And administer with it the excision of that kind from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do that when you think that that grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have put upon it many sponges: then extract it with hooks, or with a fine hand, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction will alleviate it.
And in water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to cough at first: and immediately put in his ear a little of the old cotton wool: and it is placed upon that ear in which is the water.
If he goes out through that, it is good.
If not: then take many stones, according to the length of the digit, tight, loose, and warm them with fire near, and introduce the sick person through one ear: and let him go out through the other ear, and strike him with a stone on the stone which is in the ear.
Do not cease doing this with the stone and the stone, until all the water has gone out.
And when the water has gone out, take from the fire or from a jug one, and introduce its extremity one into the ear: and raise the other extremity with fire, until most of it is consumed.
Then repeat the jug with another, and do this many times, until all the water has gone out: and extract it with a tube according to what is promised in the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that is within the ear, if it is small of the body, like a flea, and the like, take care of it as I have said in the explanation
But if it is of the body that appears to the sense: then manage the extraction of it with the hand, and with hooks: and its matter is easier for all who hold it in the ear
In the extraction of the worms generated in the ear, when you have cured it with what we have said in the discourse and in the treatise on distillations, and it does not yield your care: then it is necessary to burn the ear in the sun
If anything appears there from the worms, then extract it with the hand, or with fine hooks.
If nothing appears there, then take a tube, whose form is like this, strict below, wide above: and introduce the lower extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the sick person tolerates: then draw it out with that strong suction.
Do it many times until all worms emerge.
If they do not obey you until they come out, then pour oil around the cannula with earth, as I said on the stone.[start_of_turn]
When they do not emerge even with this, then perform distillations, which the ancients were experts in for the elimination of worms: and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.[start_of_turn]
And let your effusion be like that which you pour with oil and medicines into the wound with this instrument, whose form is shown here.
Like the wax which you make from silver or gold, tightly closed below, with a small hole above, wide above.
Let the force which is in the concavity of the cannula be made of air centered
And if you wish, take a sponge and moisten the end of it with a coating of the decoction: then pour oil, or gum, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the cannula: and let it be in the wound: then introduce the sponge with the coat above, and express it out with your hands in a temperate compression, until the oil is driven into the concavity of the ear, and you feel it inside the ear: and what is poured into the wound should be heated with fire immediately: for medicines do not tolerate being distilled when cold.
Of the care of the burn of gold.
(The provided text continues with the next section of the translation.)
When some infants emerge from the holes of their mothers’ wounds unperforated.
And sometimes it happens to some people that their ear is burned from the wound, or is born with it.
And sometimes this swelling arises in the profound cavity of the Ear, without causing any unusual sensation: and sometimes it occurs on the exterior of the cavity, and causes some unusual sensation.
And thus that which arises in the profound cavity of the Ear, and which does not comprehend the outward aspect, is difficult to heal in many situations
And when it causes sensation, the Ear must be placed under a sole, and the swelling must be pressed with a fine sponge: then if the swelling appears to be subsiding, open the opening somewhat with a slight incision, so that its edge may be slightly obtuse, while the remainder of the sponge should be soft on either side, so as not to irritate the Ear
If the swelling is caused by a natural growth of the flesh in the substance of the Ear, then hold it with a fine needle and cut it away with ease until the whole piece of flesh is removed
If the swelling is in the profound part of the Ear, then take a fine needle, soft and heat it with fire: then pass it into the substance of the Ear.
If then you sense swelling with this, which causes the patient to suffer from the weight of the hearing, try to open it with ease: and be careful not to injure the nerve of the Ear.
Then put in the Ear a plaster cast according to the quantity of the opening which you have made in the Ear: leave it for a few days, until you are certain that the wound has healed.
Or take a plaster cast, and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle over it ground alum, and use it on the Ear.
If you see the Ear still swollen after removing the swelling: then you must take out the cast and put it on another cast, which is made with rosewater, until the swelling subsides: then care for it until it is healed
If blood flow increases: then immerse the sponge, or pack the abdomen in cold water, and place above it a bandage: and employ the remaining treatment which separates the blood flow mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Regarding the care of the eyelids.
Chapter VIII These are the Altheli which arise in the eyelids, when they are wet and when they are dry.
It is necessary therefore to press them with pins: or with a single finger, and cut them away from their roots
Then place above the place a soaked sponge.
If blood flows from the wound, then cauterize it with a fine lancet
And the cauterization is better after the incision
Many of them indeed remain as long as something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, they burn those roots and they do not remain
Regarding the care of the great eyelid of the eye.
Chapter IX
Many things happen in the eyelids something which assimilates the Crandini in its height, and its hardness, and because of this it is called great: and it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid
The operation therefore in this is, as you see, if there is a great one proceeding from the eyelid, which appears from the eyelid and moves to every part, and its resolution is easy
Find therefore above it a split through the width
Then cleanse the wound from all sides with ease, until it be satisfied.
Then suspend the wound with a single suture, and cut it off.</start_of_turn>
But if it is not prepared for cutting, except when you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then it will be harmful to the patient in some way.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is large: then gather it together with a suture: and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if it is small, it will not cause any harm from it.</start_of_turn
The ointment will restore it and nourish the wound.</start_of_turn
And if it is large and extends downwards towards the inner part of the ear from the surface outwards, then turn the eyelid, and suspend the greatness with a single suture: except that you do not need an incision, and press the wound from all sides.</start_of_turn
And if you lengthen the eyelid by an incision, it will not cause any harm.</start_of_turn
Then wash the eye after the incision of the greatness with salt water: and care for the place with it which is nourished, until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
On the care of the eyelids.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 10.</start_of_turn>
Axirnath is a secretion which is generated in the upper eyelid: and it mostly happens in children: and it weighs down the eyes of them, and it causes them to have black spots in the mornings, and they are not able to see the sunlight, because the tears run down to them, and because of this the tears cause their faces to be always wet, and to sleep with their eyes open, and their eyelids are always wet under their eyebrows: and the prominence of the Axirnath is seen in the eye, and when you press on it with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.</start_of_turn
Thus is the manner of his operation, that he place the patient's head in your lap.
Then take the sheet of linen and prepare it in it a basin, and make from it a circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from every side.
Then place him thereupon, and press with your fingers from every side, so that Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle thereof moisture with some sponge-wool adhering to the tears of the wound for the width, and let not the wound be greater than that which is made in phlebotomy at depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the whole skin, until Axirnath proceeds from the wound according to the form of a white loaf of bread in many positions
Extract therefore the said limb with the cloth which you have filtered between your fingers to the outside: and you will turn your hand to the right and left, until it is dispersed: and be careful, lest you add to the wound, so that you do not reach the eye with the sponge-wool, and damage it
But if indeed Axirnath does not appear at the beginning of the wound, you add a little to the wound with ease, until Axirnath proceeds.
Then extract the limb as we have said above
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them upon the place, and bind them with threads.
And from men there are some who smear salt, and place it into the cavity of the wound, so that the remainder of that moisture may be liquefied.
Then care for it until it is healed.
But if there happens to be in the place of the after-boil a soft swelling, then care for it with cold compresses until it is healed
Concerning the mode of treating the eye when the eyelids are softened, so that it does not bulge as it should not.
Concerning the mode of treating the eye when the eyelids are softened, so that it does not bulge as it should not.
When additional hairs are added beyond the normal course under the natural hairs, and are of an excessive quantity: then they harm the eye, and cause methods of injury, such as excessive tears, softening of the eyelids, and pus, until such time as this becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And Ataxmir of the eye is cured according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire.
Or with acute medicine, as is mentioned previously in the chapter on cautery
Or by incision and stitching
Or by cannas, as I shall say
You must place the head of the patient in your lap
Then stretch out the eyelid of the eye with your left hand
If it is wrinkled, that is good
And if not: introduce the needle into the fold where there is a hair from the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are found: and draw the thread upwards with the eyelid, and tighten the fold.
And find under the added hairs in the interior part of the eyelid, with the greater lachrymal sac coming down to the lesser lachrymal sac
Then draw out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cotton wool or cloth: then mark over the eyelid with cautery, so that it is like the figure of a myrtle leaf
The wound must be closed, so that it forms a figure according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for it varies in different people.
The wound must be closed so that it forms a figure according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for it varies in different people. When the suture has been passed through two lines which you have marked, and you have begun from the larger lachrymal gland up to the smaller, make a single split near the natural hair, as is the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the needle through one of the two angles of the skin. Then remove the entire skin. Then gather together with the suture the two lips, with needle and fine thread: and stop the bleeding, and cause the excess to adhere to the two eyebrows, with some useful substance, if you wish to do so: or if not, do not cure it.
Then remove the suture and the thread, three or four days later: afterwards care for it. And if you wish, remove the scab without a suture, and care for it, which will dry and contract
For the eyelid is elevated with the closing of the wound and the gathering together of its parts: but the future is better.
This is the way of healing which the ancient Ataxmir doctors taught.
Indeed, in this is solicitude over the infirm, and this is from a good operation, and not in this is there any fear.
And another way is in Ataxmir also: and it is that the sign on the eyelid should form a figure like the figure of the leaf of a myrtle, as we have narrated.
Then elevate the eyelid with three separate hooks, or gathered together, according to the shape of this which follows, then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors, according to this shape, with equality of the incision.
If, however, it is not possible to hold the hook, and it is not equal: then grasp the point where the suture is, and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another suture near the greater lacrimal gland, and another suture near the smaller lacrimal gland: and gather together the threads between your fingers with equality
Then elevate your hand with equal elevation: and elevate the skin above which the mark is made of the limb, as we have narrated.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with a suture: and care for it until it is healed.
If, however, swelling occurs at the incision or the wound: retain this swelling with a compress, and with similar things, from sitting unguents.
And when the eyelids are also swollen, as their hair turns them.
About care for Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is, that you cover the eyelid, and split the wound which is between the teeth, according to what I have narrated
Then make two needles, or two slender sticks: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of the pupil: and insert it at the extremities of both from both parts where you have the thread.
Then gather together both things with slightness over that which is superfluous from the eyeball, and string two needles from both parts firmly, and let go of them every few days. The skin, when tightly stretched, will die, darken, and decay until it falls apart by itself.
If it lingers, then cut it through with scissors.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
When it has consolidated, elevate the eyelid: and do not puncture the hair.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of two needles, which you make according to this figure and the quantity in length and width.</start_of_turn
Regarding the elevation of hair pricked in the eye with a needle.</start_of_turn
Chapter XII.</start_of_turn>
The operation in this case is as follows: take a fine needle and introduce it under the silk thread, which is fine.</start_of_turn Then join the ends together and knot both ends with a fine knot: and let the length of the thread be equal to one palm.</start_of_turn
Then make another fine thread pass through the eye of the needle in a short space, and knot the ends of it if you wish.</start_of_turn
Then place the patient's head in your lap, and let it be close to the ground so that the operation is evident: because the operation is fine, or even less.</start_of_turn
Then introduce the needle with the thread through the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you have extracted the natural hair.</start_of_turn
Then draw out the hair until above the thread: and introduce into the thread the light of the hair: if there is one, or two, or three, not more.</start_of_turn
Then grasp your hand with that [same] hand, until the hair emerges with the bristles mingled in the eyelashes with the natural hair.
Then grasp your hand with that hand, until the hair emerges with the bristles mingled in the eyelashes with the natural hair.
If the hair is short, then either join to it a long hair from the natural hair and elevate it with that: or cast it away, until it has grown out again, and then elevate it.
Concerning the care of the eyelash that happens in the upper eyelid.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called the Leporina.
And this eyelash is either natural or accidental
Accidental, therefore, is done from the consolidation of a wound, or a section, or a cauterization, and the like of these things
And the way to operate on this is to find that consolidation, and to separate its lips, and to put between them a little piece of linen, and to bind them together, until it heals
And do not use in the treatment of this anything that will irritate and constrict: for if you do, the eyelash will deteriorate more than before: rather use those things that soften, such as barley-straw: and embroil with water, in which be dissolved salt, poppy seed: and oil of ivy, which is liquefied with some oil: and mix with that the lint, and care for it with that.
Your surgical skill is such that you can overcome every difficulty without hindrance, following the initial form.
This operation is not complete without some rectification of the Alkhatrati, so that the form may return to its original state. The care of the Alkhatrati which is in the lower eyelid is to raise or contract above to the right and left.
Chapter 123.
This lower Alkhatrati is what is truly called the Alkhatrati.
It is natural, and is accidental
It is caused by a wound, or a split, or a burn, or things like these
And the way to perform the operation in this case is to grasp the needle, which has a doubled thread, and pass it through the meat from the left lacrimal gland to the right lacrimal gland, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the meat
And then extend the meat upwards with the needle, and cut the vein with a wide spatula
If the figure of the eyelid returns to its original state, that is good.
And if not, grasp the suture, and put it into the split, and close it with the eyelid: and find two holes in the inner side of the eyelid, and the extremities of the two holes are from the two angles of the incision, until they converge and make an angle: until when they converge, the figure of them both becomes like the Greek letter lambda.
And then remove that part of the meat which is as wide as the acute angle below, from that which follows the eyelid.
Then join the separated parts: thus with a thread of wool.
Then care for them as we have said, with soothing medicines, and applications, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the flesh should slip from the wound, from the suture or cautery: then it is necessary to find the wound even under the eyelashes, even as before.</start_of_turn
Then separate between two lips with an application, as we have said.</start_of_turn
And the sum of the discourse concerning the care of the Alxatra is, when it is above or below, that it should be treated in that operation, according to the form of the Alxatra.</start_of_turn
For itself, there are many varieties in the form: and a prudent artist prepares the limb in any way that is possible, until he has restored the figure to its natural shape, or as near as possible, and even the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in many arrangements.</start_of_turn
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva, or the cornea.</start_of_turn
Chapter XV.</start_of_turn>
When this happens to many people, it is like the consolidation of the upper eyelid with the white of the eye, and it hinders its natural operations.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore to introduce the edge of the radius under the eyelid, and to elevate it upwards: or to extend it with a needle: then cut through the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which is not with the sharpness of the incision of the scalpel, but rather obtusely near: so that it does not irritate the patient during the operation, and that the scalpel be withdrawn easily, and that the eye be restored to its natural shape: and that the adhesion be completely healed.</start_of_turn
Pour water into the eye, with water driving out the former: or distill it into it from a vessel made, from gum dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a strip of linen: and put over the eye wool soaked in alum or chalk: and after three days use a sponge, and with solids, until it is healed
As for the incision of the nail and the protrusion of the flesh of the tear ducts.
Chapter XVI.</start_of_turn>
You know that the nail is according to two modes.</start_of_turn> Or it is fleshy: and is similar to rough sand, soft.</start_of_turn
Or it is not fleshy, similar to frozen white moisture: which when it touches iron, or you grasp it with a finger, it breaks off and does not adhere to it.</start_of_turn
And both these kinds do not begin until the greater tear has gone, until which time it covers the whole, and prohibits light, and the movement of the eye.</start_of_turn
And the way of working in its incision is: as you place the sickly head on your lap.</start_of_turn
Then open its eyes, and lift the eyelid with your hand.</start_of_turn
Then collect the nail with a pair of tweezers a few times, and stretch it upwards.</start_of_turn
Then take the needle, and introduce it through the hair from the hair of a horse, and silk or thread: and let the thread be strong, and double the end of the needle, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce the nail with the needle, and bind it with thread to the nail, and stretch the nail upwards: and scrape away with the nail the hair following the pupil, as if you were scraping the nail with the hair until the end of it.</start_of_turn
Then the remainder of the incision is to be made in the root of the lacrimal bone with fine spatulas, or with small forceps: and let go of the natural flesh of the lacrimal bone, so that it does not obstruct the course of the tears.
And when the nail is extended with only one nail: or with a thread, as we have said.
Then it is to be scraped away with fine spatulas, whose form is this.
And take heed, that you do not touch the delicate corneal tunic, and cause a break in it, and perforate the pupil
Then after the incision, pour upon the eye some powdered salt, or make a solution from alum, and leave it in until the next day.
And care for it as is necessary, until it is healed If the nail is neither sensitive nor able to penetrate the soft parts, nor does it protrude in it, then it is to be treated in this way with the physicians, and will be healed as I have said in the instruction
If you wish to make an incision, then open the eye of the patient, and grasp the delicate bone with fine spatulas, of slight curvature, of acute form, according to this shape.
And remove the nail from above with care
If you see that it is becoming rare and crumbling, and leaving prints in the bone, then drain from your hand into the eye from a solution of alum, or of red alum, or of salt: and wash the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation above until the whole of it is removed
Unless the contrary is present in the eye, leave the swelling alone, and care for the swelling until it heals. Repeat the operation when necessary until it heals.</start_of_turn>
The prominence of the tear gland, if it causes great pain in the eye, should be suspended with a hook, and its part should be excised: do not make the final incision, lest the flow of tears be interrupted.</start_of_turn>
Then let the eye remain lubricated with a red lentil, or something like it, until it heals.</start_of_turn> As for the incision of the pupil, and the native tissue in the eye.</start_of_turn
Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn
Sometimes in the eyes of men there is a red swelling of the flesh, either composed or superposed, which covers the pupil, approaches or tightens over the eyelids, and sometimes even turns the eyelids outwards: and it looks like a rose petal.</start_of_turn
And the operation for this is also to put the diseased head in your hand.</start_of_turn
Then open his eyes and gather all the flesh with hooks which are convenient for this: and hold it with one forceps, or grasp it.</start_of_turn
Then make an incision in the first place, until you have finished all of it with the knife.</start_of_turn
And burn away from the eye, so that you do not damage it during the operation: and let your incision be as we have said in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps, with which the fat is collected, as it is said above.</start_of_turn
When the incision is complete and the wound has been thoroughly cleansed, then pour salt over the eye: either dissolve it into a powder of red pepper, or use similar unguents which are corrosive to the eye. Place upon the eye a compress of cloth with alum or vinegar, in order to protect it from the heat of the afterburn.
If anything remains of the dressing, and the blood is still warm, and the swelling has subsided: then remove the eye, and keep it cool until the swelling has gone down
Then repeat over it with the operation until it is healed.
Do the same with any meat which has been added which has happened in the eye of this kind.
It is true that it is necessary to avoid all care of the eye from natural or accidental causes during the operation with the iron, and do not introduce your hand into any of these operations until you are certain that the limb can tolerate this operation.
On the collection of fat from the eye.
Chapter 18. The fat is a red wax which covers the eye, and hinders its operation by water: and it weakens the eye as long as it lasts.
It is necessary therefore in the first place to consider whether the eye in which the fat is, is strong and not in any other way diseased, apart from the fat: then collect the fat from it
And it is necessary to take great care not to move your head backwards
Then suspend the veins with one thread each, or two according to your prudence: and let the needle be fine like half the diameter, or two threads together according to this form.
Then collect with fine forceps those one or two [objects], and drain blood every hour until the foreign bodies have been moved from the eye, and they have healed: and beware not to damage the eye with the extremities of the forceps.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation lest you cause harm to them [the eyes].
And when you have finished, then instill in the eye some cold or reddish unguent: that its sharpness may destroy what remains of the foreign body.
If it is not possible for you to collect it all in that hour, then close the eye with this, which will soothe the pain of the eye: and keep it closed for a few days, until the pain has ceased: and protect it from the heat: and repeat the process above until it is healed.
This is the form of the forceps.</start_of_turn>
Of the reduction of the swelling of the nose.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XIX.</start_of_turn
Physicians call the swelling of the nose "Fistula of Arissa," which they cure with cautery or with acute medicine that burns, as the case may be.</start_of_turn
And if it does not heal, do not be ashamed to make an incision at the root of the swelling at its birthplace, and evacuate all the moisture that is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed.</start_of_turn
When the bone is exposed, and there is corruption or blackness in it, then dry it with an instrument of this shape.</start_of_turn
And it is called "Asperation of the head."</start_of_turn
Let iron go from the head downwards, and let its head be rounded like a cushion, which is pierced with a needle of lime or with an awl or with a fine puncture: and place it upon the diseased part of the bone. Then move it between your fingers, and press your hand firmly, until you know that the fracture has been reduced: and do it again
Then move it between your fingers, and press your hand firmly, until you know that the fracture has been reduced: and do it again Then restore the place with sponges and hemostatic agents.
If therefore the place is consolidated, and a wound has formed there, and the circulation of blood has ceased: and it remains for forty days, and does not return, and does not swell, and does not become inflamed in that place: then you know that it has healed
And if not, then it is not in that limb, except to reduce the fistula to the opening of the nose, according to this shape.
And it is necessary to detect the bone from the second bone with iron, or with acute medicine: and when it has been detected, then grasp the fragment according to this shape, let the iron be at an angle, equilateral: and let the wood be in a triangular extension reaching up to the extremity, like a vein.
Then place it upon the bone itself: and let it be close to the lacrimal: and extend your hand from the eye a little.
Then move your hand with the fragment, until it pierces the bone, and you feel it is weak: by this you will know that the marrow is coming out through that, when you keep your hand on your nose
Therefore restore the place with sponges and hemostatic agents, as I have taught you.
When therefore a wound has formed and the place has become solid: then the matter which was flowing outwards returns to the nose: and thus it is easier for it to be healed over the wound
On the reduction of the prominent eye. On the reduction of the prominent eye.
When the eye stands out completely, and does not yield to pressure, neither by reduction nor by diminution: then it is necessary to lance the diseased part: then perform phlebotomy: afterwards apply packs to the cavity without incision, but with suction.
Then apply to the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and oil, and gum arabic
Then bind the eye tightly over a pad with many feathers
And the manner of the feathers is: that you take fine wool, many, and fold every feather from four sides: make many from these: then put one upon another, according to the quantity which the eye requires: then bind over these with a strong cloth
And repeat the packs with suction without incision
Then remove the packs, and keep the eye closed day and night.
If, however, the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary to bind it tightly: then remove the ligament after a day and a night, as we have said
If, therefore, the eye is again reddish from the old tunics, it is good: and if not, then repeat the pad, and feathers, and binding, and packs, until it is healed
Of the incision of the tunica of the eye.
Of the incision of the tunica of the eye
When disruption occurs in the tunica of the eye, then it stands out and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and is deformed in the form of a man by that. Then it is necessary to incumber that: then the operation in this is, as we have said, and it is that you introduce the needle into the root of the tunica from the lower part to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle through the part of the lacrimal bone where the doubled thread is, and make it penetrate: and draw out the first needle following its own course.
Then pierce the place of the doubled thread and ligate with it the edge of the vein around the needle: and tighten it much.</start_of_turn>
Then draw out the needle, and place upon the eye a soaked lanolin on a piece of lint: and draw it out until the thread comes out with the vein.</start_of_turn>
Then care for the eye with it, which soothes it, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
And when the vein is drawn out from every part with a circle of cloth, until the eye regains its great prominence.</start_of_turn
Then prick with a fine needle which reaches the depth of the eye, and let out the moisture of the albumin, and let the eye descend, and join immediately: then tighten it up until it is healed.</start_of_turn
¶ Regarding the care of the eye.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
This disease which is called Alcomnati, is not merely an eye-sore, but a disease which is caused by an accumulation of matter in the eye, similar to descending water, and not by the disease itself.</start_of_turn
And the method for dealing with it is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly on the bed.</start_of_turn
Then take hold of his head with your hands from both sides, and move it around, until you see the disease rise up towards the lower part of his eye.</start_of_turn
Then it will remain fixed and will not descend, and the light will be completely extinguished: and he will see the infirmity just as he saw it: and if it does not descend downwards, you know that it is water.</start_of_turn
If the patient is not prepared for the descent of the bowels as we have said, then sit the patient between your hands. Then take a soft cushion and find it above the bony prominence at the junction of the joint with the cornea in the crown, until the bowels evacuate.</start_of_turn>
When they have evacuated, then pour lukewarm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have boiled barley and honey: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until the eye is healed.</start_of_turn>
As for the care of the water that descends into the eye, or for a cataract.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXIII.</start_of_turn
We have said the kind of water for irrigation, and what is suitable for the perforation according to the declaration and explanation, then take that accordingly for the sake of the patient.</start_of_turn
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands square, opposite the light, near the heel: and fix his eye securely, and bind it tightly: then take the outer edge of his eyelid with your right hand, if the eye in which the water is, is the left eye: or take the inner edge with your left hand, if the eye is the right.</start_of_turn
Then take your right hand with the almond, if the eye is left: or your left hand if the eye is right.</start_of_turn
Then place the edge of the almond near the corner of the eye for the width of the radius in the white of the eye apparent to the tear: then push the almond with force: and you will know that the almond has pierced the membrane of the eye: and you will feel that the almond has gone through to the bottom.</start_of_turn
The measure of the general path of the eye should reach from the pupil to the end of the iris: this is the circumference of the eye.
You will see this very thing in the pupil of the eye, because of the clarity of the cornea.
Then place the [speculum] until it reaches the place where the aqueous humor is
Then press the lower eyelid down one after the other.
If the water therefore descends immediately, the diseased part will immediately retract from that which opens the pupil, and the speculum in the eye itself
Then rest for a while.
If the water descends again, then withdraw the speculum again, except for the part that is withdrawn by the speculum itself.
When it has settled and does not ascend: then withdraw the speculum easily: and you will rotate your hand slowly. Then dissolve in the water some clear salt of the gem: and wipe with it when you are done
Then put over the eye the whole bandage, or soaked wool fattened with saffron, and alum: and bind with it the healthy eye
We, however, and those who are with us at this time, put over it a rough plaster with egg white.
If it does not admit the speculum to enter the eye on account of its hardness, because it is from a person whose eye is hard and thick: then it is necessary to take the almond-shaped scraper, which is called the Alberid, which has this form.</start_of_turn>
Scrape therefore with it only as much as is necessary, and do not move your hand too far back: and do not do anything that may cause injury to the eye.</start_of_turn
Then insert the almond, as we have said.
Then insert the almond, as we have said. And in order to complete the work of your operation, prepare for the patient a dormitory made in the center: in which he shall sleep upon his back in a dark room: and it shall be guarded from all movements, and from coughing: and let food be given him of that which soothes the nature of his ailment: and let him not move his head to the right or to the left in any way.
And let the ligament be adjusted according to its position until the third day. Then let it be resolved in that dark room, and experience its effect: and make him drink something
Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day
And it should not be forced that it be done at the time of the treatment, or immediately after the incision: indeed it should be delayed, because water ascends quickly through the swollen part
If, however, a cold abscess should happen: then it is necessary that you wash the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with that which settles the abscess: until it is settled: then give him to drink something orally which will regulate his discharge during those few days, while it exists in that dark room.
Then he shall gradually go out of the room and return to his home.
And know that in this matter the pupil is not excused from his vision for a long time: then indeed he will hear about the operation
And indeed some of those from Alayrach are saying that an almond was perforated in the magdan in Alayrach, from which water comes out
But indeed no one in our land has done this: neither have I read of it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that this is something new
These are the forms of the species from great things, so that they remain upon them who know them not.
Be like the air itself: their extremities are like the three angles of a triangle, and their summit is acute.</start_of_turn>
Great things.</start_of_turn>
On the care of the newborn flesh in the nose.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXVI.</start_of_turn
When various meats are born in the nose of a scorpion, there is something which is absorbed from them that causes many feet: from this comes the cancerous tumor, the stone, and the brown scum: from this also is the soft tissue, not brown.</start_of_turn
Therefore, in that which is soft from these meats, not fraudulent, neither cancerous, you must sit with your hands opposite to the solid part, open the nose and throw out the mucus into those meats: then draw them out to the exterior and cut away whatever you find with a fine acute knife until you know that all the meat has been removed.</start_of_turn
If anything remains of that from whose excision is not possible: then cut it away with a fine instrument until nothing remains of it.</start_of_turn
If, however, blood should dominate, or a thick clot form: then oppose it by that which will overcome it: either by malignant clots, then burn them out until the blood is separated, and remove all the meats.</start_of_turn
Then throw into the nose after the incision of the socket, and water, or liquid.</start_of_turn
If, however, the nose is opened, and there proceeds from it moisture up to the palate, then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn
If moisture does not penetrate, according to what is necessary, then you know that it is within the living tissue that lies above the roots of the nose bones, which does not emerge with the cutting of the instrument.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce a thread of linen of some thickness and to knot it in many places: and to place between every knot an amount equal to the breadth of a finger, or less: and the patient will vomit, so that he shoots out one end of the thread through the nose along with the clot, until it reaches the stomach, and comes out through the gut.
And many do the same thing as this young boy Attom in school: and it is easy for him who wishes to do it.
Then place two ends of the thread, one that comes out through the nose and the other that remains in the nose
And the minister closes the wound with knots that are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is again with the knots of the thread.
Then withdraw the thread: and place in the nose after washing the blood away a little of the unguent that you drank with the Egyptian unguent: do this three days, or more, until the unguent has eaten away all that remains of the flesh
Then put in the end of the matter in the nose a lead cannula for a few days, until it heals.
If however urgent is the treatment that requires it, do so.
For the application of the caputpurgium, when oil and other medicines are distilled in the nose, do this from silver, or from air: and let its mouth be like that of a small trumpet, opened like a conch: and its content like that of it.
If one wishes to make a closed incision, like a needle.
If one wishes to make a closed incision, like a needle.
This is the form of the instrument. About the care of the nose.
Day 25
Many are born on the tip of the nose of Thelul, and they grow large and increase in size with the days, until the wound becomes equal to their appearance
And because of this, it is necessary that you cut away that part at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it.
Then place something over the place, or cauterise, or apply a burning medicine to the place of it
If, however, the incision tardies, until it has grown large, then consider whether it is a stone, hard, brown in colour, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: for it is a cancerous swelling
Many indeed are the waters which cause swelling of the head, and which arise from it with great malice towards the light which they had before.
And if the swelling is soft to the touch, not brown in colour, and if the incision is possible throughout, then evacuate the patient and cut it without fear, without hesitation: and care for the place with something that dries and contracts, until it heals
About the stitching of the nose, and the lip, and the ear.
Day 26
You know that when a solution of cohesion is continuous in a soft cartilage, it gives little support in that operation, except in some people.
It is necessary therefore when anything happens to anyone from that, that you consider whether there is a wound remaining with its blood: and then add the pain of the wound with the suture: then care for it until it is healed.
If the edges of a wound have been separated by continued tension, and every part is sound: then it is necessary to scrub all the parts from their outer surface until they bleed again.</start_of_turn>
Then add the lips together with the suture, and tighten them, and sprinkle upon it dragon's blood, and resin: and place above the powder a piece of plaster of Paris, and something else of solid plaster: and leave it bound for two days, or three.</start_of_turn>
Then dissolve it, and change the medicine: and leave it, until the threads are dissolved by themselves.</start_of_turn> Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The way of suturing is to add tension continuously, or with a hook, as we have narrated in the suture of the belly: or to add tension with the thread, as you have been told.</start_of_turn
About the extraction of the knots of the lips.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn> Many people suffer from swelling in the insides of their lips, resembling hard grains of herbs: and some of them are small, and some are large.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to cover the lips, and find on every knot of them, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it off from all sides.</start_of_turn
Then apply to the place after the cutting a little burnt ointment, until the blood is stopped.</start_of_turn
Then it is bound with vinegar, and the place is cared for with it, in which there is a sticking [agent], until the wound is healed.
From the incision of a new wound over the jawbone.
The head is in the eighth position Many veins are born over the jawbone, as the ancients call them abuluss
It is necessary therefore to suspend them with a single thread: or to grasp them with forceps, and cut them at their root, and let the blood run, or the serum
Then put upon the place the dry sponge, or other powdery astringents, desiccant.
When the flesh returns to its place after treatment, for many return, then cut the vein again, and cauterize it: for it does not return after being cauterized
On the reason of the tooth with iron
The head is in the ninth position
When they gather on the surfaces of the tooth from the inside and outside parts, and between the gums, the hard, rough coatings, and sometimes they decay, and become yellow, until it reaches that corruption of the gum, and the teeth become loose
It is necessary therefore to make the handle of your hands firm between your hands, and to put your head in your mouth, and to move the molar and the tooth, in which you see the coatings, and something like sand: until something remains from it, and do the same with black pigment, and yellowness, and yellowing, and other things until it moves
If therefore it is removed from the beginning of the reason, it is good: and if not, then repeat the reason on another day, the second day, and the third day, until you have finally completed the study of that which you desire
And know this, that the tooth requires diverse rasps of different forms, many figures: according to what is prepared for your operation: forasmuch as the rasp which radiates from the lower part is different from the rasp which radiates between the teeth, according to other forms.
These forms of rasps are prepared for you, which you will need
For the extraction of teeth.
Chapter 30.
It is necessary to cure the tooth from its pain with all skill, and then to eradicate it
There is nothing that can replace its sublimation when it is eradicated: because it is a sublimed substance: until such time as there is no excuse for the eradication of the tooth, then it is necessary to command that the sick man eradicate it, so that it may be strengthened, and be confirmed to you that the tooth is painful
Many indeed deceive the sick with pain, and say that it is in the tooth itself and eradicate it: but the pain does not depart, until the sick tooth is eradicated
For we know that this is from the operation of bloodletting
When it is confirmed to you that the tooth itself is painful, then it is necessary to sacrifice around the tooth with sponges, in which something useful is to be found, until the gums are separated from all parts: then move it with your fingers, or with fine forceps at first slowly, until you have crushed it
Then place the large forceps in that place well, and hold the patient's head between your knees: which you have held well, so that it does not move: then draw out the tooth according to its straightness, so that you do not break it
If it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and introduce it under it from all parts with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first
If the tooth is perforated or corrupted: then it is necessary that you fill up that hole with wool: and bind it with the extremity of a thin thread, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction over it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you take care of the surrounding gum from all parts much with scraping during the process of extraction.</start_of_turn>
And keep your courage, so that you do not break it, and remain over it until that evil has gone from it which is greater than its first pain.</start_of_turn>
Beware, lest you do the things which the phlebotomists do carelessly in their haste, and your audacity over the eradication of it, beyond what we have said.</start_of_turn>
Many men have made great mistakes through their pride over people's great diseases, from which it is difficult to recover, and that remain whole, or extract some of them, or extract the whole thing with some of the teeth of the jaw: as we have often seen.</start_of_turn Then it is collected after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt.</start_of_turn> If blood flows from the place (for many men it happens): then there is something of the clot there, and fill it with that: and if not, cauterize it if it does not bring you the clot.</start_of_turn
The forms of the fine forceps which you must use to move the tooth in the first place: let their long extremities be broad, and their short handles be thick, so that they do not bend when pressure is put upon them with the hand: let them be like the jaws of large beavers, until when you bind them with the thread, they do not break themselves, neither bend: their short extremities must be strong and made of iron, or of twisted wire, directed towards the extremities: and in their extremities must be teeth, some of which are mixed with others, and bind the constriction gently, firmly.</start_of_turn
And when extremities resemble the shape of an eagle's beak, which is called ciconia, and are subject to strong constrictions.
Concerning the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jaw bones.
Chapter I
When there remains in the eradication of a tooth which has fractured something, it is necessary to place butter on the area for one or two days until the place is softened: then introduce forceps into the cavity, or graspers: whose extremities resemble the beak of an eagle, which is called ciconia
The form of these forceps is as follows:
Their extremities are made like a file or like an awl
If these forceps do not suffice to extract the tooth, then it is necessary to make an incision over the root and remove the entire pulp, and introduce a small forceps, which is called Palanca parua, whose shape is as follows:
Its short handle and large head: and it is not to be grasped, lest it be broken
If the root comes out through this, that is good: and if not, it is necessary to use other instruments whose form is similar to these
The first triangular shape of the extremities, in which there is some thickness
The fine triangular shape of the extremities
It is also used with this instrument which has two branches, whose shape is as follows And with other instruments and materials which are appropriate for teeth.
It is also necessary to grasp with this instrument which resembles a large single unit, of this triangular shape of the twisted extremities, which has some thickness, so that it does not break: and it must not be grasped
Know that the instruments of the teeth are many: and like the rest of the instruments, they do not all work in the same way. And a prudent craftsman, skilled in his art, finds for himself the appropriate instrument according to the operation and the ailments of each.
For the ailments of which the ancients did not speak, there are instruments appropriate to each.
If, however, the jawbone is fractured from the tooth, or from any other bones of the mouth, or if it is putrefying: then one must look closely into the place itself with the instruments and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and handle with care, as its form is like this
It is there in some degree of length, so that it may be tied up or held with the bone, and not flee and break, until the bone is extracted: and restore the place with the physicians who are accustomed to this
If there is only a small amount of pus in the bone, then drain it from its pus, and care for it, until it is healed.
As for the elevation of prominent teeth above others.
Chapter 2.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, a wound is made by that shape: and especially when this happens in women and girls, because of their gums.
Because if a tooth has grown after another tooth, and is not located, or if it is possible to suture it, or to smooth it: then extract it: and if it is joined to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has this shape
It is like a small knife, made of iron, with acute extremities blunt.
And let your incision be such as that which you make on many days, on account of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not cause damage to any other tooth.
If, however, the exposed edge of the limature is prominent: then limate it with the same limate which has the form of this
Let the whole edge of the limature be grasped by the lesser points of the handle, like a limate which is made for a needle: with which the tooth is slowly pared away in many days with ease, without causing damage to the tooth, and falling out: then soften it, finally smooth it with some rasps.
If the tooth from which a part has broken away, and which hurts the tongue: then it is necessary to limate it also, until the asperity of that fracture has been removed, and it has been made even: and it must be flattened, so as not to hurt the tongue, or corrupt the speech
Concerning the restoration of teeth with gold wires.
Chapter 33.
When it happens that the front teeth are cracked and bruised by percussion, or in any case: and the diseased cannot be held in place by the bite of the food which he habitually swallows: and when treatment with medicaments has no effect: then the wit is in this, that they be bound with gold wire: for gold is white, and does not putrefy after a few days: but silver never changes
And let the middle wire be in thickness and breadth as much as it can grasp between the teeth
And the form of the restoration is that you grasp the wire, and pass the loop through between two healthy teeth: then you twist the two extremities of the wire between the teeth which are moving, whether one or more, until you have reached the healthy tooth of the other side
Repeat the process until you reach the part from which you commenced: and grasp your hand with care and wisdom until it does not move forward: and let your constriction be such as to bind the thread at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip away.
Repeat the process until you reach the part from which you commenced: and grasp your hand with care and wisdom until it does not move forward: and let your constriction be such as to bind the thread at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip away.
If it is dissolved or fractured, string it with another thread and stabilize it as before for the whole time.
This is the form of teeth, and the figure of the rotation of two sound teeth and two moved teeth, as with water
And when it happens that one tooth or two have fallen out from their places due to an injury, they must be returned as we have described, and they remain: and this does not happen except by a skillful, prudent, and experienced artificer
And when some piece of bone or cartilage has been adjusted: and it is made like a tooth in shape, and is placed in its place, from which the tooth has been extracted and is bound, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time
Regarding the incision of the ligament that happens under the tongue, and which hinders speech.
Chapter 34.
If there is anything hard or knotty in that area, and it comes from the consolidation of the wound: then project into that tissue and find it by its breadth, until you cut the ligament, and the knot will be resolved.
If, however, the flow of blood increases, then put over the place a soaked compress of alum. If blood boils, then cauterize the place with a blunt cautery, which agrees with that: then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed On the extraction of the ranula which is under the tongue.
Chapter 5.
Whenever there occurs under the tongue a swelling which assimilates the small ranula, hindering the tongue from its natural operation: and perchance it increases so much, that it fills the mouth.
If therefore you see the same dark, hard swelling which does not have any sensation in the infirm: then do not touch it, because it is cancer
And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is humidity: then project into that tissue and cut it with a fine scalpel, and free it from all sides
If blood flows upon thee in the hour of thy operation, then lay upon it a dry sponge, until the blood be separated: then return to thy operation, until thou hast extracted it with its complement.
Then apply vinegar and salt: and care for the rest with such treatment as is suitable for this, until it be healed.
On the treatment of the wound of two almonds.
Chapter 6.
And then either perforate it: or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of a white colour, round, and its root is slight: then you must cut it off
And the operation in this is as you consider before your operation, if the wound has calmed down completely, or if it has diminished somewhat: then do sit the patient with his head towards the sun: and open the mouth, and take out the tongue with your hands, and grasp the lower lip with an instrument, which has such a form. Do it from silver, or from air, which is subtle like a knife
When therefore the language is spoken, and the apostema is shown, and the latter falls upon the former: then take the hook and grasp it in the belly, and draw it out as much as is possible, except that you draw out with it something from the tunics.
Then cut the wound with the instrument whose form follows.
Like scissors: truly the extremities of these are curved, so that the opening of each is directed towards the other at an acute angle: from which care must be taken lest there be iron or blood soaked into the wound.
If this instrument is not present, then cut with the sponge, which has this form.
Be acute from one side, not from the other side.</start_of_turn>
And after you have cut the belly once, cut the other following the same kind of incision.</start_of_turn>
Then after the incision the patient shall gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.</start_of_turn>
If however blood flows from it, gargle with water in which are pounded coriander seeds: or leaves of myrtle, or things like these from the sponges, until the bleeding stops: then care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when there appear in the belly other apostemata, besides the two in the tonsils.</start_of_turn
Cut these therefore equally according to what I said in the incision of the two tonsils.</start_of_turn
And I myself have treated a woman with an apostemate which was born between her ribs, which was drawing towards the loin, little sense, because it was almost strangling her: and the woman was breathing from meatus strictus, and I forbade her from eating and drinking: and she died within one or two days.</start_of_turn
The after-tooth shall ascend only as much as it emitted two branches, until it reaches above the two nostrils.
The after-tooth shall ascend only as much as it emitted two branches, until it reaches above the two nostrils.
Then draw it [the after-tooth] out, and from that there is a large piece [of tissue].
Then cut off what is beyond the nostril.
Then make that which projects from the other nostril retreat inwards
Then open its mouth, and press its tongue: and afterwards fix the tooth in the after-tooth: then cut off from it a part of it, and there will be no blood there: it is absolutely like the gut of a woman, and immediately drinks water, and then eats food
It is not right to continue cutting into that after-tooth for a long time: and the after-tooth will remain in the place where we cut, until it is prolonged excessively and with it.
I devised, and cauterized the after-tooth between the gut.
It stood from the addition [of the after-tooth]: then I went away from that side, and I do not know what God did with it after me
On the incision of a toothless after-tooth
Chapter 7.
When a catarrus descends to the lower jaw, and the after-tooth is long: then it is called a perpendicular: and if it is in the lower part large and round, then it is called a toothless
When it is cured with that which we said in the explanation, and the cure does not confer: and you see that the after-tooth is soft and quiet from it: then it is necessary to cut it off
And whatever is aggregated in a round shape, which has no length, is either blood, or of a dusky or black colour, and has no sensation: in such a case it is necessary to make an incision of it.
And in such a case there is fear over the sick person.
It is necessary therefore when you are treating it according to the method which I have mentioned from the white colour and the length, so that you make the sick man sit facing the sun: and you grasp his tongue with an instrument of which I have spoken previously: then fix the thumb of your hand in one, and draw out the other: and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned in the incision of two caruncles
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it except that which adds to the natural limit without addition
For if you cut from it more, you will damage the flesh and the bone.
Then after the incision make use of what we have mentioned in the incision of two caruncles: and care for it until it is healed.
If however the sick man returns from the incision: then it is necessary that you use your skill in cauterizing it without fear and haste.
And the mode of cauterization in this is not except with acute water: and it is that you place the head of the sick person in your lap
And then grasp his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned before.
And then take from the water which I mentioned before, and mix it with burnt charcoal which has not been extinguished, and put it on it not thick, neither thin, and press from it the concavity of this instrument
So that the extremities of it on which the medicine is placed are like the concavity of the radius of a conch shell
Place the instrument with the medicine above the vulva: and the patient lies with his side open, so that the fluid may flow out from his mouth from the medicine inwards, so that it does not descend into his gut, and it causes him pain.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.</start_of_turn>
And you from the first keep your hand above the vulva for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it is becoming dark, and give the patient a sedative dose of the medicine.</start_of_turn>
And if you wish to take the limb, and fold it over the end of the radius, and fold the limb with the medicine inside, and bring the radius with the limb into the cannula above, until the limb is fixed over the vulva.</start_of_turn Do this many times, until you follow that which you wish concerning the cautery of the vein.</start_of_turn>
Then remove the medicine: for it itself will dry and fall off in three days, or four.</start_of_turn
If however you think that you must go again with the medicine, go again: and after the cautery, remove the surrounding fat of the vein with the limb and soak it in butter, and massage it with that which is around it from the medicine: and wash it with cold water.</start_of_turn
And care for the outside with stitches, and for the inside with gargling, until he is healed.</start_of_turn
Thus is this sort of treatment safer than an incision and longer lasting in respect of fear.</start_of_turn
And when the vulva is healed even with that which is subtler than cautery and incision: it is healed by fumigation, according to this method.</start_of_turn
Take calamine, hyssop, origanum, rue, sassafras, chamomile, abrotanum, and similar herbs: gather them all together, or some of them in a vessel, and immerse them in vinegar. Let them boil: and the vessel should be covered with a layer of earth in the center. There should be a hole in the middle of the vessel above which the instrument is composed in this manner.
Make it of silver, or of brass: and insert the extremity, in which is the pomegranate seed, into the bone of the patient, until the vapor reaches the upper lip above the cannula, until the lip is darkened very much
Then repeat over it many times, until it heals.
And be careful, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of apostematis.
Praiseworthy are you for adding this in apostemate: and it is not proper to do this except when the apostematis is cool
If, however, this instrument is not present with you, then take a needle and compose in its extremity bark or resin: so that it does not burn the bone of the patient: because the bark or resin of the resin prohibits the vapor from burning the bone: and this is from a good treatment with health
About the extraction of thorns, and bones from the gullet.
Chapter 38.
Many times there adheres in the gullet bones, or thorns of fish, or something else.
It is necessary therefore that you extract what is apparent from it which falls from the tongue with the instrument at the angle of the jaw, and it is declared to you that it is in the gullet
And what is not apparent to you and is hidden in the gullet, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach
Perhaps then the adjacent thing will depart through neglect.
Or the sick man may swallow down a piece of bread, or a radix of lettuce, or swallow down a dry lump of barley: or he may take a dry sponge of sea-foam and bind it up with a thread, and then swallow it down.
When it has reached the place where the bones or spines are, and is drawn out, then it departs. If it does not depart with it as we have said: then use an instrument of lead according to this form
Let it be thicker than the radius of a bean, and at its extremity there shall be a curve which will enter the gut without difficulty: and let it have its head elevated upwards
And take care of its touch upon the epiglottis, so that it does not cause it to cough, and drive it down with the bone or the spine, or let the physician drive it in with his hand
But that the sick man may drive it down himself is better: because of his knowledge of the place of the annexed thing: and he drives it downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all of which is according to the quantity which is prepared for him, until it departs
On the extraction of blood clots.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the blood clot is treated with that which I have said in the previous section for the treatment of wounds with the physicians, and it does not yield, then consider in the belly of the sick man under the sole or at the base of the tongue, after having drawn out the tongue with the instrument which I have mentioned.
If therefore your hand should slip over the blood clot, draw it out with a small hook, or with fine fingers that are withdrawn from the middle.
If it is not possible with the fingers: then take a curved cannula and introduce it into the belly of the patient up to the guttur: then introduce into the curve of the cannula a burning iron with fire.
Do this many times: and let the patient abstain from all water for the whole day.
Then take a full treatment of cold water, and open his mouth with it: and close his mouth with it, and do not swallow anything from it: and drink water an hour after each meal with his hand.
The bloodsucker is like him who feels the water falling from his hand.
But if he does not go away with that which we have told you, then fumigate the patient with aromatic herbs, or with an asa with an instrument which we mentioned in the fumigation of the wounds
Do this many times, because it itself goes away
And the mode of operation in fumigation is that you take all the vessels in which there are dates with fire: and the vessels are covered with a cover, in the middle of which is a hole: and make in that hole the extremity of the instrument
Then throw the fumigation, and put the patient's mouth on the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth, until you know that the fumigation has passed to the bloodsucker
For the bloodsucker immediately goes away.
If it does not go away, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And the patient can tolerate sitting, and eat garlic and onions, and does not drink water. It is necessary therefore that he goes away with this regimen.
This is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucker is extracted from the gut, when it falls upon its belly.
It is like forceps, thus like a wound: for it has the curvature which intrudes into the gut
And its extremity is like the beak of a stork, which is called ciconia, in which there is the roughness of lime: when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
About the opening of the apostemata, and their section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.</start_of_turn>
There are many kinds of apostemata, of many kinds, according as the recollection of their matter: and they are diverse in their perforation and their section into two modes.
One of them is a kind of apostematum which comprehends humilities.
The other is because of the place where it occurs in the body
For indeed the apostemata that occur in the head are different from those that occur in the belly: and those that occur in a fleshy place are different from those that occur in the joints: and each one of them has its own judgment from the operation.
There are also apostemata which do not need to be perforated except after the perfection of health in the body, and the completion of their matter: and there are those which must be perforated while they are raw and have not matured according to the completion.
Such as apostemata which are close to the joints
For when an apostematum occurs near a joint and persists, it may putrefy because of the surrounding parts, perhaps corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint: which is the cause of the closer contraction of that limb
The swelling is at the main limb: for if you delay the perforation of it until it ripens, then it will bite you or become infected, or through that main limb.
The swelling is close to the limb, perforate it therefore while it is still immature: and it must not be perforated as a raw swelling, without complete digestion, except that it is close to the limb, lest it putrefy deeply, and extend to the inner parts, and make a fistula, or remain in its termination without healing. It is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the swelling, for it is matured according to the completion of its complement: and it is at rest in soothing of pain, recession of fever, and diminution of redness, and pulse, and elevation of the head of the swelling: and the rest of the signs. It is necessary that you make the perforation in the lower part of the swelling, and more elevated: and let the perforation be wide in length of the body, if the swelling is in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of laceration, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all the places that do not have a reflection.
In those things which reflect, be cautious with the perforation according to that limb.
When the swelling is in the places of carbuncles: then it is better that you delay the perforation of it until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the poison is prolonged, and there is much dirt and pus, and perhaps the lips of the wound will be inflamed, and its depth will be increased
And some swellings are perforated according to the width of the body for necessity: or according to that which the limb requires
It is necessary to perform a small perforation in the small apostemata and a large perforation in the large apostemata: or multiple sections according to the size of the apostemata.
Some apostemata require the skin to be sutured: when it is made like a piece of cloth and is completed at the end, when it is dead. This is like what happens in many cases, such as with wounds from a dog bite and abscesses
There are also those which are sectioned with three angles
Like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like the heel apostemata.
There are also those which are sectioned in a circular shape and those which are sectioned like a half moon: and those which are similar to these sections.
This is true of those which do not have a head, such as the superficial leninous apostemata: it is necessary to perforate them with a superficial perforation, or only planely.
And when the apostema is large, and when many stitches have been gathered together, and it is perforated, so that the pus does not spill out immediately: extract a part of it from that very moment
Then anoint the apostema until another day.
Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree of the case: especially if the patient is weak in spirit, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man: for the spirit of the animal is dissolved with the discharge of the pus: and perhaps the patient will die, and you will not know it
Therefore take great care with this chapter.
And after you have made the perforation, concerning which perforation you have made the after-effects, it is necessary that you should drain the blood: and consider.
If there is a little blood after the perforation, or if it is a flat section, then administer a ligature from linen, or from an old coat
And if there is great bleeding and many holes of perforation, then it is necessary that you should introduce a ligature into every hole until they reach the belly.
If you have cut off a part of the skin in the after-effect, or if you have circumcised the area: then it is necessary that you should put on an old coat, or as when a garment is being taken off, or be covered with wool without moisture: and bind it up until the third day.
Then remove it and take care of it until it is healed
If, however, bleeding occurs during your operation in an hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which soak it in a cloth: and put it over the site of bleeding many times over
If bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you should administer regimen and care, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places of this book, and from experience.
If it is in the winter and the site of the after-effect is of many nerves: then it is necessary that you should infuse sponges with wine and oil of warmth: and put them on the place.
And if it is in the summer and the place is fleshy: then it is necessary that you should put on sponges soaked in water, or oil, or both with wine and oil, and keep it cold.
Until then, as we have said, on the third day you must dissolve the after-effect, and drain it, and administer care which is suitable for it, until it is healed.
This is indeed necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of wounds in general.
According to the nature of the wound, indeed I have spoken of every wound in general, how it is necessary for its treatment to be considered individually
Concerning the section of wounds that occur in the head skin.
Chapter 41.
Small wounds occur on the head skin, and they are of the kind of nodules which contain tunics, which are like small bags: as if they were chicken eggs
There are many kinds of them.
There are those which are fat: and those which contain moisture like slime: and those which contain moisture like wet earth and gravel: and similar to these, and those which are hard stones
And in the section of all of them, and in their extraction, there is no fear, as long as during their section no artery is injured.
And the operation in their section is to learn how to use the instrument which is called Intromissum, until you know what it contains
For if it contains moisture, then dry it with the superficial section: in this way.
Begin with the incision from line b to line g. When the moisture has been evacuated, then remove the sac which contains it, do not leave anything behind.
Many times it returns, if anything remains of it Then soak the wound in Egyptian unguent if it is there: or in water and salt: and apply with it a willow, and remove it on another day.
The wound has eaten away what remains of the bladder. Repeat the procedure above on the wound with the second and third aegyptio, and if you still do not see that anything remains of the bladder, then indeed take care of the wound with unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If the wound still contains a pimple: then dry it out in this way, making a cut having the shape of a cross: and remove the nails between the two layers of the cut, and scrape the wound from all sides: and try your skill in extracting the membrane which contains it.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it makes resistance, the artery must be dealt with as I shall tell you later.</start_of_turn>
Proceed in the same way with a stone abscess, by cutting it open and treating it in the same way as before.</start_of_turn The cutting open of a stone abscess is easier: because there is little blood and moisture.</start_of_turn
And sometimes there are some of these bladder abscesses which are in the head of some men, in whom there is no moisture at all.</start_of_turn
Or make an opening at the lower part of it, so that the course of the healing may be downwards.</start_of_turn
Then care for that which agrees with this from the treatment.
Then care for that which agrees with this from the treatment of the tonsils in the neck
Chapter 42.
Many swellings occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes in other parts of the body.
And over these which occur in the neck, there is one, and many: and they are generated from one: and every tonsil is within its own sheath, as in the nodes and swellings of the head, as we have mentioned
And the species of these tonsils are many
And from these there are fatty ones: and those which contain humors: and malignant ones, which do not obey treatment
In this way, as the good humors are expelled from the touch, whose mark is the proximity of the color of the skin, and which move towards all parts, and are not connected with the nerves of the neck, neither with the windpipe, neither with the arteries, neither is it deep: it is necessary to cut it off with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body from the line b to the line g. and to remove two lips of the skin with one stitch, or with many stitches if necessary, as we have mentioned in the swelling of the head, and to extract it gradually
And it is necessary to be cautious so that no bone, or nerve, is injured
And let the sponge be neither too acute nor too blunt: so that it does not add to your hand with the incision, or cause discomfort to the patient, and cuts only what is necessary.
If, however, you cut a vein or an artery, or are hindered by the operation, then put in the wound a bit of alum or some powders which absorb blood, and bind up the wound, and leave it until the swelling subsides, and the wound is softened: or begin to putrefy it
Blood is severed by the clamp Redi until completion of the operation.
Take care of yourself.</start_of_turn>
If the whole trophlet is cut, then it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound: and hold them in place immediately, after which you should wash because there is no remaining excess.</start_of_turn
If, however, you wash and there remains some excess because of the size of the trophlet, then it is necessary that you insert your finger under the root of it and extract it: and administer the suture as we have said.</start_of_turn
And whatever contains moisture from the trophlets, perforate it with a superficial perforation: so that you can see the place of its maturity: and put the perforation from this which follows below the body as we have said.</start_of_turn
Then administer after the perforation lint with unguent, and the like, so that it may consume whatever remains from the corruption: until when you wash the wound will be clean: then take care of yourself with the generation of meat, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
Of the excision of the epiglottis from the apostemate within the gut.</start_of_turn
Chapter XLIII.
The ancients say that this part of the epiglottis was made by none other in our land, and this is the writing of their speech.
But in cases of swelling of the joints, it is necessary to make an incision of the epiglottis: since it will not receive any benefit from it, because all the veins and lungs are weak.
And in those who have a soft swelling in the mouth, or the gullet, or two glands of the tongue, when there is no inflammation of the windpipe, it is necessary to make an incision of the epiglottis in order to escape from the destruction which is caused by the accumulation. It is necessary therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, to cut under three or four circles of the epiglottis, with a small incision in the middle of the two circles, as in the case of the epiglottis of a hare: for this place is suitable for the incision, because it is bare of flesh, and the blood vessels from it are long
And if the physician is timid, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with one finger.
Then find the skin, until it reaches the windpipe: there will be blood in the wound.
Then cut the soft tissue which we have mentioned: and it is signified above the incision of the windpipe by the phlegm which comes out of it, when it is ruptured, and the cutting of the vocal cords.
And withdraw the wound open for some time.
When an hour has passed since the inflammation has subsided, gather together two lips of the wound of the skin, and sew them up alone without cartilage
Then administer the medicines which make the flesh grow, until healing is accomplished.
Albucasis writes: Then administer the medicines which make the flesh grow, until healing is accomplished.
Thus we have learned from this discourse that the exposition is not to be delayed, except when the patient has fainted from pain: for the patient has perished while breathing, and wishes to interrupt his breathing: the epiglottis is split, that the patient may breathe through the wound in the throat, and he recovers from death. Therefore they command that the wound be closed, until the harmful cause of the disease has passed away. And the harmful cause of the disease is in most cases three days, and almost like the disease itself: therefore they command that the wound be closed again when the disease has passed away, and that it be cared for until healing has taken place.
And that is what I myself have seen: a handmaid took a knife and put it into her own throat, and it went into the windpipe.
I was called to care for her, and I found her foaming at the mouth, like one who is dead.</start_of_turn>
I saw that the wound had burst open, and blood had flowed out of the wound of the handmaid.</start_of_turn
I was amazed, for she did not bleed to death, nor did she guide the blood: the wind was coming out of the wound.</start_of_turn
I cared for her, and I closed the wound, and cared for her until she was healed: and nothing happened to the handmaid except that she coughed up blood: and she recovered after a few days to a better condition.</start_of_turn>
Hence it is clear: there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.</start_of_turn>
On the section of the hernia of the gutturis.
On the section of the hernia of the gutturis.
This chapter is entitled 'On the section of the hernia of the gutturis', and is a large apostema according to the colour of the body: and it is frequent in women.
It is classified into two kinds: either it is natural or accidental The natural hernia is certainly not caused by an injury
The accidental hernia is, however, classified into two kinds: one is like a swelling of fat nodules
The other is like an apostema which arises from the swelling of an artery
And in this there is danger: it must not be presumed that it is small just because of its appearance: and you must prove it and investigate it with an instrument called the Intromisso.</start_of_turn>
If you find that it is like a swelling of fat nodules and is not suspended with any other parts: then you must dry it out, just as you would dry out fat nodules: and extract it with that which contains the contents of the sac, if there is one: or if not, then examine the whole of it.</start_of_turn
Then care for the place from which it was extracted until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
'On the section of the super-species of nodules'.</start_of_turn>
'On the section of the super-species of nodules'.</start_of_turn There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already mentioned all of them in their division: and it is necessary to narrate here the difference between the Node and the Exitus, in case of doubt.</start_of_turn I say, therefore, that when the Exitus is hot, and there is fever and pain which arise: until the ebullition of excess has passed and the putrefaction is completed: then the fever and heat will subside.</start_of_turn
When the node is not hot, neither feverish, nor painful, it contains blood clots, which is their own sac, and is according to the colour of the body: and it begins like millet and becomes like barley, being greater or less.
There are two kinds: either fatty [blood clots] or containing moisture.
The colour of moisture is various, as I said in the previous section It is necessary, therefore, when you are dealing with the treatment of the Node, to examine it and inquire about it at first with the instrument called Intromissum, according to the shape which will be shown in the subsequent chapter
The way of inquiring about the abscesses, and of all Nodes, is to take hold of this instrument and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the abscess: and withdraw your fingers gradually until you know that the instrument has pierced the skin
Then you will take the last part of your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then withdraw the Intromissum, and consider what comes out through its opening.
If indeed blood runs out, whatever its colour: then dry it with a superficial incision, as I said in the other abscesses
And if no blood runs out through the opening of the Intromissum, then you know that it is fatty: dry it therefore with a section having the shape of a cross, as we have learned: and suspend it with stitches, and scrape away the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the clot close to it, until you have extracted it whole with the Node.
If, however, the clot ruptures during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it whole, as often happens in this case, then extract it piecemeal until nothing remains of it.
If anything remains from it, a little or a lot, it returns to Node according to its majority.
If anything remains from it, a little or a lot, it returns to Node according to its majority.
If there is a large Node, then two of its lips must be sutured, and it must be cared for with that which is contained in it. If, however, there is a pulsating or non-pulsating vein, then it must be sutured, and its place must be properly cleansed, and it must be bound tightly for two or three days, until the vein has putrefied and the blood-clotting has ceased: then return to the incision which remains from the Node.
Of the instruments outside which are used for cutting and perforating.
Chapter XLVI.
These are the forms of the instruments which are introduced, and there are three kinds of them.
There are three kinds of these instruments: the large, the medium, and the small
Let them be of iron, rounded at the ends and flattened in the middle, so that they may hasten the entrance into the abscess
And these are the forms of the perforators, and no, that is, for piercing: and one of them is called the beris, which is a piercer, and there are three kinds of them
There are three kinds of these: the large, the medium, and the small
They meet, so that they may investigate through these abscesses, and exits, and fistulas, and bubbles from that which is between the bones.
And others are round, third, linear, like a large needle which follows under the skin, from citrine, or air, or iron, or silver. And the best of them are those which are made from citrine.</start_of_turn>
Experiences also arise from black lead, which unite so that through them fistulas are formed, the cavities of which reflect like lenities themselves with those reflections.</start_of_turn>
There are three kinds again.</start_of_turn For some are long, some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of the size of the fistula and the tightness of it.</start_of_turn The shape of veins, and there are many kinds.</start_of_turn For some are simple, that is, those which have only one curve: and there are three kinds like rivers, great, medium, and small.</start_of_turn
And blind veins are three kinds.</start_of_turn
And those which have two curves are called haemae: there are three kinds of them: and those which have three curves are called quinary: and all of these are necessary in their place.</start_of_turn
These are the forms of scalpels, which cut and scrape nodes and abscesses: there are three kinds of them, for some are large, medium, and small.</start_of_turn
Their extremities which make the cut are acute, the other extremities are not acute: and they are not put together except when there is an attempt to make an incision in the tissue of a node near the fear of a vein, or nerve: and so that the patient may recover more quickly from the pain caused by the incision than from the pain caused by the excision of the abscess.</start_of_turn
These are Magda, and there are three kinds of them.
These are Magda, and there are three kinds of them. They are made of air, and are similar to Radium, with which alcohol is made: and at the wide end is a hidden Spatumilis point: and in it runs inwards and outwards whenever desired, like water.
The shape of Spatumila which go between the fingers at the perforation of the apostematum: and they are not perceived by the sick: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The winds of the veins when the blood flow is broken: and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made of air, or lemon-yellow, round, to the length of a palm, like water: and are subtle.
And it is necessary that these kinds of veins should be large and small with you: in order to break the blood easily when necessary, and then when there is no physician present
But do not use these in the breaking of blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in places where there is carnation: such as wounds of the leg, and hip, and wounds of the arm, and breast, and belly, and groin, and similar wounds, from carnation, humors.
And when they are made of these small things which are similar to the knobs of fists, according to their shape: with which the blood is broken when it flows out of the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery: and when they are made of these things which are round according to this shape.
About the care of the breasts of men which assimilate the milk of women.
Chapter XLVII.
When the breasts of some people swell during sleep (that is, when they begin to emit urine in sleep), they become like those of women: and they remain soft after urination.
Whoever dislikes this must cut across the breasts with a lunar section according to this shape from the ridge, to the ridge, and then scrape off the whole fatness.</start_of_turn>
Then apply alum from the medicine of incision.</start_of_turn>
Then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and take care of it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If however the breast hangs downwards and becomes soft because of its size, as often happens with women: then it is necessary to make two similar lunar sections on the two upper sides of it, each containing the other at the limits of each, until one line is greater than the other. According to this shape, from the ridge to the ridge. Then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips and remove the fat, and do what has been said concerning the stitches and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If however one does not wish to perform the incision because of the patient's anxiety or because of bleeding: then it is necessary to apply a poultice soaked in corrosive unguent under the breast and let it go, until that which remains of the fat has been eaten away.</start_of_turn
Then take care of it until it heals.</start_of_turn
Concerning the perforation of the apostemas, which happens under the nipple.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLVIII.</start_of_turn These apostemas which happen under the nipple are of the kind of hard roundworms which contain vesicles, and from these are the humilities which proceed.</start_of_turn
Whatever is contained in the humors which are exuded by the moon must be cut away with a lunar section, according to this form, from the line b to the line g, as when all that is in the apostemate from the uterus is evacuated, then immediately fill up the cavity with wool and dismiss it until the next day.
The cavity must be filled with wool and dismissed until the next day.
If the uterus were of the kind of cluster of knots of Strophulas, then cut above it, as we have said in the section above the Strophulas equally
If, however, a vein extends in this place and emits pus, then administer cautery in it, as we have said above in what precedes
Concerning the section of the uterus which happens because of the artery and the vein.
Chapter 49.</start_of_turn>
When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above the womb is consolidated, then much blood flows out from the uterus: and in the same way blood flows out from the veins also, as in it from the uterus and swelling
And the signs by which it is known that the uterus and swelling are because of the artery and the vein, are these: for when the uterus is because of the artery, it is long, gathered in the depth of the body: and when you press on the swelling with your fingers, you feel as though there is a crackling sound in it
And that which is because of the vein, is round in the belly of the patient
And the section above this uterus is dangerous, especially under the ribs, and in the groin, and the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is very harmful
It is necessary therefore that the care of it should be taken with iron, and that which is also in the extremities or in the head, must also be taken care of.
For indeed that which is from iron is from the swelling of the artery, which is found in the cut section along its length.
Then open the section with hooks, afterwards the artery: and liberate it from the tunics, until it is detached
Then introduce under these the point, and make the vessel penetrate until the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places, as you have been taught in the extraction of two arteries which are in the intervals
Then cauterize the place which is between the two ligatures with a spatula, until the blood which is in it all has gone out, and the clot is dissolved.
Then administer the treatment which generates pus, until the ligatures fall away: afterwards care for this with suitable unguents until it heals
For if there should be a clot on account of the section of the Vein, then you must be careful not to do any damage to the skin with your hand.
Then introduce under the place where you held your hand the point, and make the vessel penetrate: and there be in it a double thread, until you extract it from the other side.
Then bind with the same the clot with a good ligature: according to what I have told you concerning the ligation of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of the thread. But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce another point with another thread under the whole clot at the incision of the needle: before that, and bind your thread in four places.
Then dry the swelling in the middle of its course, until when it departs what is in it: then cut through the excess of the skin, and discharge what is bound up from it.
Then apply above the swelling the piece which you submerged in wine, and oil.
Then apply treatment, which is done with liniments and unguents, until it is healed
As for a swelling that comes from the twisting of nerves.
Head L
Just as it happens with a swelling in an artery and a vein, in the same way it happens with nerves: that which happens by percussion in the body, or by excessive labor, and in a similar way: and it is most frequent in the armpits, or the calves, and in all the places where the nerves are joined together: and it is a serious swelling Its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and it is found in various positions without pain: and when it is squeezed with pressure, it feels in it a weakness similar to that of stupidity
It is not a swelling that is gathered in the depth of the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to all parts, and does not go forward or backward or to the rear
Since it comes from the body in the joints, it does not need to be sutured with iron
Perhaps there will be a contraction.
But in that which comes from the body in the head, or in the front, find the skin with a swelling like a bubble
If it is a small swelling, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from its root
If it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and scrape it off: then take it out, and gather up the blood with a suture: and care for it until it heals
Concerning the excision of the apostematus, which occurs in the groin.
Concerning the excision of the apostematus, which occurs in the groin. Certain people suffer from multiple tumors in the groin, and in other parts of their bodies, such as the testicles, which are called Fungalia because of their resemblance to fungi.
Their root is tough, their head is large, and they are covered with skin.
They are excised from small incisions, and they grow large in size.
I myself saw a man who had two of these tumors in his groin, which were larger than any others. There was no difference between them in color, size of root, or in their covering, and they bled profusely from their bases.
Therefore I advise you to excise them, and you will find in one about X and eight ounces, and in the other about six ounces. The operation for their excision is as follows: if the patient is bleeding excessively, and the color of the tumor is white, bloody, and tough of root: then excise it with a broad knife, and be present with cautery in the fire
Much blood is expelled from their excision. Therefore, if you are overcome with blood, cauterize them immediately
If you see the patient is weak and timid from the incision with the knife, take a lead weight and make a hook from it, and string it with thread: whose manner is as we have said, and dismiss it in two days.
Then add lead tightly.
Do not cease stringing the lead until it is fractured, and falls away without labor
If, however, the root of the great vessel should be affected, then in its incision there is something fearful and small: especially that which is in the belly.
It is true that it is possible to cut through the middle of it.
Then burn it, so that it does not return
Then care for it until the wound has healed.
And do not presume to cut through the little one which is of a dusky colour, little sense, and foul aspect: for it is a cancerous tumor. And I shall come back with a reminder of cancer after this.
Regarding the care of the umbilical cord.
Chapter 52
The umbilical cord becomes prominent from many wounds
Either from cuts on the skin which are above the belly: or it comes out through an opening in the intestines, according to what happens in other ruptures
Or from blood which flows from the vein, or from the artery, as mentioned before.
Or from the clotted blood in it.
If, however, it is because of a cut in the skin, and the opening of the bowels: then its colour is similar to that of the body: and it is soft, without pain: and it appears in various places
And if it is because of the discharge of the intestines, then its place is as we have mentioned, with an opening of various sizes
When you touch it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it: and it swells greatly at the entrance of the bath, and it causes great pain
If, however, it is due to humidity, it is soft, then it does not conceal itself when you touch it, neither does it tighten nor add anything.
If it is due to blood, then at that time the swelling appears with these signs against the black mark of the nail
If it is due to a broken bone: then it is a swelling that is grave, large, hard, and appears according to the quantity of one
If it is due to a wound, then its touch is soft. And the operation in this case is as you consider, if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of an artery or vein or a wound: then it is necessary to prohibit the treatment of it.
For in this case there is fear and danger, as you were taught in the chapter where I said that swelling due to an artery or vein is dangerous
If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or a tumor: then it is necessary to expel the patient, as long as he holds his breath, and to keep him standing extended
Then the signs with encasement all around the navel.
Then command him to lie down between your hands over his back.
Then surround with a bandage slightly wider in the circumference of the navel over the place where you indicated encasement
Then extend the swelling upwards with a large loop.
Then bind it firmly around with thread or silk thread: and make the knot of the ligament well bound.
Then open the swelling extended above the ligament
If therefore you find that the finger is caught by the ligament: then draw out the splinter of bone which is projecting inwards, and introduce it into the finger-index, and press the intestine inwards: and if you find a bone, then grasp it with a single hand, and break off its superfluity.
If, on the other hand, the artery or vein is affected: then surround it with much.
Then return to your work./li>
And grasp two needles, and introduce them through two strong threads: and introduce two needles around the circumference which you made around the swelling in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.</start_of_turn>
Then tighten the swelling in four places above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place, until the extended flesh putrefies: and it will fall away by itself: or cut it off when it softens and putrefies.</start_of_turn>
Then care for the wound as it should be until it heals.</start_of_turn>
Which if the navel-mark is raised from the flesh near it, or from moisture: then it is necessary that you make the swelling concave, as we said.</start_of_turn
And remove the blood, or moisture, which you find in it.</start_of_turn
Then care for the wound as it solidifies the place.</start_of_turn
§ Care of cancer. Chapter 53.</start_of_turn>
I am unable to cure anyone from this: neither do I know anyone who can do so before me
And the operation in this case, when it is located as we have said, is to proceed as before, and to evacuate the morbid tumor from the black bile several times
Then let us perform a phlebotomy if you find it with the swelling fully developed.
Then prepare the patient for the operation, in which he is placed alongside the operation.
Then join the Cancer to the nails which are convenient to him
Then bind it around with the skin, according to the prescription, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it off suddenly, but press the place and evacuate all the thick blood, as much as you can with the instruments.
If, however, it causes a violent flow of thick blood from an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the bleeding stops.
Then care for him with the remaining treatment until he is healed
¶ On the treatment of dropsy
Chapter 14
We shall discourse in this section concerning the different kinds of dropsy, and how water is accumulated: and the signs of each kind, and their treatment by physicians.
And that which is cured with iron is not except one kind of ascites alone: neither is it like iron in kind of tympani: neither like kind of hypospasmus complete: for that is mortal.
When you are being treated for this kind of hydrops of the tympani, take heed and do not neglect your treatment: consider it carefully.
For if a patient is suffering from weakness alongside the hydrops, or any other illness besides the hydrops, such as vomiting or solution of the bowels, and the like: then do not treat him with iron, for that is dangerous
If, however, you see the patient overflowing with spirit, neither young nor old: then the mode of treatment in this case is that you support the patient with your hands and press down upon his belly with your thumbs, driving out the water downwards.
And take a sponge of thorns, according to this shape.
There are two acute ends, long, like a sponge of thorns.
Indeed, there is some slight shortness in this, so that it does not pass through until the intestines, and does not wound it
Consider carefully.
For if the generation of the hydrops is from the intestines, then it is necessary to cut from the navel to the quantity of three fingers, downwards straight over the belly
If indeed the generation of the hydrops is because of the congestion of the liver: then your incision will be on the left side from the navel to three fingers.
And if the cause of it is the spleen, then the incision should be on the right side: and it is not necessary to make the incision above where you want to put the patient, in order not to cause excessive bleeding to the delicate parts
Then perforate with the instrument the whole skin.
Then introduce into that area, and raise your hand with Spatumili between the skin, and scrape, as though you are scraping yourself: and be equal in the quantity that you scrape as the quantity of nails, or somewhat less.
Then perforate the scrape, until Spatumili reaches the empty place: and that is the place of water.
Then draw it out, and introduce into the hole of the instrument, which has this shape
And it is like a tube: it is made of silver, or gold, or electrum, flexible, soft: which has in its lower part a small hole, and in its sides are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side: and its extremity is cut, according to the manner of the incision of a reed, as water: at its extremity is an arm.</start_of_turn>
For when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately descends above the instrument, so that it evacuates from the water in an hour the quantity medium.</start_of_turn
For if you evacuate from it more than is necessary, in an hour perhaps the sick person dies from the resolution of the spirit of his animal: or it happens to him syncope which approaches death.</start_of_turn
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what is significant to you the conditions of the sick person from the virtue of his pulse, and from his health.</start_of_turn>
Then draw out the instrument, and retain the water.</start_of_turn>
That is, because it is retained immediately by the skin which retains the hole which is above the scrape: of which I told you, that you must perforate it according to the light mode.</start_of_turn
Repeat the instrument on the other side if you are able to tolerate the patient: and extract also from water the quantity that is sufficient. Repeat the procedure on the other side without fear; and keep yourself guarded against error: until there remains from the water nothing but a little.
If, however, you fear for the patient, and you discharge from the water a great quantity: then care for him with burial in hot sand, and with much sweating in the bath and in the sun, and expect above the seat: and care for him with physicians of experience, until he is healed: and cauterize upon the stomach, and the spleen, and the liver, after the water has been extracted, according to what I have said before
As for the care of infants who are born in places where the urinary tract is not perforated
Chapter 55. When a child comes out of the womb of its mother and its head is not perforated, or that the opening is narrow, or is not in its proper place.
One must therefore assist with the perforation of it immediately when it is born with a fine needle, according to this form.
Then place in the opening a small lead weight, and bind it: and keep it for three days, or four
When it wishes to urinate, move it, and mix it up
Then reduce it.
And if you do not put in lead, it is possible that the urine which is passing over the place will not permit it to close.
The one whose opening is narrow is treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it becomes wider.
If the opening is in an unnatural position, they suffer.
For in such a case the opening is at the end of the hair-growth: because it cannot reach forward until it has lifted the hair above. Neither is there any generation, therefore, because the sperm cannot pass beyond the matrix in a straight line: and there is a wound which is painful to her.
And the mode of treatment in this is that the sick person be placed over his back.
Then stretch out his hair with your left hand stretching towards the heel, and cut off the head of the hair from its root, with a knife or a sharp spatula: as it is the cutting of hair, or as you would a radish, so that its middle part comes out like the head of hair: and that the opening be in the middle as it should be.
And take care that there be no flow of blood during your operation.
Many times indeed this happens.
Oppose it therefore with that which cuts off the blood, and care for the wound until it is healed
And concerning the accidents which happen in the preparation of the wound and the head of the hair, and corruption, blackness, and adhesion.
Chapter 66.
Many of these things happen in the hair, and it is the prominence of the diseased tissue.
And among these there are malignant and non-malignant things.
The malignant one must be suspended with a fine thread and cut off, until the whole of it is gone
Then place upon the wound the submerged heel in unguento Aegyptio. Then care for the wound afterwards with a finer unguent until it has healed
If the wound is malignant, dark in colour, then it is necessary to apply cautery to it after making an incision and to remove the cause of the wound itself.
If, however, the wound is tightly closed and is part of the larger wound, and part of it is within and part of it is outside: then it is necessary to ligate the deeper part of the wound until it is consolidated, and then care for the outside of the wound. For if you care for both together, the wound will not be closed
And sometimes also in testicles, and black and corrupted swelling
Therefore it is necessary to drain the whole of what is blackened and corrupted, and what wants to corrupt, or which is already corrupted
Then apply above it after that with honey which is softened with pounded barley and pounded thyme leaves
Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it has healed.
If, however, blood flows, then apply cautery with a lunar cautery, according to this form.
Cautery is useful in two situations simultaneously, namely for blood flow and for a wound which is corrupted
If the head of the worm has become corrupted and is destroyed throughout in an hour: then it is necessary to introduce lead into the flesh of the worm, so that it may mix with the pus above it
In the case of an adhesion of the wound to the head of the worm, and this adhesion does not happen except in that case in which the wound is healed and does not require excision: and when it does happen in connection with the wound or its pus: it is necessary to scrape away the wound with a blunt spatula until the ligament is severed and the head of the worm is freed from all sides
If it is difficult to discern the excellence of these things, then it is appropriate to excise something from the head or from the genitals.
When the prepuce is subtle, it is perhaps pierced because of its slightness or quickly
Then separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a fine linen cloth which has already been made wet in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then care for it with vinegar, until it is solidified. Regarding the cleansing of infants, and the treatment of errors from accidents.
Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not a complete solution like other wounds: indeed, when it comes from our operation, from our will, and when it is in the child itself, it is necessary to show in this operation a greater care, and to cause less suffering to the child.
I say, that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws, and it is not except that we have learned through experience.
Indeed, I have found among the artifices a greater part who make use of cutting and bleeding for the cleansing of infants, by circumcision with a needle and with scissors: and they use wine and ligature with a thread, and incision with a nail.
And I myself have tried all these methods, and I have not found a better cleansing of infants than with scissors, and ligation with a thread
For in the cleansing with a needle, much skin escapes
For the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper skin escapes, and threatens the lower layer: it is thought therefore to make an incision to reach the other, and to relieve the future pain
And when the modification is made by the affected part, that is, the digits, which the surgeons employ, it is not secure to make an incision at the extremity of the limb; for perhaps it will enter into the hole of it.
And in the modification with the nail, perhaps the iron will go away, and will corrupt your work; for the skin of the child is short in nature, and many are born thus, which does not dispense with the modification: and I say that it is this which will aid it.
And with regard to the modification with the scissors, and the ligation with thread, a good experiment has been found to be this: for the scissors are proportional to the incision; therefore, as the sharpness which is above is like that which is below
When you have thus grasped the hand, the two sharpness are proportional, and they cut according to the operation at one time: and there is a compression like that which follows a figure, containing the skin of the limb from every part, so that no mistake is made at all
And the manner of the operation itself is this, that you make the excision, children especially, if there be any of them who understand their surroundings, that you do not make an incision, except that you ligate the thread in the limb itself: and you let it go until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be happy in every way possible, from that which receives intelligence.
Then put your hand into the limb, and blow into the skin, and pull it up, until the head of the limb comes out.
Then loosen the surrounding tissue from that which is aggregated in that cavity.
Then secure the marked place with a doubled thread.
Then secure the lower part with an inferior ligament alongside the main ligament. Then take hold with your index finger and thumb, and hold the place of the lower ligament securely, and cut between the two ligaments.
Then lift the skin upwards quickly, and extract the head of the vein.
Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better thus) and put powder on top: and over the powder put a bandage which has been soaked in warm water, broken with a little fresh alum: and leave it on until the next day: and care for the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
But as for the shape of the forceps for this purpose, it is like this
There are two handles at each end, and the blades are joined: do not let the handle slip into the cleft of the claw: and let the length of the two blades be equal, like the length of two equal thumbs
The danger in this procedure is that perhaps the underlying skin has escaped entirely, or a part of it has escaped at the incision site. Therefore it is necessary to expand the surrounding area from your hour hand with your thumb before incisions: and make the incisions according to equality.
If you are unable to hold the surrounding area with your thumb, then grasp it with your index finger, and make the incision
If, however, three days pass and the swelling under the vein remains, remove the swelling: then let the swelling subside naturally, and remove the clot with ease, and make the incision as described above: and be careful from the head of the vein downwards
It will not harm him.
It will not harm him. For if it happens from the skin above the measure to the upper parts, it does not harm him even so.
It will not harm him. For as we have said, until he is healed.
Until he is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by the formation of a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh, or similar things from which we have spoken in the method of treatment of dropsy
And if the urine does not dissolve, and you think that the retention is because of a stone which is in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary to be positioned with his knees bent over
Then join his feet over his back, and stretch out his belly from the upper part of his back, and grasp his thighs as much as possible for him
He thinks therefore that with the neck of the bladder towards the back, the stone will be expelled: and the urine will be discharged
And if it does not dissolve as we have said, and you think there is something above the infirmity: then you must administer the extraction with an instrument called a siringa, which is made of silver, is subtle, soft, and concave like the quill of a bird in the thickness of a radius, long like the palm of one hand and a medium: with a fine needle at its head
And the way of extracting the urine is as follows: take a doubled thread and tie in its extremity a wool or cotton thread, a good ligation: and introduce the extremity of the thread into the lower part of the siringa: and pierce with scissors if anything remains of the wool, but introduce into the needle with certainty, as when you are making an ass
Then apply the sponge with oil or butter, and vinegar: and let the patient sit upon a seat, and bind up the wound, and pour oil upon the wound with warm oil, and olive oil, and tepid water.
Then introduce the sponge into the wound until it reaches the root of the wound
Then double the above from the navel upwards Then push the sponge into the wound until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that the wound has gone past the painful part: do not do this except in the case where the wound has become taut.
Then draw out the thread with the lancet gradually
The vein follows the lancet.
Then draw out the wound, and let the vein flow through the urine: and repeat the sponge, and do not cease doing this until the wound has evacuated its urine and the patient experiences relief. Regarding the quality of the urine of Clepshydra
Chapter 59
It is blind, that is, closed
And in it are three holes, two from one side, and one from the other side, like water
And the concaved place where it is pushed, where that which drives it rests, should be in proportion to the quantity which it desires without addition, until when it is drawn with it something is attracted from the humilities: and when it is pushed out, when it is driven out far: according to what the Clepshydra does, which throws out pitch, that is, Greek fire in the fields of Mars
When any liquid is thrown upon the cavity, introduce the extremity of the bladder towards the liquid and draw it up with that which urges it upwards, for the liquid is thus drawn into the concavity of the bladder. Then introduce the extremity of the bladder into the cavity, as we mentioned in the syringe.
Then draw up the liquid with that which urges it upwards and immediately the humidity proceeds to the cavity, so that the patient feels its effect immediately Thus make a slight enema so that the bladder is cleansed.
Then insert the strong thread firmly through those holes, as they are twisted together Then gather the circle, as the flax is gathered: after you have placed in it that which is exuded from the humilities, and oils, and waters.
Then tie it in an instrument: and do it like that which was done with the bladder when expressing with your hand, until the liquid reaches the bladder.
On the Extraction of the Stone.
On the Extraction of the Stone. We have already spoken concerning the types of Stone, and their treatment with physicians: and we have mentioned the difference between the Stone generated in other parts of the body, and the vesical Stone, and the signs of the latter: and we have mentioned that the operation for the Stone is performed with the hand and the incision: and that the Stone is generated in the bladder itself: and that which appears in the urine: and I will speak of this with manifest exposition and brevity.
I say therefore, that the Stone which is generated in the bladder occurs most frequently in children.
And from its signs it is known that the urine comes out of the bladder like water in its substance: and there appears in it white sand, and it irritates the painful parts of the bladder, and causes them to swell, and causes great pain Then it is raised up, and comes out with it through the anus in many people.
And the healing of children from this is easy, until the age of fourteen
It is difficult in old age
In young people, however, it is middle-sized, in which case its care is easier: and if it is small, the care of it is less expensive
When we come to the treatment, it is necessary in the first place to purge the patient with clister, which removes all the stool which is in his intestines: for this indeed sometimes hinders the finding of the Stone in the inquiry. Then the patient is taken with his feet, and is struck, and moved downwards: so that the Stone may go down to the depth of the bladder, or be expelled from a high place.
Then make him sit with his arms prepared between yours, and his hands under his buttocks, so that his belly may hang down freely to the lower parts.
Then ask him and touch him externally.
If you feel a stone in the space, then immediately hold it with a section above it
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must remove the index finger of the left hand if it is a child: or the middle finger if it is an adult: and insert it into the belly of the patient, and ask about the stone, until it rests under your finger: and slowly bring it to the bottom of the belly
Then press above it with your finger, and push it outwards towards the place where the section is to be made: and command the minister to cut away the belly from the hand, and command another minister to extend the testicles of the right hand upwards: and another hand to move the skin which is under the testicles in the part from the place where the section is to be made
Then insert the sponge with the shape like this.
And find in it what is between the belly and the testicles, and not in the middle, at the side of the left hip: and let the section be made above the stone, and your finger be in the rectum: and make a transverse incision, so that the external incision is wide and the internal incision is narrow, according to the quantity that allows the stone to escape from it without being greater
Perhaps the finger that is in the rectum will press the stone at the section and it will come out without difficulty.
And you know that the stone has angles and margins, because of which its exit is difficult because of that
And from this is soft, like a gland, and round: and it facilitates the egress of its contents.
And to it are added angles and margins to the fissure.
If it does not issue forth thus, then it is necessary that you introduce above it: or that you draw over it with your hand in the middle, whose extremities are like the Moon which is drawn over the Stone, and does not recede from it: or that you introduce under it an instrument which is fine and flexible at its extremities
But if you cannot overcome it from above, then enlarge the small opening.</start_of_turn>
If anything from the blood incites you, cut it off with a saw.</start_of_turn>
If there is more than one stone, then drive in the first one to the bone of the belly.</start_of_turn
Then break over the rest of it.</start_of_turn>
Then drive out the little ones after that: and do the same if there are more than two.</start_of_turn
If it is great in size, then ignorance is not sufficient to cut through it with a large section.</start_of_turn
For it happens to the sick that two evils come together: or that he should die, or that there is a constant discharge of urine: because the place is not consolidated altogether.</start_of_turn>
But administer the expulsion of it until it has gone out: or introduce a fracture in its fracture with scissors, until you have extracted it frustrated.</start_of_turn
When you have completed your operation, then apply a bandage of wool, aloes, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place over it a soaked sponge of oil and wine, or oil of roses and cold water: so that the wound will be cooled.</start_of_turn
Then, suspend the patient supine over his own column, and do not loosen the ligaments until the third day.
When you have loosened it, bind up the place with much water and oil
Then care for it with unguent of rue, and unguent of alum, until it is healed.
If however it happens that a blood clot has been added to the wound, and is corroded, and similar: thus also when blood is congealed in the bladder and is withheld from it: this is recognized from the emission of blood with the urine
Insert your finger into the wound, and extract the blood clot
For if it remains, it causes corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and oppose all sorts of things with it which is useful for the cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the hours of cure of the whole thing, that you bind up two thighs, and join them together, for the cause of the physicians who put things on the place.
If the stone is small, and is in the meat of the bladder, and is fixed in it, and prevents the passage of urine: then care for it with that which I mentioned before until you reach the section
Many times I have excused myself from this treatment because of this. And it is, that you take a perforator of iron, which has this form, triangular extremities, acute, fixed in wood
Then take thread, and bind it with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the perforating iron into the abscess with ease, until it reaches the Perforatorium to the very stone: and withdraw the Perforatorium gradually from the stone: and make the perforation, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
The urine will immediately cease to flow.
Then place your hand over what remains of the stone from the exterior of the abscess.
The stone itself will break and go out with the urine, and the patient will be healed
If, however, this cure is not prepared for him, because of something that hinders it: then bind a thread under the stone and a thread above the stone Then dry over the stone within the abscess between two ligatures.
Then remove it.
Then loosen the ligature and stop the flow of frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind a thread under the stone, except that it does not go back to the orifice: and the other thread above, except when the thread is loosened after the stone has gone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to bind the upper thread so that it raises the skin upwards, so that the skin returns to its proper place and covers the wound, as we have said
Of the Extraction of a Stone from a Woman.
(The text continues with instructions for the specific procedure of extracting a stone from a woman.)
A stone is rarely generated in women
If, however, it should happen to any of them to have a stone, then the cure is difficult and is prohibited for various reasons
One of them is: a woman who perhaps is a man. And the second is that you do not find a woman who confesses herself to be a doctor when she is chaste, or who is married.
The third is that you do not find a woman who is well-skilled in this art, especially in surgery with the hand.
The fourth is the distance from the stone: for it requires deep section, and there is fear in that.
If necessity compels you to that, then you must take a female doctor who is well-skilled: and few are found.</start_of_turn>
If you wish, however, to take a man, take a chaste one, discreet, and present to him a skilled female midwife or a woman who has learned a part of the art: do this, and especially tell him about the stone from the inquiry.</start_of_turn> First of all, look to see if the woman is a man: then you must insert your finger into her belly and feel for the stone.</start_of_turn>
If you find it, grasp it under your finger and then order the midwife to insert her finger into the lower belly of the patient and inquire about the stone, after placing your left hand over the flank and compressing it gently.</start_of_turn> If you find the stone, then you must gradually move it from the opening of the bladder downwards with all your skill, until you have brought it down to the root of the hip bone.</start_of_turn
Then cut above it at the middle of the flank against the root of the hip bone, from whichever side you prepare it, and feel the stone in that place: and do not move your finger from the stone, holding it under it: and make the incision small at first.</start_of_turn
Then he lets the radium enter through that section.
If he feels a stone, then he adds to the section a quantity proportional to that which the stone has gone out from it.
And you know that there are many kinds of stones Among them is the small one, the great one, the soft one and the rough one, the long one and the round one having a branch.
You know therefore the kinds of them, so that you may understand by this what is said above it
If he sees blood flowing, then he adds in the place of the wound some burnt alum, and he keeps it for an hour, until the blood is clotted
If he sees blood flowing, and you know that the evacuation of blood is from the artery that has been cut: then you put powder on the place, and bind it with threads of a decent size: and do not move it: and let the stone go, and do not pull it out
Perhaps the woman is weak.
Then care for the wound.
When the pain of blood has subsided after a few days, and the place has become softened, then he returns to his operation, until the stone comes out
About the incision for a watery hernia
Chapter 122.
A watery hernia is not anything other than the accumulation of moisture in a white sac under the testicles containing urine: and it is called a hernia. And when it is within its proper membrane itself, which nature has prepared for it in part, until it is put out: that is something else, and is the covering of the testicles between the fat, which we have mentioned: and it does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of these branches is from the weakness which happens to the testicles: whereupon it flows out to them this matter
And when it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or, its color is declining towards citron, or it is reddish-bloody, or greenish, black, or pale yellow, and that is better
For if it is in the white fat which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round about the length like the figure of an egg: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from all sides
And if it is in the proper membrane itself of the body, then the swelling is round with a part like an egg, and because of this the man knows that it is something else
And if the moisture is between the covering of the testicles and the fat, then it goes under the sense
When therefore one sees the color of the moisture, then to experience the color of the moisture in the swelling with the introduction of a square which has preceded in form.
According to that therefore which proceeds from the introduction, judge about that which is between them.
When therefore we come to the treatment with the iron, then it is necessary to take away from the sick person what is harmful, such as a phlebotomy if it is possible, and to fill his body with liquid
Then the thing rests upon its back upon a high thing slightly, and put under it many cushions.
Then sit thou on its left side, and command the minister, that he sit on its right side, who shall extend his arm towards one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the part of the belly which is near the navel.
Then take a broad sponge, and dry the testicles from the middle along their length, until near the navel: and make a cut according to the straightness of an equidistant line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white membrane which encompasses: and scrape it off and observe, or cut it out: and thy scraping shall be as great as that which thou dost scrape from the part which hangs down with the greater testicle: and scrape gently according to the quantity which thou canst manage
Then pierce the full bladder with a wide perforation, and draw out all the water. Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the bladder upwards, and do not touch the membrane which encompasses the testicles: and cut the bladder as thou wilt, either entirely or in fragments, especially its width slightly
For if thou art not careful in thy inspection, there will be no security in the incision, that the water will not return.
If however anything external proceeds from its skin in the hour of thy operation: then when thou hast finished the incision of the bladder, reduce it.
Then gather together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it so that the rest of the wound be healed.
If thou find any black fluid from another place, then it is necessary that thou bind up the place, which is the suspending membrane, fearing the flow of blood.
Then remove the testicle with the suspension, and extract the sperm: afterwards care for it as we have said.
If indeed water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two roots: dry therefore the other part equally as you did in the other
And if it is made even, as for one operation, then do thus: then drain the blood.
And insert into the sections the lancet dipped in oil, or in rose oil: and place outside the lancet another layer of lancet which you submerged in wine and oil, and expand above two testicles, and look into the belly: and put upon it doubled layers of wool, and there are sponges: and bind them up above with a ligament, which is having six according to this shape.
Then take away two towels, and wash, and apply the carmine-colored unguent, according to this likeness: and let the extremities which are sent forward from the shoulder, or wet wool: and gather with the tightening in the lumbar region of the arms: and one extremity shall take over upon one until the shoulder, and the second shall take over at the part of the loin: and two extremities upon two thighs lower, and two extremities the other upon two groin, and gather the whole tightening in the lumbar region of the arms.
And when it is necessary to treat this swelling artificially with a cautery in the place of the incision with iron: and it is that you take a fine cautery blade, and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, as we have said: until when the white sponge containing water is detected: then take the cautery, according to this shape.
The letters are assimilated like those in Greek
Then prick with it thus that swelling, and it is ignited, until the whole moisture comes out
Then spread the sponge with hooks, and burn away the fat with a fine flame, and cut it through as much as you can, until you have cauterized all of it.
Do not let the flame touch the tissue itself.
You know that this operation is safer and longer lasting than the one with incision
If, however, you make the contrary movement in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cauterization afterwards, or there is blood flow, or something else of the like: then it is necessary to treat that which makes the contrary movement, with the treatment which suits it, according to what has been said.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect to endure this operation on account of its horror: then I shall give an incision according to what I have mentioned above: and that is enough
When you are certain that you have reached the point which we mentioned concerning the signification of the sensation which has subsided: then you must make the patient sit on an elevated seat
Then make the perforation of the fat in the lower part of the body with a sponge hook: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and keep the opening wide open until all the fat has clotted.
Then place over the place of the buttock, and bind it, and let it go so that it may clot the remainder of the fat: then care for it until the wound has healed
If, however, there is resistance to the escape of the water in the hour when you perform the perforation: and this is not except for the fact that a white pimple makes resistance to the opening of the wound and hinders the escape of the water: then you must introduce a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which the watery humors are extracted, whose form has preceded: or add to the operation of the wound a little.
Know also that water returns and accumulates after six months, or thereabouts.
When it accumulates, it returns again in the same way, and passes through the sick man's days.
Concerning the care of the marrow of the bones.
Chapter LXIII.</start_of_turn>
Know that in the section above this Ramus, there is fear of producing infection in various positions
Therefore its excision with salt from that is seen
And I remember the operation for that, and the kind of dressing.
I say that many abscesses happen in the body, from which testicles are composed: and this is from excessive eating of pork. Or from acute or chronic excess, or acridness which flows down to the testicles
Or from a blow.</start_of_turn>
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found to be painful: and it is a grave abscess.</start_of_turn>
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it is from the swelling of arteries, and the inflation of them: as I mentioned before concerning its reminder: or from the swelling of veins.</start_of_turn
Which is from the swelling of the arteries, is known by the position of the abscess when you press it with your fingers.</start_of_turn>
And it does not behove that you touch it directly.</start_of_turn
That which arises from the inflation of veins does not disperse from it with any compression whatever with the fingers. It is also possible that above this kind of swelling there may be a cutting, and above the rest of the flesh: and this is like cutting the skin of the testicles.
Then extend the limb upwards, and draw it out with a white bandage: and release the swelling from the parts, and bind the part: and cut through the swelling after you have freed it from all sides of the limb
If, however, the limb is solidified with these native parts of the body, then it is necessary to draw out the limb and cut through it. If there is an adhesion between something of the veins, or in that which is between the parts: then it is necessary to free the whole adhesion, and to make a round incision.
But if there is a natural part of the flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut through the whole of that, and to draw out the limb, as we have said When the operation is finished, then put a bandage over the wound which is infiltrated with fat in a rose-coloured oil, and wine: then care for the limb with the rest of the care, until it is healed.
Of the care of limbs, which is with speed.
Chapter 122.
Inflammation is a swelling which is surrounding and compressing the quadra, similar to a bag, with the softening of the testicles: and it makes it difficult for the infirm to move and exercise, and to walk.
And in the treatment of this inflammation is from fear, because of that from which it proceeds is remembered
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance.
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. Then make a transverse incision with a sharp knife over the testicles until the testicles are detected
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. Then remove the testicles from all sides, as we have said concerning the arteries which are in the groin
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. Then dry it in the middle of a straight incision according to the length of the body, and remove what is gathered from the moistness of corrupt feces.
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. Then take care of the wound with care of the rest of the wounds, so that the testicles which feed one of the testicles are not nourished.
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. There is no evil in this.
Truly, it is necessary to say that the operation must be performed as they did in the first instance. But if the veins are all severed from the testicles, then it is necessary to remove the testicles with the veins: so that nothing is left to nourish them, because of the incision, and that they do not fester, but rather die and become useless.
On the care of the Ramus of the intestine. On the care of the Ramus of the intestine.
Because the intestines descend from that break to one testicle
This break is either from the siphoning or from the extension of it
These two kinds happen from many causes: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a cry, or from the elevation of a heavy thing, and the like.
And the sign is when it is from the extension of the siphoning
It happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen immediately: and it is a swelling equal to the depth: because the siphoning compresses the intestine
And the sign of it is when it is from the section of the siphoning, because it makes the pain that arises immediately: and it is a swelling of various kinds, appearing under the skin nearby: and this is because of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it to the outside of the siphoning
And when it comes out with the intestine along with a ball: and this is called the Ramus of the intestine, and a ball: and when it happens with a swelling.
And when it runs into the intestine with stool, and is retained there: and this is with great sickness: because it makes arise pain in the belly, and especially when it is let go.
And in the treatment of these diseases of the intestine with iron, fear is to be had: because it is necessary to prevent the cause of it
And the manner of the operation is that you must urge the principal illness to reduce the intestine to its own concavity, if it obeys the return.
Then it rests upon its collar between your hands: and elevate its edges.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin towards the upper parts, and dry the whole scrotum thoroughly along its length
Then fix in two points of the incision the intestines which are opposite to each other, according to what is necessary to open the section with the intestines: and the incision should be made according to the quantity which is possible, that it may escape from it all things
Then strip the fat and what is under the skin of the testicles, until when the white fat is detected, hard throughout: then insert your finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white fat which is under the skin and the white fat which is between the fats.
Then move with your right hand towards the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white fat upwards, with your left hand: and elevate the gut with the fat towards the part of the incision: and command the minister to extend the gut upwards: and you shall solve the adhesion which is at the complete solution
And seek with your fingers that there be nothing left of the intestine in the white fat or hard
If however you find anything there: then push it downwards into the lower belly
Then grasp the clamp, in which is a thick thread made of ten threads: and insert it at the end of the white fat, that is, the tunica which is under the skin of the testicles which follows the incision: then cut off the extremities which protrude from the thread, until there remain four threads.
Then form some of the edges over some others in the shape of a cross: and bind with silk thread, as we have said, because it is under the skin of the testicles that the ligament is firmly fixed, until it cannot bear any of the uses which nourish them to send anything to them: so that it does not happen that after the abscess becomes cold.
And put the ligament again outside the first ligament, long enough to be less than two fingers from it
And after these two ligaments let go from the testicles, which are under the skin of the testicles, in the quantity of the magnitude of a finger: and cut off the rest entirely according to the roundness, and take out from it all.
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles by cutting, from which blood runs, and heal: as we have narrated before.
Then apply soaked wool under the fat, and put in a wound: and administer the ligament which we have mentioned.
And when the white fat which we mentioned has been cauterized, after cutting it out with fear of the flow of blood.
Many times this happens.
And let go of the ligament, until it falls down by itself.
If, however, its case is delayed, then it will be embroidered with warm water: and put over that which we have mentioned, until it falls down
Then care for the wound with the rest of the care for wounds, until it heals.
Of a swelling that has a root.
Chapter LXVI.
In the case of a swelling which has a root, no one should be allowed to handle it with a knife.
And first of all, they say, it is like that which we have narrated in Ramice which is with Vite.
And first of all, they say, it is like that which we have narrated in Ramice which is with Vite. That is, as a limb hangs loose after its section above it is easy to dry out in the middle, and care afterwards with that which opens it until the limb falls away: and care of the wound, as we have said, until it is healed.
Of the disruption which happens in the groin.
Chapter LXVII.
When a rupture happens in the groin, as we have said, and the place hangs out, and does not descend to the testicles anything from the intestines: and if it descends, it is little and returns in every hour: truly if it is prolonged with that time, a tear is added in the groin until the intestines descend into the groin
And this happens from the extension of the groin, which is in the groin, as we have said
That is, because the groin is extended: then it is softened and the place hangs out, and it hangs out.
And its care is with cautery, as it was mentioned before
And when it is cured with iron, in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands.
Then dry the place of the rupture after it has hung out, and cut across the breadth, according to the quantity of three fingers wide
Then bind the intestines and those which are under the skin, until the fat is revealed which is under the skin following it
Then take a needle and put it over the place that hangs out from the fat, and press it into the depth of the belly.
Then take two points above the extremity of the radius from the sutures, and join them with a suture one with the other: then extract the extremity of the radius.
And do not perforate the gut at all, neither draw out any strings or anything else, like I told you in the treatise on intestinal branches Then take care of this cure of wounds.
When you have cut the thread, soften it, and restore the wound until it is consolidated
Do not pull against each other, and do not add prominence of the rupture.
And the cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to the marrow.
Of the softening of the skin of testicles.
Chapter LXVIII.</start_of_turn>
The skin of testicles is softened in many people, because the meat which is between them is softened, and its aspect is improved
Therefore it is necessary for him who is treating him to make him urinate on his back, and to cut away the softened skin over the natural skin. Then join together two lips with a suture: and if you wish, make a surplus of the softened skin by means of three or four sutures, and tighten the suture
Then take care of the cure of the remaining wounds until they are healed, and take out the stitches.
Of castration.</start_of_turn>
Chapter LXIX.</start_of_turn
You know that Castratio has been excluded from our law: therefore, I am permitted not to recall it in this book. It is not necessary to recall it except for two cases.
For one thing, it is necessary that it be mentioned in the science of medicine whenever Castratio is inquired about: and that one know its treatment when it happens.
The other is that we often need to perform castration on some animals because of the stench they emit on account of our perfumes, such as asses, hircuses, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore, that Castration is done in two ways. Or by cutting off.
Or by incision and division
In the former method, however, the operation is as follows: we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles become soft and limp, and then we cut off the testicles with our hands until they are completely severed and no longer perceptible to the touch
In castration by incision and division, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly and grasp the testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than that by attrition: for it perhaps leaves something of the testicles, which the animal desires for coitus.
Then care for the wound, until it is healed
There are two methods for caring for Hermaphrodites.
Chapter 70.
The hermaphroditic condition originates from two sources.
One of these is that it appears in the space following the testicles, or on the surface of the testicles, between two testicles, like the shape of a female vulva, which has hair: and sometimes urine runs from the area on the surface of the testicles.
There is another kind among women, which is like a female vulva resting on the abdomen just like small testicles, protruding outwards: one is like the penis of a man, and two are like two testicles
The treatment for all three types, two of which are hermaphroditic and one which is female, is: to cut away the added flesh until the imprint of the condition has disappeared.
Then care for the remaining wounds
In the second kind of hermaphroditism from which urine comes out through the testicles on the surface, there is neither operation nor any treatment for it
As for the incision of the tenticle and the protruding flesh in the female genitals
Chapter 71
The tenticle may perhaps be added upon something natural, until it becomes deformed and unsightly: and sometimes it swells in some women so much that it expands like that in men, and persists until coitus.
It is therefore necessary to remove the supernumerary tenticle, with or without a vein, and cut: and do not hesitate in the incision, especially not in the deep root: so as not to cause the flow of blood
Then care for the wound itself until it heals
The belly is that which is born from the matrix until it fills itself: and sometimes it departs to the outside according to the shape of the tail: and for this reason they call the disease of the tail.
Therefore we must proceed thus as we proceed with Tentigin and cure it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the care of the fistula, which is the swelling of a woman which is not perforated.</start_of_turn
Chapter LXXII.</start_of_turn
The fistula is, as it is a swelling of a woman which is not perforated, or as it is a small opening.</start_of_turn
It is either natural or accidental.</start_of_turn
The accidental one is from the disease which preceded it: and this itself is either from the native flesh added, or from fine sand, or from pus: and it is either in the depth of the matrix, or in the flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it hinders coitus and impregnation, and delivery, and perhaps hinders menstruation.</start_of_turn
And the knowledge of it is by the aspect of the obstetrician, if there is an apparent prolapse of the opening.</start_of_turn
If however it is not apparent, then inquire with your fingers, or with an X-ray.</start_of_turn
If however the prolapse is from fine sand, and is close to two teeth: then proceed carefully, and break it.</start_of_turn
And it is like putting over two lips two little pillows.</start_of_turn
Then put your two index fingers of both hands together, and the woman sit with her back expanded and her knees spread wide.</start_of_turn
Then extend two lips with force, until the delicate sac is ruptured, and the opening is revealed.
Then grasp the lip, and soak it in oil, and place it on the place: and let the woman drink every day, so that it does not solidify in another place.
If, however, the sac is thick and tough: then it is necessary to cut it with a knife like the blade of a myrtle leaf
If, however, the opening is natural from the flesh: then suspend the lip with hooks, and cut it: and there be with you medicines which flow blood without causing harm, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus it is aggregated with alum or white powder.
Then administer a wide lead cannula, so that it does not solidify too quickly, keep it for a few days: and administer vinegar from dry lino, then care for the rest of the treatment, until it is healed
And when it is born in the matrix of other flesh: it is necessary to cut according to this manner: while there is no cancerous tumor in the matrix, do not oppose with iron in any way
Regarding the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red ones in women's veins.
Chapter 73.
Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the veins near the opening of the rectum, because of the great flow of blood in them.
When hemorrhoids are thus lessened, they become little; and I have already spoken in the discourse concerning the species of these and their signs: and here I will tell you what is useful for their treatment, and what is not
I say, that hemorrhoids which are in the matrix opening, and which do not appear to sense: then there is no need for treatment with iron
Whatever exists in the cavity of the uterus above which sensation is lost, is to be cured.
It is necessary therefore that you immerse the woman in a cold house.
Then extend the lobe with forceps, or with a rough cloth, and cut away the roots from them.
Then powder over the roots above the flow of blood from one incision without causing damage: like acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour
Then put her to bed in cold water
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of rue, and nutmeg, and gall, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back
If blood is therefore separated with it, that is good: and if not, make it adhere to the swellings, and blisters, without incision
Then take wool, and soak in the juice of tarth, or the juice of arnica, or the juice of elderberry leaves, that is, aloe, wine of Ponticus, and make it adhere to the wound
When the swelling has subsided, then care for the place with unguents, until it is healed
Though it is white in colour like hair, and has a rough appearance
It is necessary therefore that you cut away what appears from it, according to what I have said above: and care for it, until it is healed
On perforation of the Exitura [a vein] which happens in the matrix.
On perforation of the Exitura which happens in the matrix.
Various kinds of abscesses happen in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscess, ulcer, foreign body, alekilati, herpes, aestiomemus, fistula, hemorrhoids, ragus, thelil, and cold abscess.
And I shall say concerning all these ailments and their kinds, their signs, and their treatment in general: it is necessary to speak in this treatise of the cold abscess which happens in the matrix, when it is caused by other abscesses which join health, and to know how to open it with a knife.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary to consider this.
If the pain of the abscess is acute with percussion, flame, and fever: and you see it turning red: do not attempt to open it immediately: take care of it with something which promotes its maturation, until the acute inflammation subsides.</start_of_turn
Then it is necessary to make her sit on a seat which supports two seats, and she should recline, or be laid across her back, and rest her feet on the lower part of the belly: and let her hips be spread out, and put her arms under her knees, and bind both straps conveniently to that.</start_of_turn
Then sit on the right side the obstetrician, and administer the instrument with which you open the orifice of the matrix.</start_of_turn>
Which has the shape of the things which are after.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary when you administer this instrument, to hold the liver with a deep grasp of the matrix of the woman: so that it does not go deeper into the matrix than is necessary, and does not harm the lower part.</start_of_turn
If, however, the instrument be more shallow than profound, it is necessary that you place plugs over the covering of the profound matrix: in order to prevent the entrance of the entire instrument into the profound matrix. And it is necessary that you place a plug, which runs in the instrument, from the upper side: and that you hold the instrument, and that you turn the minister of the plug until the profound matrix is opened.
When the exit appears, and the hand grasps it, and it is soft and yielding: then it is necessary that you cut it off at its head with a broad spatula.</start_of_turn>
When the healthy parts have been evacuated, then it is necessary that you place in the wound a cushion soaked in rose oil: or in olive oil, in which there is some astringency: and place the cushion, and withdraw the section from the profound matrix.</start_of_turn>
And place externally over the matrix, and over the wound a bandage of wool soaked in water, in which there are bulges of evil.</start_of_turn>
Then care after two days with an unguent which agrees with it, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
And when the matrix and the wound are washed, it is to be plastered with water and honey: then with water in which there is a radix of lily, or longwort: then return to the unguent.</start_of_turn>
If the wound has been hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary that you hinder its treatment with iron, rather treat it with that which we said in the instruction.</start_of_turn>
Concerning the doctrine of midwifery, how to treat the embryos of women, according to an unnatural figure of egress.</start_of_turn
Chapter Lxx.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to know in the first instance the figure of natural birth.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to know in the first instance the figure of natural birth. When therefore you see these signs, you must immediately grasp the uterus so that the embryo may descend more quickly.
Whoever does this for another part is unnatural and harmful.
For when the fetus comes out feet first, and the body comes out before the head, and the feet and hands together, or the head and hand: or the belly comes out: or perhaps the head strikes against the collarbone, and similar things happen from unnatural figures.
It is necessary therefore for the Obstetrician to be prudent and cautious in all these matters, and to be wary of error and excessive force. I show you all the figures of these things and how they are performed, and I explain their significance, and I stand over them.
When the fetus comes out head first at its natural delivery, and if it is delivered over the woman, and if it is difficult for her to part, and if the water breaks: then let her sit down, or let the women hold her up. And let her breathe slowly with a decocted vinegar solution and with oily unguents.
Then the Obstetrician introduces his thumb between the toes of the fetus and finds the second [finger], and grasps it with his finger, until it is freed from the moisture: and press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to instill a woman from the fenugreek mucilage with ole of sesame.
Then command her to supinate after instilling, that she cover her belly with the palm of her hand, and keep her mouth and nose closed for one hour
The fetus will immediately come out.
If two hands of the fetus come out at once, then it is necessary to reduce them gradually
If it does not yield inwards, then place a woman upon a seat, and elevate her feet above her head: then press the seat against the earth: and the woman should be kept steady, that she does not fall upon the concussion
If therefore the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut open the abdomen, and extract the fetus: and bind the hand with a cloth, and extract it with an equal force: for it will come out itself.
The emergence of the fetus through the feet.
When the fetus comes out through the feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards: then gradually turn the fetus: afterwards equalize it
Then take hold of one foot and extend it gradually
When they come out up to the hips, then command her to cover herself, and make her lie down: they will come out by themselves, if God wills it.
And if they do not come out as we have said, then gradually reduce the fetus until you place it according to the natural figure.
For it will come out by itself when its time comes.
If it be forbidden with all that we have said: then take from the slime of elderberry, and ole of sesame, and gum dissolved: and pierce all through in the mortar by a good blow. Then line with it the vulva of a woman, and below the entrance of her belly.
Then make her sit in warm water, until the jaundice follows.
When the lower parts are relaxed by the heat, then make for her a sieve of myrrh: and support her
When she has held the sieve for an hour, then make her sit on a seat.
Then make her expectorate: and bind her jaw and nose: and press the lower part of her belly with pressure from below.
For the urine will immediately come out.
The fetus comes out over the knee and hand
When it comes out in this form, then it will enter inwards gradually putting out its hand.
Then the woman lies down on her neck, and hangs her legs down to the lower parts: and she lies lying on a bed, and she covers her hand with her own hand
And press above her belly gradually
And draw out what is under her feet from the nails, until it is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then take hold of her feet, and move them towards the navel.
Then press what is above the jaundice gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts
Then put out her hand gradually, and equalize the fetus slowly: and command the woman to bear down, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus hangs laterally from the hands.
The fetus hangs laterally from the hands. Reduce the hand
If it is not possible to reduce the hand, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
If she is unable to walk, then make her lie on a stretcher: and beat her thighs with a blunt object until she feels pain
Then administer the unguents which you have prepared from mucilages.
If she feels relief in the part, then make her sit on a chair
Then study the reduction of the hand, and equalize the fetus according to its natural form: and make the woman groan and instruct her to compress herself until she is delivered.
The fetus has emerged over his collar, with his hands spread out, and his face is towards the back of his mother.
The obstetrician must grasp the fetus's hand and gradually rotate him, aligning him with ease
When he is aligned, then place on his navel the unguents which we mentioned from wax and mucilages
Then instruct her to move slowly
When you have done this, then make her sit on a chair and instruct her to lean towards her right side
Then instruct her to compress: and make her groan with effort.
The fetus is ready to be born on the right side
When it has descended through the birth opening in this way with the second foot, then break the second foot with your thumb until it is expelled from the moisture.
If the fetus hangs suspended over the face and the neck, then cut the cord from the navel: so that it does not remain and die.
Then push the fetus inwards, until you have placed the cord according to what is necessary: and command the woman to press her hand lightly: for he will himself come out through the easy birth opening.
The birth of twins, or of many fetuses.
You know that twins are often born multiple: and sometimes three or four are born together.
It is true, but it is rare.
Five things indeed are outside of nature, and do not live long: and they are retained together, although multiplied, by one: and they are separated by the navel-string of each of them
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus through the natural birth opening, easily: and they come out through the difficult birth opening, as we have told you. If, however, some of them are difficult at the time of birth, and remain until they reach the figures which we have mentioned as unnatural, then care for them as we have told you: and let the midwife be gentle, and do what she does with ease and with delay, and adapt herself to every figure as she is prepared for her from the ingenuity leading to safety
When one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more are formed in the womb: and I have seen a woman give birth to seven and another to fifteen, all of them formed
Which is done by the measurement of the glorious learned man
This therefore all must be in the science of Obstetrics. It is perhaps like that: it opposes it just as it must oppose that which is necessary
Concerning the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with medicine as I said in the discourse on medications, and it does not go out, and you must perform an operation with the hand, then you must consider it.
If a healthy woman is virtuous and there is no risk of losing her due to any accident, then you must cause the woman to recline over the lectum, over her back, and let her head be inclined downwards, and her legs elevated: and the minister should hold her from both parts, or she should be bound to the lectum, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus
Then moisten the os matricis with oily substances with high mucilage, and sponges of aloes, and linseed seeds. Then let the Obstetrician wet his hand with these oils and mucilages: then he will introduce the hand into the matrix with ease
Then he will feel where the ribs are fixed to the fetus, and the convenient place for that.
Consider then, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its head: then fix the ribs in the eyes, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate itself, or under the beard, or under the hyoid bone, or in nearby places to the ribs, and under the hypochondria
If however the descent is over its feet, then in the groin and the middle ribs
And it is necessary that the hook grasp the thumb with the right hand: and place the curve of its arch in that which is between the digits of the left hand: and insert it with the hand with ease, and fix the hook in some of those places which we have mentioned, until it reaches the desired thing.
And then extend it evenly, and it should not be extended only in a straight line, but rather move towards all parts, so as to alleviate its emergence: as it is done with a tooth when extracting it.
And it is necessary in that which is between these, so as to soften the extension.
That if it be retained from that, then the Obstetrix must grasp any digit with wax, and insert it from the side, so as to rotate it with that which is retained
If, therefore, a part of the fetus goes out, then change the hooks to another place which is higher: do this until the fetus comes out whole
If, therefore, the hand goes out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its coarseness: then it is necessary that it be covered over with the thumb
And then draw out the hook until when it comes out whole, cut it either on the joint of the thumb or on the nail, or in the heel: and it is necessary that you make the hook in the other hand, and in the two feet.
If, however, the head of the fetus is large, or if there is a constriction in its exit, or there is water gathered in its head: then it is necessary to insert between the digits the Spatumile spinous, and grasp it with that, and draw out the water: or break it with the instrument which is called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows
Similarly, if the fetus is of great head size, then it is necessary to remove the afterbirth: either by extracting it along with the placenta, as we have said.
Then grasp the bones with forceps.</start_of_turn>
If the head comes out, and remains at the vulva: then it is found, until the moisture that is in the chest is discharged.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it does not become complicated, and does not yield to extraction: then cut off the head as best you can, as is possible to you.</start_of_turn>
If there is an afterbirth below the belly, or in swelling: then it is necessary to perforate it, until the moisture from it comes out.</start_of_turn
If, however, the fetus is above its feet: then its traction is easy, and its direction towards the maternal bone is gentle.</start_of_turn
If, however, it is caught at the abdomen, or the chest: then it is necessary to extract it with the cloth which you have placed over your hand: and find the abdomen, or the chest, until the moisture that is in it comes out.</start_of_turn
If, however, the rest of the limbs are removed, and the head returns: then let the obstetrician insert his left hand.</start_of_turn If, therefore, the maternal bone is open: then insert your hand deeply into the womb, and grasp the head with your fingers until it reaches the maternal bone: then insert a single hook, or two hooks, into it, and grasp it with them.</start_of_turn
If, however, the maternal bone is closed, because of a thick afterbirth that has happened to it: then it is not necessary to toil over it, but it is necessary to administer an effusion of liquid and fat: and administer plasters: and sit in waters which soften and moisten.</start_of_turn
If the fetus is above its normal size, it is possible to equalize it: then the usual remedy is administered for the fetus which is present.
If it is not possible to equalize it, then it is forced out and extracted.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything remaining inside the body.</start_of_turn>
When you have completed the operation, then the usual remedy is administered for the postpartum chills which occur in the womb.</start_of_turn>
If there is a flow of blood, then descend in slippery substances, and administer the remaining treatment.</start_of_turn
And I myself have seen a woman in whom there was a dead fetus: then she was impregnated above that liquid again, afterwards another fetus died also.</start_of_turn
It happened to her after a long time that there was an abscess in her belly, and it became inflated, until it was opened: and pus began to flow out.</start_of_turn
I was called to her care and I treated her for a long time: but the wound did not heal.</start_of_turn
I placed over it some strong adhesive plaster: and it came out of the place.</start_of_turn
Then a few days passed by, and another bone came out.</start_of_turn
I am amazed at this, since there is no bone in her womb.</start_of_turn>
I thought that there must be the bones of the dead fetus.</start_of_turn>
I inquired about the wound and I extracted many bones, the woman being in better conditions: and I treated her for a long time, and she stopped emitting pus.</start_of_turn
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment.
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment.
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment.
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment. Here below is the shape of the Strictor, with which books are equalised, to which are equal two handles at the ends of two sticks.
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment. True to this, these vertigo must be made subtler than the strictor: and to do this, either from ebony or from seasoned wood.
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment. And the breadth of every stick is like two fingers: and the margin of each of them is like one finger, and the length of each of them is palm and a half: and in the middle of the two sticks are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are fastened in both, of whose length is half of the palm and a little, and whose breadth is like two fingers, or less
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment. And these two additions are introduced into the matrix bone, so that they open when two Vertigines are turned together.
And I have not fixed this foreign matter until I have ascertained that there is knowledge within it, and an aid for that which the artful physician administers with his hand from the care of the ailment. The shape of the Vertige which opens the matrix.
Another form like that, subtler and smoother.
It may be made from seasoned beech or horn, according to the resemblance of the forceps.
Two appendages are to be added at its extremity, as above: and the length of each appendage is like the palm of the hand, and the width of each is two fingers wide
When you wish to open the matrix with this, then make her sit over a bench, with her feet hanging down, and open that which is between her thighs
Then introduce these two appendages joined together into the matrix: and you are holding the lower extremity of the instrument between her thighs
Then open your hand with the instrument, like when you are using forceps, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the matrix, until the Obstetrix has done what she wishes
Another form of Vertigo which the ancients called the Impelling Force which drives out the fetus.
The Almisdac form which counteracts the small head The Vncini form which has a spine like a single thorn
The Vncini form which has two spines
The forceps form which has teeth like serrations, with which the head of the fetus is countered
The form of the spatumilis has two extremities to cut off the head.
The form of two spatumilis also has two extremities
These instruments are all used, and the more numerous the species are that are prepared by the artificer, the swifter will be the operation and the greater its height among men, on account of their quantity.
There is no need to despise any of these instruments, because they are all prepared for you.
It is not excusable to omit any of them
About the extraction of the second (tooth)?
Head number 78
When the second is retained in the part, then it is necessary to split the lower incisors in order to retain the breath.
Then make a groove with the forceps: and grasp the hand over the bone, and restrain the breath of the patient.
If it comes out through this, that is good
If not: then grasp the root firmly, and perforate at the junction of the bone: and place in it savory herbs such as calamine, rue, and chamomile, and saffron, and rue, and cassia twig, and centaury: grasp all of these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them with water, and place them over a fire
Then place a bundle of reeds over the hole in the pot, and the other extremity in the bone: and keep it held until the vapor has reached the cavity of the bone
Then make a groove as we said before
The second will then come out easily
If, however, after this treatment, he still remains and does not depart: then command the Obstetrician to immerse his hand in the brim of the olive oil or in the thick mucus of the elder. Then he shall insert it into the anus and seek with it the second [part].
When he has found it, then he shall grasp it and draw it out gradually.
If, however, there be an appendix in the depth of the belly, then he shall insert the hand again, as we have said, until he has found the second part. And he shall draw it out gradually following the rule, so that the belly does not tear at the time of drawing out: it is necessary, therefore, to shift it with ease to the right and left sides: and then add in the quantity of the drawing out.
It will obey him then, and will be healed, and will depart from the adhesion
As for if the belly-wall is closed, as we have said before: treat it with vomiting and with a medication of oil with herbs
If, however, it does not depart with all that we have said, then beware lest you tire yourself out in the process of drawing out.</start_of_turn>
It is true that it must come out at the os of the belly towards the woman's hipbone.</start_of_turn>
Then anoint the belly with unguent of four herbs.</start_of_turn
This will make the belly putrefy after days, and will dissolve, and will depart.</start_of_turn>
However, when it has putrefied, it will emit a bad odor from the belly and the head, and will cause pain in that place, and make the patient weak.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered for that.
Some of the ancients are experts in fumigation with asphalt and powdered ochre.</start_of_turn>
The manner in which a woman is fumigated at the second and menstrual retention.</start_of_turn>
Let there be an opening like a cauldron, or from a horn: and let the outside of the instrument be placed over the fire: and let the fumigation be placed upon the branches: hold it until the fumigation is consumed: and do it again.</start_of_turn
Regarding the care of an unpierced animal.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 79.</start_of_turn>
Many boys are born with their navels unpierced, and whom I have seen oiled with subtle saffron.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that the midwife pierce that with her finger: and if not, pierce it with a sharp needle: and be careful of the tear, lest it touch it.</start_of_turn
Then put upon it infused wool in wine and oil.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with nails, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If indeed it is to be oiled, then put in the hole a lead cannula for many days, and remove it when the boy wishes to urinate.</start_of_turn
And indeed the oiling of the navel also takes place from the consolidation of the wound, or from the afterbirth.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that the consolidation be dried up, and then care for it as we have said concerning care and lead.</start_of_turn On the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are of two kinds: Nodation, and Grossitudo, which occur close to any deformity: either in the space of one part or in several places.
When thus the Nodulation is treated, it is opened up and white aqueous moisture or subtle pus runs out of it
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.</start_of_turn>
And there are fistulas of the kind when they are penetrating right up to the bladder, and right up to the marrow of the bone.</start_of_turn>
And they are penetrating right up to the hip joint, and right up to the node of the buttocks.</start_of_turn>
And thus it is known that a penetrating fistula right up to the bone, even if not penetrating, is that you introduce your finger into the part, and introduce something subtle into the fistula from the air, or from iron: when there is no distortion.</start_of_turn
When there is distortion in these, then introduce into the part a subtle lead weight, or a hair from a horse's tail, until you feel the weight, or until the hair enters your finger.</start_of_turn
When you do not feel the sensation of the tip, neither is there any evacuation from the wound, neither swelling, nor worms as I have said: then you know that it is not penetrating: proceed therefore to the treatment.</start_of_turn
When the fistula has penetrated as far as the bladder or the meat of the urine: then its significance is the discharge of urine from that point, and the prohibition of that from this point in order to consolidate the place with the physicians.
When the fistula has penetrated as far as the hip joint or the hip bone: then its sign is that it extends up to that point, if there is no curvature of the fistula up to the bone: and the appearance of pain in the surrounding area, and that pus always escapes from that point: and that there is no benefit in that from the medicine, neither is it consolidated with the unguent
In all these penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure: and the cure of them is toil and constancy, from the stupid doctors, over whom they are formed. But in those which are not penetrating and are not old, hope of recovery is expected with rest: as I have said above, and as I have proved: and it is that the patient should lie between your hands over his back: and lift up his legs up to above his hips, and his hips should be inclined towards his belly
Then introduce lead or air, if there is curvature of the fistula, until you know where the tip has gone.
If, however, the patient feels pain around the part: then it is necessary to insert your finger as a sign into the part
If you feel in your finger that the fistula is penetrating by itself without you having recognized it, besides that you feel between your finger and the flesh, or bone: then you know certainly that it is penetrating: for there is no benefit in that, because it is not its cure, as we have said
They say that in some men the wound heals by itself, and from the medicine which is expected to be given to him, it is that you should apply a subtle cautery according to the breadth of the fistula, as it has been said before, and introduce the flame into the fistula until it has gone round the part
Then repeat that twice or thrice until you know that all the added flesh has become softened like the pennae of a bird.
Then treat it with softened butter until the flesh comes out: then treat it with unguents which generate flesh and consolidate it
If it is healed, that is good.
And if not, then it will not be healed with any other treatment.
And if the limb comes out and does not reach up to your thumb which is in the groin, and is between the thumb and the thick hair of the flesh, or if there is a fistula there: then make an incision in that which follows the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry with the thumb which is in the fistula until the cutting reaches the end of the thumb, and the thumb comes out.
Then soften those softened flesh which have become like the pennae of a bird, so that nothing remains of them
If however blood comes between you and the operation, and separates between you and the operation as you cut those flesh: then it is better that you cauterize with fire, or with acute medicine.
For indeed cauterization with fire unites good habits, adds the adulation of those added flesh, and cuts blood, and dries moisture
Then treat it with softened butter or poultices until the place emits pus, and the softened flesh comes out in the pus
Then treat it with a wound which is consolidated with unguents which generate flesh: and these are medicines which have stypticity and drying power
When restoration is complete, then healing takes place: and not by repeated efforts. When, however, the fistula persists even to the depth of the bowels, and is prolonged by the excess of bodily humours: then insert your finger into the rectum and inquire concerning the extent of the fistula.
If you feel resistance, and between you and the fistula there is soft swelling of fat or flesh, and there is proximity to the penetration: then there is no operation in that place, except with great trust and hope.
For in such a case one must use three methods: or else cauterise the fistula itself, as we have said: or dissect it, until you have reached its cavity, so that you can afterwards introduce remedies and achieve a cure from the next moment
And do not proceed too much with the dissection, lest you lacerate the wall of the rectum, and cause excessive discharge of faeces without will Then care for it as we have said. Perhaps it will heal by itself: or stretch out the swelling and dry it when it is almost close to the rectum, as we have said, or by means of a hook or other sharp instrument.
Then wipe clean the tissues which are left after the dissection, until where the mark of the incision disappears.
And try to restore the entire wound with the incision, and the upper opening where it is consolidated: and the fistula will remain open in the inner part of the rectum, and will be less painful
When you suture the fistula in this way: and that is when you insert your finger into the fistula: and it is at the side of the rectum around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the rectum: then grasp the perforated extremity, which is like a needle with a head, that is, prepared for the skin, according to this shape.
And insert within the loop of the thread which is bound up from five threads, and round about it.
And insert the needle with the thread into the fistula, until it follows the curvature of its opening.
If, however, it has pierced the inner margin of the anus near the opening, then withdraw the thread from that hole: so that you may insert your finger into the anus, and withdraw the end of the thread, and join the two ends together: and bind both of them, and let it go on one day, or two days: and the more the thread has penetrated the flesh, the more tightly you should bind it, until those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the thread have become soft and fallen away: then take care of the wound, until it is healed, and the fistula is cured
And do not make it pierce too violently, lest you damage it
And do as we have said above, until it is healed
Make the sponge of spicery which is found in the fistula, the curvature of which is acute above, and the part which is not acute below, so that it does not damage that which is not necessary, like water
As for the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs out of the incision of them: and the care of the wounds.
Chapter 81.
There are hemorrhoids of two kinds.
Either they are inside the anus, like the stones of a bean or a plum: or they are like the seeds of an olive tree
And they are small and large: and blood runs from them always, and there is one, and there are many of them
And there are outside the knee, and at its extremities.
And those which are outside the knee are mostly few in humidity, from which yellow urine or somewhat thick blood flows: and they are of the colour of the body itself.
The treatment of that which is inside the knee is, to give the patient something to stimulate the bowels: and to express, until the anus comes out, and the other parts appear.
Therefore also suspend with hooks: or hold with your thumb.
Then cut through at the roots of these things.
If, however, they do not remain in the grasp of the hook, because of the humidity of these things and their softening: then cover them with rough cloth, or with a coat of coarse wool, and draw them out with your fingers
Then cut through, and powder over the cut whatever fine powder you like, so that it stays in the place of the burn.
Or burn them according to what has been said in the chapter on burning
Then care for the knee with the rest of the treatment, until it heals
And if the anus does not come out spontaneously, then instill the patient with a small enema, so that it be urged out along with the urine, and comes out quickly when the patient expels it.
And if the other parts are outside the knee, then the matter is easy, and is like that of a hook: you can grasp them with your thumb, or grasp them with the hook, and cut through them
Then care for the knee as we have said, until it heals
Whoever abhors incision with a knife must administer suture accordingly.
Take the thread and pass it through the point.</start_of_turn>
Then draw out the needle to the upper part, and make it penetrate with the needle at the root from the opposite side: and pass through two extremities of the thread, at the lower part of the needle, and make them lateral: and tighten the knot firmly.</start_of_turn>
Then knot the thread, and draw out the needle.</start_of_turn>
Do this with all the knots, and let go of the needle: neither do you retain it, lest you cause excessive bleeding.</start_of_turn
Then put over it a soaked bandage of linen in rosewater, or alum, and put the latter over it: and command the patient to rest.</start_of_turn>
Then let it go, until it drops off.</start_of_turn
When they have dropped off, take care of the wound with unguents, and leave the treatment until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn
¶ On the Treatment of Incisions.</start_of_turn>
Many of these are caused by the excessive evacuation of feces, and the constriction of nature.</start_of_turn
When these have ceased, and they do not yield to medical treatment: then it is necessary to ligate with a sponge or with your finger, until they become soft, and the outer layer is removed from the wound which hinders consolidation.</start_of_turn
Then care for the wound, until it consolidates as it should.</start_of_turn
If, however, they do not consolidate: then repeat the wound with more force than before, until they bleed profusely, and then care for the wound until it heals.</start_of_turn
Concerning the treatment of the swelling of the marrow of the teeth and not of the teeth: and of the swelling of the gums, and of the ants.
Then care for this: and if you wish you can cauterize it according to what is written in its chapter.
As for ants, one of them is a small, rough, filtered, rounded elevation above the surface of the body
And they appear in the hands of children many times
And its treatment is that you extend the ants and cut them off: or you tie them up with a silk thread: or with hair, until they fall off.
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is stated previously with fire, or with acute medicine: and thus the inward ants are eradicated, and not the outward ones with the instrument which I say And as for ants, it is also a small, filtered elevation, large, above the surface of the body, which extends inwards downwards: and when it meets with cold, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it occurs throughout the body: and most of them occur in the hands.
And its treatment is that you take a thorn from the claw of a cat, or a strong bristle: and put it on the ant, until it encloses the circle of the bristle from its parts.
Then withdraw your hand with the cannula until it severs what is around the Formica: and place it in the depth of the flesh, and extract the Formica from its root. Or if you wish, do this with an air or iron cannula, according to this fashion.</start_of_turn>
Let the upper part of the cannula reach the thickness of the surd which is being pulled, so that it may support the thumb during its withdrawal and its own withdrawal.</start_of_turn>
Or if you wish, cauterize the Formica according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery of the Athelil.</start_of_turn>
And concerning the forms of the instruments which are administered to the Clisteria in ailments of the Ani, and the solution of the belly, and the colic.</start_of_turn
Chapter 83.</start_of_turn>
When the Clistera is formed from silver, or gold, or from blown glass, or hammered metal.</start_of_turn
And when they are formed from these instruments, small and great, according to those in which they are administered.</start_of_turn
This is what is administered in the treatment of young children with loose or painful lungs, as well as those clistera.</start_of_turn
Large clistera.</start_of_turn
Small clistera.</start_of_turn
The cannula, that is, the upper part in which the uterus is tied, should be broad according to this manner: and should have a distinction so that the uterus is tied like water, and the lower part which goes into the belly should be solid, that is, not open, soft, flexible, drawing towards smoothness: and on one of its sides there are two holes, and on the other side a single hole.</start_of_turn
The diameter of the opening should be according to the length of the rays; more so the larger, and less so the smaller. And let there be a space within, in which the instruments are placed from the belly of the animal: either from parchment or from skin, which is according to the shape of a small ass. And its root is a single palm.
And when it is placed in this space, it is strung in the head of the clips between two distinguishing constrictions of strength.
And then clip it with it.
And this is the shape of the circle which is here depicted, and of the holes The quality of the clipping with it is: to grasp the belly or the belly from the medicine, which is warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance: and take care that it is neither too hot nor too cold, nor too cold
And then the patient is laid upon his back, and raises his legs towards the upper parts: and place under it a cushion, that is, skin over which men lie, or linen
And then apply the extremity of the clips with oil, or with alum, or with barley mucilage, or with things of a similar kind.
And then introduce it into the hole with ease.
And then grasp the belly with both hands and press it out until it evacuates all that is in the clip into the intestines Then extract the Clistere, and elevate the patient's limbs towards the side. If the physician thinks that he should remove it, then he should retain as much as he can
And if he sleeps throughout the night, this is the most important thing in healing.
If, however, you apply the Clistere to the inner parts of the belly, and it brings about the evacuation of its contents: then repeat the Clistere until it is healed
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the rectum, then let the Clistere be gentle and soft, from the Clisteres that are given to children
And this is the form of the gentle Clistere which is above that which is strict of the skin.
On the treatment of wounds of the head without fracture of the bone.
Head wound number 84
I have said in the discourse about the treatment of wounds that it agrees with the book, and I will say here the treatment of them with the hand and also with the help of physicians as a supplement.
I say therefore that wounds are varied according to the thing which causes them, and according to the place where the wound falls
So also the wounds which are made by many things are like the blows of a stone: or the cutting of a sword or knife: or the percussion with a lance, or wood, or arrow: and like these from many things.
Wounds, however, which are caused by the place of the body are like a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the limbs: and like these from many parts of the body
I am reporting on the treatment of certain wounds, so that I may present a ratiocination and regulation concerning the remaining wounds.
I shall begin with the simple head wounds: for the recollection of compound wounds is at the beginning of the third chapter
Thus I say.
When there is a simple wound on the head and there is no fracture of the bone: consider then, if there is discharge of gravel, or like substances, and if the wound is only superficial: then it is a great wound, and the parts surrounding it are liable to become inflamed because of the heat: then take off the part immediately, and perform a cephalic phlebotomy without delay: and do not delay: and extract from it as much blood as is in its power according to the quantity of its virtue: if there is nothing to prevent it, especially if there is little blood flowing from the wound
And let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wound
And let the patient be warned against repletion, and wine, and coarse food.
If however anything prohibits diminution [of the wound], then let him abstain from food, and not approach flesh or drink wine.</start_of_turn>
And apply to the wound if it happens to him a soft swelling, a poultice of fat bound up in rose-colored earth, or with wine in which there is styptic matter.</start_of_turn
But if you are secure from the soft swelling, then apply to the wound, if there is blood clot adhering to it, and has not changed its colour, the powder which I will tell you of later: and if it has changed its colour, then apply over it some unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If however the wound is great, or is from a cut of a knife, and like these: and the edges of it do not adhere by means of little hairs, then adhere them together with a suture, according to what I shall say concerning the sutures of these wounds.</start_of_turn
If, however, a vein is detected to be hanging loose, and it is not possible to retain it, except in a small suspension: then cut it off.
Care for the vein with the physicians, and restore it in the place of the skin, and command the patient to eat food which is solid in the stomach, such as heads of garlic, and barley boiled, until the pulse is restored: and such things are similar to it.
If you find in the flesh putrefaction, which does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the putrefied part entirely, and throw it away: then care for the wound
If, however, in the wound there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not severed by the physicians, then inquire concerning the artery.
If, therefore, you find it not severed, cut it off with sponges, or ligate it.</start_of_turn>
If necessity compels you when it does not conform to what we have said: then cauterize the vein, until the blood is severed.</start_of_turn>
Method of application of the powdered dressing.</start_of_turn>
Recipe: mix one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts burnt lime: mix them all together thoroughly, and sprinkle them over the wound, and bind the wound securely, until it adheres well to it and coagulates with the blood.</start_of_turn
Then stretch it out over feathers, and send it away, and do not keep it until it has become dry, for it will spoil.</start_of_turn
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine.
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine.
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
Until it is healed, it does not vanish from this medicine
If indeed a wound is deep, or occurs in that sinus in its lower part where pus is gathered, then perforate it in a depressed spot in that place.
If indeed a wound has incised an artery, and blood flow has ensued: then separate it, or dry it up, and ligate it: or cauterize it if need be.</start_of_turn>
If indeed fragments of cartilage have fallen out, or all of them, and the surrounding tissue is soft: then gather the edges of the skin together with sutures over the opening of the gut, and do not touch the gut itself, but rather equalize it, and reduce it to its natural shape.</start_of_turn
Then bind it tightly with a bandage, and discharge it in a few days.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it with poultices which have astringency and drying qualities, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If indeed a wound has made an imprint in the bone, then uncover it: then if there are fragments of bone in that place, extract them all, or whatever can be extracted from it: and what cannot be prepared, leave it, until the wound has healed, and the bone has separated and discharged its pus.</start_of_turn>
If indeed the wound was recent, then powder over it the powder which I have mentioned.</start_of_turn
If indeed bone is seen in the wound, and a fistula has formed: then care for it as is mentioned in its chapter.</start_of_turn
Chapter 86.</start_of_turn
If any fluid proceeds from the wound when the patient breathes, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it does not reach great depth, and it is found with its blood: then do not put in it from the first hour any powder, neither string it, lest the blood remain in its depth and be lost, but return to the heart and kill the patient: but put in the wound a strong absorbent, and dress it twice daily.
If indeed the wound is not present at the place, then put in the opening of the wound a thick wool cushion, that it may absorb what proceeds from it from the humilities: and cause the patient to sleep upon the wound, that the blood which is gathered in it may be cured.
If indeed more than three days or more have passed from the wound and the patient has neither spasm nor bad tremor of the heart nor bad constriction of the breath, nor other symptoms: then you know that the wound is healed.
Care for it also with medicines and with care, and with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing is excused, and it always opens: then you know that a fistula has been made.
Care for it from its head to its tail
And if the wound is from a cut of a sword or a knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then care for it as for that which has been sutured, if it is large: or with powder if it is small.
But if indeed it has made an imprint in the bone, and there is a fracture from it: then inquire about the wound, and properly remove that fracture, if it is separated.
If indeed they are not separated: leave them alone, until the wound putrefies, in order that the extraction of them may be easier
The remaining wounds of the other members must be judged in their curation.
Concerning the wounds of the belly, the intestines, and the bowels
Concerning the wounds of the belly, the intestines, and the bowels
The disruption that occurs in the belly is great, medium, or small.
From the great one, therefore, whenever the intestines or a number of intestines come out
Therefore, there is an inward displacement of them, and their suture is more arduous and difficult
And the small disruption is also difficult in another way
Therefore, it follows that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not promptly restore them to their place after their inward displacement: for they swell, open, and become thickened: and thus their passage becomes difficult
For this reason, therefore, the medium disruption is better: for with it the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, as it is with the great and small disruptions
You know that the suture of wounds is done in four ways.
Two sutures are common for the suture of the belly, and for the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures are proper for the remaining wounds of the body.
However, there are other two which are more proper for the suture of the belly: and I will narrate both of them with their exposition and their declaration I say therefore, that when a wound is small, and something from the intestine comes out of it, and it is difficult to reduce it: then that is because of one of the two methods.
Neither because of the proximity of the disruption [of blood vessels] nor because of the inflation in the intestine due to the cold of the air.
When such things are present, it is necessary to heat it [the affected area], as with oil or to immerse a sponge or bag filled with moist material in warm water alone.
Or boil in water a little barley, some cypress and saffron, and embrace with them the intestine until the inflation subsides
When such a drink has been made which has a styptic power: it is better than plain water in resolving the inflation.
When the inflation has subsided, then moisten the intestine with the warm water in which it has been boiled, or with vinegar.
For in this way its entrance will be eased with little things.
If, however, its return recurs after this treatment, then one will find a small disruption, with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids.
The first treatment is better when it is prepared beforehand than when it is performed hastily: and it does not cause injury to the instrument after it is necessary and defective
Let one part be acute and the other not acute, and the outer part not be as soft as that of Spatumilis, rather let it be rather blunt: and such is like cheese, as in the drink
When the vessel has been strengthened and the intestine has been introduced, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its own place, if possible: for this is better.
When, however, the disruption is wide in the lower part of the intestine: then one must make the patient lie on his belly with his head raised higher than his feet.
If it is in the upper part of the belly, then place its head above and its feet below.
If there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your intention and consideration on this, that the part in which the wound is be above the other part.
It is like this with great wounds and with medium wounds also
But in small wounds, place it according to what is prepared for you
Then make it present between your hands, which hold the disruption whole: and join its lips together.
Then remove from it what follows the suture something after something: and this is the manner of common suture of one.
And it is, that you take the needle, or the number of needles according to the quantity of the wound.
Then let go from the extremity of the disruption the quantity of a finger-width, that is, the doctor: and fix the needle once beyond what you introduce into the flesh in two extremities of the skin, when two extremities of the fat are made to penetrate from the other side, and when you have brought together two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of the fat: and there are four orders
Then draw with a double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from two parts together, until two lips of the wound are aggregated by a descent.
Then let go the length of a finger also, and fix in the flesh another needle: afterwards pass the thread back with the needle, as you did with the first needle.
Do not cease to do this until you have completed the constriction of the whole wound
And the needles of medium size are between the length and the breadth: because the fine needles easily slip through flesh, and the large ones are difficult to pass through the skin: therefore it is necessary that the intermediate sizes be between the length and the breadth.
It is not permitted for the needle to be placed at the two nearest edges of the skin: lest it slip through the flesh too quickly, and open up a wound before the tissue has solidified, and remain extended even after stitching, thereby hindering the healing of the wound
Then cut off the extremities of the needles, so that they do not wound the patient in his sleep: and place upon them little cushions of wool from all around, which hold the extremities of the needles: and let them go, until you know that the wound has solidified
And this is the kind of suture which is most suitable for small wounds.
For a small wound, one or two needles, or even three or four, suffice
The second common suture is that in which the extremities are four in number: two of skin and two of fat in one wound, with a needle through which the thread is passed, equal in length and breadth.
Then, when you have pierced with the needle the four extremities, reduce the needle from the part from which you began, so that the thread is taut from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture will be like the stitching of cloth. Place between every suture as much breadth as the little finger
This kind of suture is known to men
And when I performed this suture upon a man who had suffered a wound from a knife in his belly, which had been disrupted by the intestines up to the amount of two palms from the middle of the intestines, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
The intestines stood outside the wound for forty-four hours.
The wound closed after remaining open for fifteen days: and I cared for it diligently, and it healed: and afterwards it remained closed for many years, in its original position.</start_of_turn>
The physicians judged that it would not heal.</start_of_turn>
And indeed, I did not treat it with unguents.</start_of_turn
Because I was in a place where unguents were not to be found, and there were no medicines available.</start_of_turn
I placed above the wound a bandage of wool twice a day, and I bathed it frequently with warm water until it healed.</start_of_turn
Two other kinds of sutures I shall describe according to the narration of the sermon.</start_of_turn>
And it is thus that you begin with the acute suture: and you enter the hook from the outside inwards towards the interior.</start_of_turn
When you have thus penetrated the skin, and in the tear you have made according to the length and breadth of the whole body: let go of the outer extremity in the side from which you introduced the hook, and make the hook penetrate through the opposite extremity from the inside outwards at the opposite end.</start_of_turn
When you have thus made the hook penetrate, then make it penetrate once more in the same place outwards from the outside: and let go of the outer extremity which is in this side, and make the hook penetrate through the opposite extremity from the inside outwards at the opposite end. Make it penetrate just as you did when you made the first penetration in the outer extremity which is in this side, until it penetrates through the whole.</start_of_turn
Then commence also from this side from the same edge, and draw out the same with the extremity which is from the heel to the edge on the other side, and extract the point from the skin which has penetrated.
Then withdraw from that skin and draw out the heel which is on the other side with the edge: and extract that which has penetrated from the skin from that side, and make that part one with this and that: and make this part one after the other until its edge is altogether as in this example.
And the sum of all these sutures is as for the sutures of leather: thus as you draw out one extremity from one part of the skin: and as you let down the other from the other part, until you complete it.
The second kind of proper suture which Gale has said.
This is the way in which he has said it, that you must join each part according to its likeness, as certain physicians do with some things: and you must apply the heel to its like, and the edge to its like.
And that is done according to what I have told you.
It is necessary that you insert the point at the heel close to the outer side, and make that penetrate inwards only in this place: and draw out both extremities of the suture.
Then withdraw the point and make that penetrate from the outer side inwards through both extremities of the suture, that is to say on each side
Then withdraw both of them, and also make them penetrate both from the inside outwards through the other two edges which are on the opposite side
And this is the best way of stitching which is remembered.
This is indeed the word of Galen.
Some have said this.
The gut suture is corrected with two squares.
That is, insert in both guts a single thread: and begin with the needle that is with thee, and make it pass through until it reaches the other side, following the suture that is between the two layers of skin
Know that when a disruption is in the middle of the gut: then the suture of that is more difficult than that of the rest of the gut.
The judgement of the violent wound is the judgement of the other wounds.
That is, because when you follow a wound with its blood, before it changes itself by swelling: and you reduce the intestines, and hold them together: then you put over the powdered meat.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put over it some unguents, which are in your presence, until they make pus: and the thread will fall out, and the wound will be consolidated, and will heal.
Then care for this as for the care of the other wounds, until it is healed
But if there are not present to thee medical men, then put over it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, soft cotton: and change it twice a day, as I have taught thee, until it is healed
If however thou fear that the wound communicates with the principal members in the lesion: then thou must plunge wool wool of the finest kind into lukewarm oil, or into rose oil: and put it about the parts which are between the buttocks, and under the armpits
If he feels pain, or swelling, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens to him), then he must anoint himself with a mixture of wine and black, warm unguents: especially if putrefaction has already penetrated the intestine, and an opening has been made through to its cavity.
And know that that which is from the great intestine is easier to heal: and that which is from the small intestine is more difficult to heal.
The small intestine, however, which is called Ieiunum, does not suffer healing from the wound which happens to it throughout: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the greatness of their numbers, and because of the subtility of its body, and for the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
If, however, that which proceeds from the wound is a clot, and you follow it up, reduce it according to your reduction of the intestines which you equalise
If indeed it has passed beyond that space, and is black or dark: then it is necessary to tie it up with a thread above the place which has been injured so that the flow of blood does not occur
For in a clot there are veins and arteries.
Then cut through that which is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging threads from the lower part of the wound outside it: so as to support above its attraction, and extraction of it in the case of a clot, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remember the wound which happens in the Intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the Intestine, and it is small: then it is possible, in some individuals, that it will heal: because I have seen that which was wounded in the belly with a lance, and which was from the right side of the stomach, and which was old: and a fistula was formed, and it went out of it egestion, and swelling
I hold fast this treatment until I am relieved from the patient's condition: neither will I cease until he is healed and his place is firmly restored.
Once I have placed the treatment in its proper position, I fear no harm to the patient, for no harm has befallen him from this treatment.
I remain in a better state of health, eating and drinking well, fasting and sweating, having bathed, and exercising regularly in my diet
And some experimenters have said that when a wound occurs in the intestines, and it is slight: then it is necessary to bind it in this way.
And it is like taking large ants.
Then join together two lips of the wound, and place an ant on one of those which has an open jaw over the two lips of the wound
When you have placed the head over them, and tied its jaw, cut off its head, and it will adhere to it, and will not be dissolved.
And place another ant near the first one, and do not cease doing this until you have completed the wound to the amount of the entire wound
And then draw it down, and close the wound.
And those heads remain annexed in the intestines, until the intestine is healed, and is not harmful to the patient It is also possible to bind the intestine even with a fine thread: which has been taken from the intestine of an animal, and is annexed to it when it is introduced into the belly
And take the extremity of that thread from the intestine, and cut out a great deal of it.
Then the ligament at its extremity is bound by a subtle thread of linen.
Then insert that thread into the edge, and with it the intestine.
Then reduce it to disruption. And in this manner of stitching with hooks and intestine, it is not without reason that it should be done with trust and hope.
You know that which is great, spacious, especially if it is in a graceful intestine: then it is not wit without subtlety, neither is its healing altogether
About the care of ulcers, and fistulas.
Chapter 88.</start_of_turn>
You know that every ulcer, or swelling when it grows old and hardens, and becomes an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and does not burst: then it is called universally in any part of the body a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.</start_of_turn>
And a fistula is indeed according to truth a filtered nodulation, hard, white: with which there is no pain, which has the consistency of a bird's wing feather: and for this reason they call some of them Risati, that is, feathers.</start_of_turn
And sometimes in certain hours it is moist, which emits pus.</start_of_turn
And perhaps it bursts in some hours.</start_of_turn
And sometimes when this moisture is much, and is little, and is great, and is fine.</start_of_turn
And I say beforehand in the explanation, that every ulcer which does not heal, neither is born in this body, is not that except for one new cause.</start_of_turn
When one is in want of life, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body: or because of its malice: or because between the two there is a hard substance covering the lips, hindering the birth of flesh: or because there is an abundance of pus and phlegm: or because there is a putrid ulcer in itself, and the matter that issues from it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is unsuitable for its treatment: or because corruption is falling in the region, being a kind of pestilence: or because of the property of the region itself, as it often happens in Caesarea, where digestion is difficult and healing is delayed after a wound by nature: or because there is only one bone, or a number of bones.
I have also mentioned all these causes and signs, and the cures for them with the doctors in discussion. And it is proper here to tell you the cure for fistula and swelling, which is done by one operation with the hand.
You know therefore that fistula occurs in all the members of the body.
There are indeed fistulas which arise from great veins and arteries, or nerves, or fat: or from the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the bones: or from some parts of the back, or from some of the joints.
Since these fistulas are of this kind, they are caused by difficult diseases that do not receive treatment, and are accompanied by hardship and ignorance.
If, however, any fistula does not reach such depths as those which I have mentioned, and if you hope for its recovery and trust its treatment, and wish to recover your health, then attempt to grasp the air or iron if the fistula lies according to its rule, and inquire about it with the thing itself.
If, however, in the fistula there is tortuousity, then you must investigate the same with a weight that is subtle.
For the weight is gentle of its body, it will flow around the tortuousity.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible to do this with the weight alone
Therefore grasp from the inside out of its openings.
For the moisture which you grasp will go out through the other openings and run from the inside.
Then inquire diligently in what manner it is possible: that you may know whether there is bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is of long or short duration: or whether it is a fistula which has many openings and rests upon the whole of it, with the sum of your force: with your interrogation of the patient, and the finding of pain upon compression with your hand in the place, and similar signs and symptoms following
When you have rested upon all these things, then proceed to the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider then, if the fistula is apparent in a nearby place, or in a remote place from the junction, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned: then dry up the fistula according to what is said above from the narration, and remove what is in it from the filtration, and corrupt blood, which is born from the opening of it from the flesh, or pus, and similar things: and care for it until it is healed
If, however, the fistula is of great depth and is according to right angles: then it is necessary that you cut through the depth as much as is possible.
Then remove from it all the corrupt blood from it
Then administer the roundels of lead involved in acute medicine: and introduce them until they reach the depth of the fistula which you have grasped with the iron: do this as many times as necessary, until the acute medicine has eaten away everything that remains in the depth of the fistula from its corruption.
Then restore the cavity with unguents that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If indeed it does not heal through this, then cauterize it according to what we have said
If indeed the cause of the fistula is bone, and you have confirmed that for me: then inquire about it, and dry it up according to what I have told you: if it does not impede you anything from the bone, or nerve, or major limb, as we have said
If indeed it is detected that there is bone in it, and there is some corruption and blackness: then burn it, until the corruption of that is completely removed
Then care for it with that which nourishes it, until it is healed.
Which if it does not heal, and pus is emitted as it did before: then you know that you have not achieved the entire eradication of the corruption
Investigate further concerning this, and inquire diligently about the reason for it, and the purification of it with your utmost ability.
Then restore it.
If indeed it heals, it is good: and if not, then you know that that corruption is in a profound depth of the body, which you have not been able to overcome
It is not in your power to do anything in this matter, except to yield to the nature of things.
If indeed the small bone is corrupted, and it is possible for you, draw it out with fine forceps which are suitable for that purpose
If there are many bones, then make a strong traction of them all, and do not let anything slip from your hand with your skill.
If, however, there is anything slippery from the humors, and there is no fear in the incision, or error: then incision them humors and flesh, if there are any, and free the bones.
If indeed you are not prepared to extract the bones from this hour, then place over it something which will putrefy it: and let it go, until it putrefies what is around the bones from flesh and humors
And guard the limb so that it does not swell
And be careful of the section which you made in your operation.
And put over it, if you will, sulfur pounded with oil: or immerse it in Egyptian unguent, or in some other unguents of your choosing.
For when these humors putrefy, and are separated from the bones, the wound will be soothed by the removal of the pain, and their traction
If indeed there is a large bone, such as the femur or the tibia, and the like of these, which is corrupted: then take it out cautiously, until the black spot and the corruption are removed
And then restore the limb.
If indeed what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone: then it is necessary to cut it through, and to open it up to the very place where the corruption is: then care for it until it heals. And I tell you, what happened to me in my leg: that you may take it as an example and an aid for your operation.
A youth of about thirty years of age suffered pain in his leg, because something had moved above the middle of his body inwards, that is, from within, until it reached the leg, and there remained a great swelling: and there was no external cause for it.
The swelling had persisted for a long time with an error of the physicians, until the swelling was opened, and many substances accompanied it.</start_of_turn>
And after the dressing was placed, until the leg was bandaged, many holes were made in it: which all discharged pus and moistened the body.</start_of_turn>
The multitude of physicians treated him for two years, and there was no knowledge in their art concerning this matter until I came, and I saw his leg and the matters which issued from those holes in great quantity: even all the men in the city were astonished, and his color became pale.</start_of_turn>
They tried to pierce one of the holes in one place, and the attempt reached the bone.</start_of_turn
Then I inspected all the holes: and I found that they all led inwards from all parts of the leg.</start_of_turn I treated it accordingly, and I cauterized one of those holes, until I found a piece of bone: and I found that it was corrupted: for it was rotten, discoloured, putrefied, and perforated, until it had penetrated even to the marrow.</start_of_turn
I saw that which had been detected by me, and prepared from the corrupt bone.</start_of_turn>
And I declared that there was no soundness in the bone except for that corruption, which I excised and cauterized.</start_of_turn>
And I extirpated it.</start_of_turn
Then I order the restoration of the wound along with the physicians who are firm in their space for a long time.
And they are not consolidated.
Then I attempt restoration of it.
And it is not restored.
Then I restored it with the physicians, and it was quickly consolidated and healed: and there was no need for this repetition of the operation on it, and the section of it, except because of the weakness of the patient, and his little tolerance, and my fear of death for him, for it was dying in every hour from excessive evacuation of its syncope.
He is thus healed completely: and he was born in the place of the hard bone, and a good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned to him: and he conversed with his fellows: and he did not make him lame in walking at all
If however the prominent bone in the body is fractured: then it is necessary to support it, according to this method: that you take a ligament and bind it to the extremity of the prominent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament of a greater size alongside the first ligament. Then bind the ligament over the flesh, which is upon the bone: and extend its extremity, so that you pull the flesh downwards: and you will discover the flesh over the place where you wish to saw, so that it does not damage the flesh
Place wood or a board under the lower bone in the center: for when you do this, it does not hinder that it will cut through rotten flesh.
It is necessary that the suture be placed above the corrupted part, so that there is no depression of the corruption: and that it does not appear to the sense, and that it compels the patient to make a new suture If the bone is corrupted and does not protrude, continue the part of it with the part itself: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in the part itself: then remove the flesh from all sides entirely
Then place wood under it.
Afterwards suture that part first from which the corruption is, until the suture reaches the other part: and let the suture be as far from the corruption as possible, as we said before
If the corruption is at the junction, cut through the corrupted junction and suture the bone where the other part continues.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two junctions, then there is no wisdom in it except for abrasion
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot: then matters are difficult there
But it is necessary to inquire what kind of corruption appears to you.
And abrade the flesh, and cleanse it as much as possible according to any possibility, and with any ingenuity: when it does not make the vein or nerve worse
You know that the saws and the sutures for cutting this bone are many, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their length, and their thinness, and their size, and their hardness, and their rarity.
Wherever necessary, it is appropriate to prepare an instrument suitable for each kind of operation.
You also know that these operations are significant in relation to the kind of instrument which is suitable for them, when you have studied for a long time.
And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a testimony to the methods of treating diseases: for then you will find for each ailment that which instrument is suitable from among the instruments.
The Shape of the Scalpel.
The Shape of the other Scalpel
The Shape of the other Scalpel again
The Shape of the other Scalpel once more
This shape of the Scalpel is depicted with the middle part made off-center Its arc is on the upper part, the point of its sharpness on the iron: and its handle is of boxwood, and it is made pyramidally off-center
The Shape of the Scalpel with a Joint.
The head of this Scalpel is in the shape of the head of a star: and its points are in the shape of the points of a fishnet
And it is not suitable except when it is grasped with the head of the javelin, when the head is broken, or when the bone is fractured, and it is large
The Shape of the Greater Scalpel.
The Shape of the Middle Scalpel
The Shape of the Broad Scalpel
Shape of the wound in which there is concentration.
Shape of the wound is milder in this case.
Shape of the wound is more curved at the extremities in this case
Shape of the wound is small and mild in nature
Shape of the wound as when bones are fractured
Shape of the wound is large in this case
This is similar to the radio [radius of a circle], and the extremity is like a saw: it appears in many places because of the reason for the bones.
Shape of the wound agrees with the cause of its perforation by bones
Its extremity is triangular, and the extremity is acute
It is like that of India
And it should be as it has been said concerning wounds, incisions, and saws in general
Regarding the incision of the extremities, and the closure of bones.
Chapter 89
The extremities putrefy either from an external cause or an internal cause.
When you have treated the cause of the corruption with medical remedies, and the corruption does not cease: and if you do not cut away the corruption of the limb, without which recovery will not take place: then you must cut away that limb until the corruption has ceased, so that the sick person may recover from the limb rather than from the limb itself, or from the harmful affection which is greater than the defect of the limb
And the sign that this has happened is that the limb is blackened, until it is burnt: or it becomes putrid after blackness: until that putrescence has gone out of the limb until it has reached that which follows the limb, and has spread throughout the body
Properly therefore when the incision is made, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from a blow of some venomous creatures: such as the scorpion of the sea, and the viper, and the spider, and those of a like nature.
If there is corruption, or the blow is at the extremity of the finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption, so that it may reach right up to the other hand
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut off the hand from the root of the bone, and do not leave space for the corruption, until it is carried away in the bone of the arm.
And if it occurs in the forearm, then cut off the forearm at the elbow in its joint. But if the corruption has passed, and you see it round about the elbow: then that is the death of the patient.
And as for the treatment of this, the quantity of the remedy is important.
And do the same with the foot, when corruption occurs in the finger, then cut off the finger at one of the joints: and if it reaches the heel, then cut off the whole foot
And if it reaches the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint
And if the corruption has gone above the knee, then it is not in this that the limb is preserved, except for amputation, and leaving the patient to die.
And the manner of cutting off the limb, or preserving it, is that you bind the ligaments below, which you wish to cut: and bind the other ligament above the place.
And extend one ligament downwards: and extend the other ligament upwards
And you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is torn away
Then it occurs, or it returns.
Then it occurs, or it returns. It is necessary that you place all the layers of the membrane around the gut, and do not touch the healthy tissue: and it comes to pass that the sick person's wound is added to, and the swelling is cold.
If, however, blood flows inwards during the operation, then cauterize the place quickly: or put upon it some powder which absorbs blood.</start_of_turn>
Then return to your medicine until it is completed.</start_of_turn>
Then bind up the wounded limb with a bandage suitable for it, and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
And I say to you that this is what happens in my foot, for this is what I say to you.</start_of_turn
That is, because it happens in your foot black, with the soot which is assimilated by the fire: and the corruption first happens in your finger, until it affects the whole foot.</start_of_turn
Thus did this man recover from his ailment, after he had cut away the corruption which was in the limb with its pain: and he found that the pain had gone away, and the soot had disappeared.
And when some time had passed, the same corruption happened in his thumb. He came to me, and I attempted to recover the uselessness with what I had learned from the physicians after the purification of his body: and the uselessness did not return, but it began to go away in another finger: until the corruption spread to the whole hand.</start_of_turn
He called me to cut off his hand: and I did not do it, hoping for the return of the uselessness: and I was also afraid of the death which would result from the cutting of his hand.</start_of_turn
Since the patient was above the case.
When he had recovered from me, he was brought back to the earth: and he came to me because he wished to, and he struck his hand entirely: and he was healed.
And I do not approve of this narration, except as an aid to that which falls from the kind of this illness: and as a sign that signifies, and according to how it is done.
About the care of bones, and the quality of blistering with doctors.
Chapter 90.
When swelling occurs in some limb with carbuncles, and the space of the swelling is prolonged until the collection of pus has taken place: then it is burst, or pierced, and the pus which is in it is ejected, and what remains is like a wound: and the skin which is over it is like a thin veil: and it does not reach the end of its corruption, neither does it affect the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament: it is called a sinus, and not a fistula, truly, until its space is prolonged, until corruption affects some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula, or swelling
And its care is that you cut away the entire skin as it returns: and especially when it is thin, and done like a veil: and trust that it does not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and this does not result in the last consequence of corruption: and if there is hardness in the skin from the flesh, then care for it with blistering: and consider it as a sinus
Then if it is large, and the pus which comes out of it has a foul odor: then blister it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and alum, equal parts, which are gathered in a vessel: and they are boiled over a fire, until the medicine turns red: and then they are applied to the swelling
Then take from this what you need: dissolve it with water and honey, and instill it with oil into the sinus: and bind up its orifice, and send the medicine in it for two hours.
Then draw it out with pressure: do this every day until the sinus is healed, and the stench is gone.</start_of_turn>
And when it is instilled with water of cinnabar, when it is not present with this medicine: then take cinnabar from the wood of the willow, or from the wood of the ilex: and sprinkle it over the water.</start_of_turn>
Then remain quiet, and instill with it until you are confident that the sinus is softened.</start_of_turn
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine, neither the water of cinnabar, then instill it with water and honey, to which something of ground cinnamon has been added.</start_of_turn>
Or instill it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to soften and loosen: and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in it.</start_of_turn
When you have done this several times, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has passed away: then instill it with something which makes the flesh grow in it.</start_of_turn
And it is good to take from alum of diaphanicon: and dissolve it with rosewater and wine of astringency: or instill it with some medicine, and anoint with others, of whose properties are written in the treatise on unguents.</start_of_turn
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow, in which the catheter for instillation will not pass: then widen it with iron tongs: or put in it a piece of lint soaked in Egyptian unguent, or in castor oil, until it is widened.</start_of_turn
If the orifice is large, then join its lips together with sutures and discharge from it the quantity which entered without adding anything.
If the orifice discharges pus, it is elevated towards the higher parts: then dry that in the lower place which is in it, so that it flows downwards: for pus, when it is congealed in depth, prevents the generation of flesh in it.
If it is not possible to dry the sinus below downwards, then attempt to prepare the limb with the preparation which facilitates the discharge of pus easily as it is prepared
Attempt to retain nothing of the pus at all in it: and take solidifying medicines which are placed over the sign, suitable for this purpose
And extend them over the edge of the bandage.
And let the bandage be of such quantity that it makes communication of the entire sinus possible.
Then with forceps grasp directly at the orifice of the sinus and widen the opening of the sinus slightly
Then extend from the soft tissues above the other bandage, according to the size of the opening: and place it above that in a distant position from the orifice of the sinus, so as to facilitate the discharge of the pus from it: and do not tighten the bandage too much, except after a few days when one has become accustomed to it
Whoever is above the orifice of the sinus should constantly move in every hour, so that what is aggregated in it from the pus may be discharged: and you will know whether it is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And with this consider again the place of the sinus itself, whether it feels any pain in it, or whether there is no pain in it, and whether there is swelling in it, or whether there is no swelling in it
When, therefore, the remedy is extended like this towards the mother of the sinus, then you will know that the sinus is already adhering, or is approaching adherence: then you must solve it in the mane, or on the third day. And when you have solved it, then change the bandage and renew the unguentum. When, however, it [the sinus] comes out from the sinus after a long space of time with a subtle discharge, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing approaches, because there are men who are late in the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are some who act contrariwise to this.
When, however, it comes out from the sinus after many days with undigested pus, then you know that the sinus is not adhering.
When, therefore, the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then physicians must join in the care of the patient, for they make the medicine both moist in substance and dry in action: like alum, when it is added in excess.
And from the last of these things which are done for its care, it is, that you take alum and dissolve it with rosewater, and apply it over the old wound equal in amount to its substance
Then join it with this, and use it.
And it does the like of this, when there is no alum present, honey, when you dissolve it, until it has solidified, and you apply it with that.
Or take myrrh, aloes, and balsam: mix them all together, and grind it over honey while it is over the fire.
Then apply it over the bandage, and bind it over the sinus: and apply with the honey which you have boiled until it has solidified: and sprinkle over it the powder of these things, and put it over the bandage and bind it again.
When such a long aristolochia is administered, along with radix lilii coelestis, lilium, herba flour, and centaurea.
When such long aristolochia is administered, along with radix lilii coelestis, lilium, herba flour, and centaurea, use either simple or compound preparations. Crush the mixture with honey as described previously and use it immediately.
If the condition of the sinus persists and does not improve with treatment, you know that there is corruption in its depth: either an impression is made in the bones, or in the other hard parts, or in the ligaments. In such a case, treat the fistula according to what has been stated previously. Concerning the treatment of panaritis and the retracted nail, and the addition of incision of the digit and section.
Chapter 101.
Panaritis is a swelling that occurs under the nail of the thumb or toe, or perhaps in the other fingers.
When such a condition persists and is neglected, and the swelling becomes painful, pus is emitted, and the root of the nail is corroded: and perhaps the whole nail is broken, and perhaps the corruption extends to the bone, which gives off a foul odor: and the digit becomes swollen, and its color becomes dark.
When you have treated it as we have said, and the condition does not improve: then it is necessary to cut away the whole remaining part of the nail with a knife
Then cauterize the nail afterwards.
Cauterization is better with cold.
If indeed the bone is sound and the nail is also sound, and the addition of the nail has caused the flesh to swell inwards and to bleed: then you must place a fine radium under the nail at the angle where it is biting the flesh, and press the nail upwards: and cut away the flesh easily with the knife, and place over it what remains of the flesh which has been burned by the doctors, corrosive, until it has disappeared completely
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, corruption has already set in the bone, then it is necessary to cut away the bone and extract it: for it will not heal while it remains in that corrupted state.
If an ulcer or corruption approaches the finger, then cut it at one of its joints, as has been previously mentioned
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, attrition or percussion should occur to the nail, and there is pain in that area, then it is necessary to bleed the diseased part at first
Then dry the wound with a sharp spatula from above downwards to the end.
And be careful, lest the incision should reach the flesh under the nail, for you will thereby cause additional pain and a risk of gangrene in that place.
Then care for the place with that which rests the pain
The finger which has been added which was born in the hands of men, perhaps is entirely fleshy: perhaps also in some of its bones, and perhaps in that is its nail: and some of them are born in the root of the joint, or is the origin of its nature in some joint of the finger
He who is born in some joint of the finger does not move: and he who is born beside the joint of the finger, perhaps moves
He who is fleshy from bone, his cutting is easy
That is, as you would cut it at the root with a broad spatula
As for him whose origin is in the root of the joint, the care of him is difficult
Abstain therefore from incision of it.
Abstain therefore from incision of it.
Abstain therefore from incision of it.
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it.
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Abstain therefore from incision of it
Then string the thread of the patient from the upper part of his thigh to the lower part of his knee with oil.
Then dry one, or two, or three sections wide at the place where it is needed
Then dry the wound until blood stops flowing: until the quantity of blood which you have drawn out is equal to the amount which is sufficient for the patient, and as much as the patient can tolerate of the pain.
Then tie up the wound: and command him to abstain from foods which generate black bile: and repeat the emptying and phlebotomy when the veins are full, and this will be good for the patient.
The elevation of the limb is done in this way.
The thigh of the patient, if there are many hairs in it.
Then insert the limb into a bath: or embroider it in his leg with warm water, until it turns red, and makes the veins swell: or perform an exercise forcefully, if there is no bath for him, until the limb is warmed up
Then dry the skin along the line of the vein section: or at the end of it at the knee, or at the lower part of it at the heel.
Then open the skin with needles, and remove the vein from all sides, until it appears sensible: and it is at the appearance of it that you know that the blood has returned to its normal colour
When it has gone out of the skin, the blood is like white thread
Then introduce from beneath the edge of the Radium, until it rises up and departs from the skin: suspend it with one finger, gently.
Then dry out the surrounding area near that section with three fingers.
Then scrape away the skin from the upper part of the nail, until it appears.
Then raise up the skin with the Radium as you did before, and suspend it with another finger, as you did at the beginning
Then dry out the surrounding area, or the surrounding areas, if necessary
Then raise up, and cut through the last section at the heel
Then pull out the skin up to the section that is above it
And do this until you have pulled out the skin from the higher section, or from all the sections, until they have all come away: then cut through the skin
If, however, it does not yield to pulling and raising: then introduce a sharp needle with a strong thread, and bind the skin, and pull it out: or introduce from beneath the edge of the Radium: and move your hand over the whole thing, until it comes away
Take care not to tear it
For if it tears, it will be difficult for you to raise up the skin afterwards, and it will enter through the wound to the bone.
When you have pulled out the skin completely: then place over the wound a lanolin pad soaked in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it until it heals
If the vein is contracted, having a twist which involves parts, and is not as we have described according to the rule: then you must find over the skin all the parts of the twist of that twist.
Then suspend the part with the hooks until the entire limb has been raised up: and take care at the section above the part that you do not cut through the vein or wound it: for it is difficult to raise or extract the part above.
Therefore preserve your prudence.
The form of the wound that heals life itself.
The form of the wounded limb becomes blind
It has no curvature like the rest of the limbs, neither is it acute at the extremities, so as not to wound the vein: and it is thick and flexible: because if it were slight, it would cut through the vein by its softness: indeed it has such excessive thickness that it is like we have said.</start_of_turn>
On the extraction of the vein of the thigh.</start_of_turn> Chapter XCIII.</start_of_turn
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, like Alizegi and Arabia, and in dry and warm lands, with little humidity, that is, in which no herb or tree grows.</start_of_turn
And perhaps it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.</start_of_turn
And its generation is from the decomposition that occurs under the skin, like that which occurs within the bodies of serpents and worms, and the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.</start_of_turn
And the sign of the commencement of this vein is that which occurs in the thigh inflammation and swelling.</start_of_turn
Then the place is to be dried.</start_of_turn
Then the vein is to be extracted from that place of drying, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.</start_of_turn
When the swelling appears from that extremity, then it is necessary to immerse the finger over the leaden weight, which weighs from a drachma to two drachmas and a nodus: and let go of the suspended lead.
When anything proceeds from that to the exterior, immerse it in lead and bind it there.</start_of_turn>
If it persists for a long time, then cut off a part of it, and immerse the rest.</start_of_turn>
Do not cut through the root before all of it has come out.</start_of_turn>
For if you cut through it, it contracts, and enters the flesh: and causes the swelling to become more acute, and gangrene in the place, and a bad ulcer.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to handle it gently, and extract it slowly, until all of it has come out of the body: and from this vein proceeds in some men as far as the tip of the thumb and the little finger.</start_of_turn>
And I have seen it happen to me that it has come out whole from the hand of a man who had been bitten for twenty palm-widths.</start_of_turn
If however it happens to you in the hour of your treatment: then introduce radium into the cavity of its wound, and perforate the wound with a long needle, as with the body, until all that is in it from the matter be evacuated: and administer antiphlogistic treatment to the place with physicians for a few days.</start_of_turn Then care for the aftercare of the wound.</start_of_turn
And this vein often has many branches, especially when it appears in the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and there are many holes in it, and it proceeds from every hole a branch.</start_of_turn
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there.
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there.
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there.
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there.
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there.
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there
Care for her accordingly, as we have said previously, and when that which has been promised is there If indeed the aid has reached him already in the head near the eye, then tighten under it over the eyebrow a good fold.
Then dry over it, and extract it.
And it is necessary that the patient should be treated with attention to the restoration of his body, with physicians extracting harmful humors.
And let him beware of foods that cause putrefaction of the body.
And concerning the section above the eyebrow Nakir
Chapter XCVI.
This pain is called in our land Nakir: and it is a pain which occurs in some limb: then it is transferred from limb to limb.
And indeed I have seen it happen, as I have told you.
I was called to a woman who was sick in some village
And I found her arm swollen, and I saw an inflation of pus in the groin of the arm
And after an hour had passed, I saw that there was another inflation going up like a worm, ascending up to his shoulder more quickly than is possible: like silver when it runs from one place to another
The pain therefore departed from that place and settled in the shoulder
And after an hour it went round the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm
And she told me that it had passed through her whole body, as I had seen.
I am amazed at the speed of its passage from limb to limb
And indeed I have never seen such an ailment of the eye like this, in the way that it is described above
Many people suffer from pain that changes from limb to limb: and not from the eyes, as with a woman.
I do not believe that this is the case, except perhaps in those instances where women have been afflicted by the swellings of the lower parts of the body: from which it follows that the pain is transferred from one limb to another
It is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have moist bodies, and in whom the swellings are hidden
When therefore he has received his cure, and the patient feels this pain: then, if it appears to him through the eye, as we have said, then bind above and below in the same place: and dry above the same, until the swelling is discharged: and cauterize the place.
If, however, you do not see it with your eyes: then cure him with the evacuation of the body, and with that which drives out the swellings, and carmine them with poultices of rue, and with saffron pills, and similar things.
(The text continues with a section titled "On the Extraction of Arrows.")
Chapter XCVI.</start_of_turn> Arrows are varied according to their kind and the places from which they fall from the body.
There are various kinds of arrows: because some have large cusps and others have small: and some are concave and others are convex
And there are those that have three angles.
And those that have tongues
And those that have stars
Those that are according to the limbs from which they fall are in two ways
All limbs are either principal limbs with concavities, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, spleen, and similar structures.
When any limb has fallen into any of these positions and their signs of death appear, as I shall afterwards narrate, it is necessary to remove that arrow from there, for death follows its trajectory in various positions.
And when these signs of distress do not appear, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it and care for the wound.
When the arrow has fallen into the brain and has pierced the bone, and has emerged above the brain, these are the signs: because of its impact, there are swelling, bruises, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, and mixture of the senses, and vomiting of bile.
And possibly blood will be expelled from the nostrils or ears.
And possibly speech will be lost, and the voice will be destroyed
And there will be discharge from the wound of a white moisture resembling pus
And there will be discharge from it like the moisture of meat
If these signs appear, abstain from treatment and remove the arrow if it does not emerge naturally
The signs of an arrow that has fallen into the heart are: that it is close to the left breast: and that it feels as though it is fixed in something hard, not in something soft.
And possibly the arrow will move like the beating of a pulse: and blood will flow from the wound black
And following that, there is cold at the extremity, cold sweat, and fainting.
You know therefore that death approaches uncertainly.
When the arrow wounds the lung, the sign is the bloody foam that comes out of the wound: and the swelling that follows the neck, is raised and changes the colour of the patient.
And the great and high spirit departs: and seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into the chest, that is near the ribs: then there is a great pain in the back with deep breathing: and a movement of all the arms and shoulders
If the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it comes out of the wound with some undigested food
If the arrow falls into the belly, and it lies there: something of stool or bile or intestine which has been broken comes out of the wound
There is no hope in its cure, neither in the extraction of the arrow
If the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out: and something proceeds from it to the outside, and the pain is greater over the patient: then you know that it is deadly
As for the rest of the members, such as the face, and the neck, and the chest, and the gut, and the hand, and the foot, and the back, and the buttocks, and the hip, and the thigh, and the like of these members, when it does not find the arrow in the artery or the nerve: and there is no venomous arrow.
I tell you that I have seen many such arrows, so that you may know that there is no hope for your cure.</start_of_turn>
What is this, because the arrow of care has struck the pupil of his eye in the root of his nose.
Therefore I extracted it from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no document remained in his eye
And I extracted another arrow from him which had struck him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was hidden, and I did not find the tip of it in the wood: and it was a great arrow like those of the Turkish archers, with a lead weight, in which there were no ears.
He was healed therefore, and no evil happened to him in his eye And I extracted another arrow from the Christian's belly.
And it was an Arabian arrow, which is the one with ears
And thus I found it between two ribs: and it was submerged in his belly
I handled it cautiously with them until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the belly which had struck him in the flank: and we thought that he would die from it.
When thirty days had passed from that, and no change had occurred in his condition in regard to the arrow, we considered that the arrow had ceased to exist: so we extracted it from him: and he was healed, and no evil happened to him
And behold the man to whom the arrow had struck in his back, and the swelling had subsided from him over the arrow.
And after seven years he recovered from the arrow which was in the root of his thigh
And the woman whose arrow had gone into her side had the wound consolidated with a woul [bandage] above it, and the arrow remained inside her: and no alteration was made to its position from its natural disposition, and the woman did not discover any document in relation to any of her natural operations.
And the man whose arrow had gone into his face had the wound consolidated with a bandage, and it remained, without causing him much pain: and similar things happened in many cases.
And I extracted the arrow from the King's servant, which had gone into the middle of his nose, and it had bent towards the right side below: and the arrow was entirely hidden.
I was called to care for him after the arrow wound for three days.
I found the arrow wound firmly bound tightly
I questioned him carefully with a gentle touch, and he did not feel any pain: and he himself discovered the puncture and the pain from his right side
I hoped that this was the cause of the puncture by the tip of the arrow
I plastered the place with a firm plaster in which the painful swelling had arisen, confident that the wound would heal, and that the sign of the arrow would disappear: and it did not happen in a place where the arrow had followed its course
I remained with the plaster for many days: and no accident happened, and the wound consolidated in the meantime: and he felt the arrow on the day that the arrow was extracted from his nose
And he told me this.
I put on him a sharp and corrosive medicine for several days, until it opened: and when I grasped it, I felt the tip of the arrow adhering to the wood
Then did I add in the opening of the wound for the acute physician, until it appeared to us with certainty the extremity of the arrow: and I passed over with it the space of time for about four months.
When the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and to move it, and it did not obey my orders to come out: then I did not cease to work subtily, and devised means above the ordinary, until I had finished on the following day with forceps which I had made with my own hands, according as the form of the matter would permit, until I had extracted it from the body.
Then I restored the wound.
And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored.
I restored it therefore, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely: nothing further was known of it.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of the arrows: so that you may know the rule and the significance of it, that which I have not mentioned
For parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended by narration: neither does this book comprehend them, nor does a prudent artificer compare them with little to much: and with that which is present, he overlooks that which is absent: and he finds a new operation and an new instrument among the descent of things of this art when they arise
I say therefore, that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed, except according to two methods. Either by attraction from the place from which it entered.
Or by means of the other part being reversed
And that which comes out from where it entered, or that is an arrow proceeding in the fleshy part: it is attracted and comes out
If it does not yield to the outlet within the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary that you discharge it for a few days, until the flesh that surrounds it has putrefied: and the attraction of it will be alleviated, and its egressio.
And in like manner, if it is found in bone, and does not yield to you at the outlet, then discharge it also for a few days: and do it again every day with attraction and motion, until it comes out.
If it does not yield to you at the outlet after days, then you must perforate the entire circumference of the arrow in the bone with a fine thread, until the arrow is enlarged
Then draw it out, and extract it.
If, however, the arrow is fixed in the head of the bone, and has already progressed into one of the cavities of the brain, and some of its accidents appear externally: then abstain from the attraction of the arrow, and discharge it, until it is equal to it again after days.
For if the arrow persists at the fracture, the death is not prolonged for it.
And if the arrow is not fixed, except in the body of the bone only, and does not penetrate to the fracture: and remains sick for a few days, and nothing of those accidents happens to it: then proceed to the attraction of the arrow and its extraction
If, however, it is fixed firmly, and does not yield to you at the attraction: then administer oil in the circumference of the arrow, as I have said before: then care for the place, until it heals
If, however, the arrow has already vanished from its place in the body, and is hidden and concealed from sense: then inquire about it with care.
If you feel pain, then draw out the pain with some instrument which is suitable for its attraction.
If it is impossible to remove the pain above, because of the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow in depth: and there is no bone, no nerve, nor vessel there: then find above the pain until the wound has become larger, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If there are any ligaments which hold the flesh fixed in the wound, then release the flesh fixed in the ears from all sides, with all skill which you can, and with ingenuity, if it is not possible to remove the flesh from the fracture of the ears, and to twist the ears, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you make the wound evacuate: and lower the last fragment, so that the arrow does not break, and that its extraction be difficult, and itself.</start_of_turn
If it is not possible to remove the pain within an hour, then leave the pain for a few days, until the things which are around it have decayed.</start_of_turn>
Then repeat the pain: for it will make the flow of blood worse. Then perform what we have said in the chapter about the care of wounds: and guard your virtue from the incision of the vein, or nerve, or chord.</start_of_turn>
And perform wisdom in every way that you can in order to facilitate the extraction of the arrow: and be quick, peaceful, or slow, and firm, as I have said.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that you do the same when you draw out the arrow, so that the sick person is in accordance with the figure, as it was with the arrow itself in the case of the arrow.</start_of_turn
How great is the benefit.
If it is not possible to do this, then do what you can according to the figures available.
The arrow which goes out from the opposite side, or which proceeds from that to the outside: or it makes a bulge of the extremity of the arrow at the sense of the superior part of the skin close to it, and it lets go what is above: dry it therefore above, and make a section according to the quantity that they grasp in that pair of forceps.
Then draw out the gut: for itself it becomes easy to go out.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until you press the arrow into the bone, and expand it for itself: then draw it out
And if not: leave it for a few days: then do it again, until it comes out on its own.
If the arrow is in the limb, then push it out with that itself
If indeed the limb is fractured, and you wish to administer a push: then introduce into the gut an instrument which is concave, so that the concavity of the instrument is against the concavity of the limb: then push out the gut with that itself.
If the arrow is concave, then push out the gut with an instrument that is entering into itself.
The arrow will be released by that.
If the arrow is poisonous, then it is necessary to remove all the flesh in which the poison is, if possible
Then care for the gut as it befits
If the arrow is falling in the chest, or in the belly, or in the belly-button, or on the side: and that which you touch with your finger is close to it, and it is possible to cut above the gut: then cut above, and burn from the navel, or nerve, and draw out the gut
Then, if the wound is deep, take care of it and keep it clean until it heals.
This is the form of forceps by which arrows are extracted.
The extremities are like the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not slip from it
There are many kinds of forceps, great, small, medium, according to the quantity of the arrow, the thinness or thickness of the wound, and the constriction of the wound itself
The shape of the hooked implement
The shape of the blunt implement
This is the shape of the extremity like a radius, so that its entrance into the hooked arrow is alleviated, and it is driven by it
This extremity of the forceps is hooked like the beak of a bird: so that the entrance of the arrow into itself and the driving force are alleviated
On Phlebotomy of Veins
Chapter 125 The veins which are to be phlebotomized, which abound in the body, are thirty in number.
Of these there are six in the head: two pulsating veins which are behind the ears, called the Herbae: and two arteries which appear in two temporal regions: and two veins which are in the two tear-ducts of the two eyes, called the Aspicientes: and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead: and the vein which is at the extremity of the nose
And two Guidegi which are in the neck
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth
And two veins which are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins which are called Algecherich.
And two veins which are under the tongue.
For the veins which are bled from the arms, there are five veins in every arm.
One of them is the Cephalica, and it is from the side of the shoulder: and it names the common vein of the head.
And the Fusca.
And it is the Media vein, and it is composed of the branches of the Basilica and the Cephalica: and it names the common vein of the body
And the Basilica, and it is placed on the domestic side: and it is also called the Titillicaris
And it names the common vein of the belly
And the Funis brachii, and it is placed over the elbow: and it is that from which the blood is drawn, and that which appears above the thumb in a clear mark
And the Saluatella: and it is the vein which is between the wrist and the little finger: and there are two branches to it
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins.
One of them is which is under the curvature of the thumb from the side of the shoulder
And the second is the Saphena: and its place is beside the calcaneum from the domestic side.
And the knee: and its place is beside the calcaneus from the side of the heel.
And in the other leg are three knees similar to these
Concerning the cutting of the two veins behind the knee
The cutting of these two veins which are behind the knee is useful for ancient cataracts, and for migraine, and for safra, and for a bad head wound.
And the quality of the cutting of the vein is according to what is narrated
And it is like removing the head of the patient: and you break the scalp of him in the place of the two veins with rough cloth in good friction
And then bind up the patient's neck with a bandage until two veins appear
And their place is behind the knee in two low places of the head
Seek therefore easily with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there is the sign with the scar.
And then make the cutting of the vein with a knife, and that is called Incidens
And then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist reaches the bone.
And then lift up your hand with the vein and skin towards the upper parts, and cut the vein with the incision in its place
And the length of the incision should be as long as two joined fingers, or thereabouts: and let blood flow out as much as you want
And then bind up the patient with sponges, and let go of the patient, until he is healed
And in the beginning of the book, the incision of the ears and their cauterization are mentioned.
And concerning the incision of two arteries in the temples.
And indeed two arteries which are in the two temples are to be opened (phlebotomized) for an old headache: and for a severe edema, and for excessive discharge of sharp points to the eyes And the quality of the incision is easy as you shall learn from what I shall tell you
Let the patient grasp his neck very tightly, until two veins become perceptible to the touch: and it is shown that their pulse is under your finger
Then indeed with the cautery.
And raise the skin above the vein with your index finger, and make the incision beneath it, and raise the vein upwards.
And cut the vein, just as you did in the two veins before: and let the blood run out according to the quantity you need Then close the patient's incision, and place your finger over the vein for an hour.
And afterwards put on a bandage over the wound and the nails, and tie it tightly: and leave it until it is healed.
And thus the recollection of the ears, and their incision, and their extraction is mentioned at the beginning of the book
And concerning the incision of the vein of the front after the incision of the Cephalic vein.
And indeed the incision of the vein of the front after the incision of the Cephalic vein is useful for ancient headaches: and for the hemigraines, and for redness: and for wounds and ulcers.
And what is the quality of his phlebotomy, according to what I have told you.
The patient should raise his arm until the vein becomes prominent.
Then grasp the instrument which is called the Fossorium.
What is its shape?
Place the sharp point of the Fossorium on the vein at the top, and pierce through it with the handle, or in some other way: and let the blood flow out in the quantity that you desire.
Then close the perforation of the patient, and bind it up, until it is healed
And when it is opened with a wide phlebotomy.
It is not proper, however, that the phlebotomist should be of acute temperament, like the rest of the phlebotomists, but rather of a calm and tranquil temperament
The phlebotomy must be performed cautiously: because the bone is close by; and perhaps in this place the phlebotomist will break the bone if it is too thin.
Of the phlebotomy of the veins in the two lacrimal bones.
The purpose of the phlebotomy of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal bones of both eyes, is for the eye from scabies and redness: and for the swelling in the eye, and the itching of the face.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that they should raise the patient's arm until the vein becomes prominent
Then the phlebotomy is easy: and you will be standing over his head
And perform the phlebotomy cautiously at a moderate length, with a small phlebotomist, wide and not deep, for in this place there is no bone
If the vein is slight at the extremity, it may break.
Then let him run from the blood as much as is necessary for him.
And put over it an easy cushion, and bind up the limb at night once, and make it whole.
Of the phlebotomy of veins of the nose
The veins of the nose, however, are phlebotomized for acute fever, and for excessive sweating, and for facial ailments, such as a migraine, and redness which occurs in the face: especially when it is old
And the quality of its phlebotomy is that it tightens the diseased limb
Then take hold of his left nose with your left hand, and make a slight incision, long: and hold it in the middle of the nose itself, between which is the part which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness.
Because the vein does not appear to the sense there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary, that you should take away your last hand with the phlebotomy: and make run from the blood according to your need
Then bind up the limb at night once.
The limb itself will restore itself soon
Of the phlebotomy of veins of the groin
Indeed, however, Guidegi phlebotomy is useful for constriction of the cough, and for the inception of leprosy, and for melancholy ailments, and for the itching and ulcer of the groin, and for swellings, that is, herpes of the belly
And the quality of their phlebotomy is that it tightens the diseased limb under both cheeks with a ligature: and let the artificer stand over the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on his seat.
Then the puncture of the vein is one to the length of the wide phlebotomy.
Then draw from the blood the quantity which is appropriate, or according to that which is required for the case at hand
Then do the same with the other vein
Then close the ligament and bind the two veins with a middle knot: so that the patient is not injured
And dismiss the patient until the next day
The patient will be cured.
Of the phlebotomy of veins according to Algeberich
The veins of Algeberich are phlebotomized because they cause swelling in the mouth, corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers, and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those which are in the nose, and in the vicinity of it
And the quality of the phlebotomy of these veins is that you make the patient sit before you: and bind his neck with a belt
Then pull down his lip, and look at two veins: one of which is on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left side of it: and the sign of both is by their blackness.
And this is true: because around them are small veins, black ones
Incise therefore each of them at the juncture of the incision But if there is doubt to you, and you do not know which of them they are: then you must make an incision of the greater of them, and of themselves make their mark
And do the same with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and most frequently runs with it: and incisions two veins which are in the lower lip
Of phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy.
Of phlebotomy of the veins which are under the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy: for it is necessary for the evacuation of the cephalic phlebotomy towards the gut, the tongue, and the mouth diseases.
And as for the quality of the phlebotomy, let the patient sit between your hands facing the sun: and elevate the tongue and see under the tongue from one side a vein and from the other side a vein: and the colour of both of them tends towards black.
The phlebotomy must be done on both of them: and the doctor must not put his last hand to the phlebotomy
For under them are arteries, and perhaps blood will flow from them.
Of the three veins in the cubit
For in these three veins which are phlebotomized in the cubit, phlebotomy is customary in all men.
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways.
Or by cutting with a curved knife: or by cautery with oil: or by drying with a knife, and this is Alnesil
This is its form
Thus Alnesil is, because it agrees with the section
And from these there are wide and narrow kinds according to the breadth of the veins and the tension of them. The form of phlebotomy with the knife is wide, like water
And it agrees with opening wide veins, full, bursting, apparent, large, and those which contain thick blood, turbid
And this phlebotomus is of smaller width and finer extremity.
And it is suitable for the phlebotomy of thin veins which contain thin yellow blood.
Concerning the phlebotomy of Albucasis.
Basilicae, however, which is one of these three veins of phlebotomy, is an instrument of great value Because it draws blood from the humors which are below the throat and the collar, from that which follows the breast, and the belly: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist because it causes no pain, and is above the vein.
If, however, it err, and the puncture of the phlebotomy adds to it, it will reach the artery, and there will be a flow of blood
Therefore it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy with the phlebotomus which is already punctured: rather let it be dry as with Alnesil.
If indeed it does not appear by a clear sign, then it is necessary to seek it out; and change to another one, or ask for another branch of it: or perform the phlebotomy in another place, such as the elbow
For it is itself evident, and is dry with the phlebotomus of Alnesil, as we said before
If you wish to make a phlebotomy of it itself, then it is necessary before the tension of the arm, so that you may reach the place, until you know the place of the pulse
Then take a sign over the place with the nail, afterwards the arm, and dry the vein with a concave section of the phlebotomus, as we said before.
Take care that the percussion does not fall outside the space of the artery
When you draw the string of the ligature and inflation occurs in the place which you marked with the scar, then that inflation is an inflation of an artery: it is therefore necessary.
When you draw blood at the phlebotomy and it flows like the urine of a child, and it is pale red: then you know that it is from an artery
Therefore you must take care, and place your finger on the space that is longer, then remove your finger.
If blood is shed (for it is shed in abundance), then tighten the arm and let go of it: and let the patient be still, for fear of movement: and be over his fear.
Do not move him for a few days, until he is healed.
If however blood is not shed, and you perceive that it is not there at the present time: and that there is no physician present at your moment, then cut the artery if you see it.
For its extremities recoil, and blood is shed.
Or take a piece of the skin of the buttock, and find the vein: take half of it, and tighten it over the place where the swelling is decreasing, with the ligature and the strings until tomorrow.
Then if blood is shed, that is good.
And if not: then take care of him as the one from whom the recollection of the bleeding of the wound is remembered: and the cutting of blood in him is not difficult in many positions, because of the smallness of the wound, and the possibility of tying the artery from the arm.
Of the phlebotomy of the vein of the buttock.
The vein of the buttock is suitable for phlebotomy, because it draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because it is composed of the branch of the basilica, and the branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is fitting for the phlebotomist to be above fear of his phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve.
If, therefore, he adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds a nerve, there occurs in it a stupor, and his healing becomes difficult, and perhaps does not heal at all
And this nerve appears to be connected with sensation many times
But if it is hidden in some people, and is slight, and is not seen: then you must know that you must perform the phlebotomy as you would perform the ligation of Alnesil, and divide the nerve with your skill.
And if there is one between two nerves, then find the one in length
Of the nerve of the head
Phlebotomies, however, of the cephalic nerve are dangerous, because they draw blood from the head, and confer to the eyes ailments.
And it is proper in this nerve to make the puncture with the needle only, or with the hook of the myrtus: because it is safer for all the nerves, because there is neither an artery nor a nerve under it It is indeed fitting for you to seek out a gentler location with regard to the phlebotomy, and inquire about a place where there is less danger: and it will not harm you, if you do not find it at the first percussion, as you will return over it with the phlebotomy several times. Perhaps indeed it will happen in some people when it is not punctured at the first time, but it does not harm them that.
Of the usefulness of phlebotomy, and the precautions to be taken in its performance.
The quality of phlebotomy and its accidents require your attention.
The quality of phlebotomy and its accidents require your attention.
And as for the vein in the cubit, there are three that are useful for phlebotomy, namely the cephalic, the cubital, and the basilic.
And as for phlebotomy at the beginning of spring after fasting, in the summer, and in the autumn and winter after a meal, when there are signs of fullness.
It should be done on the first or third hour after the three hours have passed
Phlebotomy for ailments does not have a fixed time: but when it is necessary and convenient, day or night, at any hour and at any time.
And it is not permitted to perform phlebotomy on children until they are at least fourteen years of age.
Neither should it be performed on a pregnant woman except from the fourth month until the seventh month
Nor on the elderly who have passed their sixtieth year
When someone wants to be bled for any reason: it is necessary to clear the intestines beforehand with a laxative, if there is much stool retained in the intestines: so as not to bring about the contamination of the principal parts by the putrefying matter of the intestines.
Neither should it be performed on a patient who is suffering from acute pain, or who is nauseous or vomiting from drunkenness until these symptoms have subsided from the body
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy.
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy.
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy.
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy.
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy.
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Neither the sick nor the infirm are immune to hydropathy
Then the phlebotomist is laid down.
And if not, then repeat it with another vein under that place slightly, or over it with some restriction: if the place does not recover
Which if it recovers, or if the patient becomes faint, then let him go today, or tomorrow: and do not tighten the ligament.
Perhaps he will then draw out the clot gently.
Do not put in the poultice.
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
If the opening is small, or blood runs too slowly: and take care that blood does not escape from the vein more than is necessary: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same place according to the rule, and add a little more to the operation
Do it with restriction, before the place recovers: for in many people the place recovers during the operation itself.
If you see that the clot has already gone, then do not repeat over it at all, for it excuses you from that thing And put over it something of the residue of oil: because it will soothe the course of the blood.
And it is better in this place than pure oil, and than other oils.
And in the same way administer the residue of oil in all your phlebotomies, which you do in prohibition of the course of the blood: and make them become tyriaca alfarach and sage, when you put one of them over the place.
Blood becomes thin and resolves when it is gross
If the large abscess occurs at the site of the phlebotomy, it frequently happens, especially to those who are not phlebotomists except in the case of a small opening of the vein, then cleanse the area and place above it a sponge soaked in water and salt, warmed up: and bind for an hour: because it will dissolve.
It is also necessary to do this after the blood has been drawn from the vein itself, with the addition of its complement, or from another vein.</start_of_turn>
And frequently indeed abscesses and swellings occur at the phlebotomy of the Basilica.
Place your hand over it [the abscess], then if you feel softness under your compression of it, then that swelling is bad.</start_of_turn
Because of this, put upon it something of what we have mentioned.</start_of_turn>
For perhaps it will flow from the artery.</start_of_turn>
But make a plaster of it with something that has styptic power, that it may stop the bleeding.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to draw from every man from the blood according to the quantity of his virtue.</start_of_turn
And that which appears from the color of the wine on the blood.</start_of_turn
For if the blood is black, then send it away until it becomes red: and in the same way if you see it thick: then send it away until it is thinned: and in the same way if it is acute: until its sharpness is gone.</start_of_turn
He who is full, strong, and requires extraction of blood should do so with one, so that the phlebotomy may be extensive: and on him who is bilious should be done contrariwise to him.
He should withdraw it in veins and make the puncture narrow: and it is better that the puncture be transverse than pointed in phlebotomy
This method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the nerves: and is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy through its width and length.
And for those who are accustomed to faint during phlebotomy, it is necessary that before phlebotomy he be given a spoonful of pounded bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or barley, if he is feverish: and let him draw from him from the blood in three veins, or four.
And if the complexion is pale, then before phlebotomy he should be given bread soaked in honey syrup or in scented honey syrup with spices, or in scented scented syrup
If syncope should happen during phlebotomy, and the cause of it is excessive bleeding: then it is necessary to give in the pot water of meat and fragrant syrup beneath the tongue: and to mix it with caraway and sweet galega and to touch his chest with these: and to do the rest which we said in the chapter on syncope from emesis
Whoever wishes to bring about evacuation of his arm, and to resolve his blood slowly: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is because of excessive evacuation, and whose temperament is bilious, that he should gradually resolve blood by the amount of his temperament in continuous days.
Whoever wishes to bring about evacuation of his arm, and to resolve his blood slowly, and his body is strong: then let him do this after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it hangs down must do so on the second or third day
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that it allows the diseased hand to be introduced into warm water until the swelling subsides and the joint becomes visible once more.
Then it is bound over itself with a bandage of moderate constriction.
Then the phlebotomy should be performed in a transverse direction gradually, not too deeply or too superficially: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be as high as that which is above the wrist joint
And most of all, the flow of blood in the warm water is to be set in the cold days.
And the phlebotomy of this joint is safer than all the others, because there is no pulsating vein nor nerve under it.
The phlebotomy of the right hand of Salvius is equal to the treatment of the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that you bind the hand with the bandage or your own hand after you have introduced the hand into the warm water until the swelling subsides and the joint becomes visible once more, and the patient should be asked to feel whether the pain has disappeared
Then the phlebotomy should be performed transversely.
And if you cut the vein completely, it will not cause any harm to him in any way.
And take care not to cut the hand too close to the phlebotomy
Under the edge of the nail are nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then again, wet the hand in warm water, and stop the blood flow in it.
For if you do not wet it in warm water, the blood solidifies in the opening of the nail, and is hindered from running.
When you have drawn out the quantity of blood necessary, then put oil and salt on the nail: so that it does not solidify too quickly.
And in the same way it is necessary to do with every fractured limb.
The bandage of a left-handed person is: because it is equal to the spleen in respect of ailments: and in like manner do it in the phlebotomy of a right-handed person, as you did in the second [instance] equally
As for the phlebotomy of the saphenae, the bandage is for ailments which are in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, retention of menses, and kidney disease, and the ulcers of the groin and the ancient ulcers of the knee, and similar ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it lets the sick limb go into the warm water: and makes above it friction, until the nails break: and binds above the junction of the limb with a bandage.</start_of_turn>
And the nails are at the heel, appearing beyond the thumb: and they are pulled out from it in the front of the foot near the bones of many bones.</start_of_turn>
The phlebotomy is therefore better in a wider limb, or at the heel in its mass: because it is better and safer.</start_of_turn
If you do the phlebotomy on the front of the foot, then take care of the nerves that are under the nails on the face of the foot.</start_of_turn
And establish your vein that you are cutting across as if you were making an incision: and let the phlebotomist be Nesil.
If blood flow is forbidden, then repeat the foot in warm water: and let the blood flow in the body until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist has erred in the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy to the upper parts, for the place is safe, and not because of any danger, when you fall from nerves, as we have said
And similarly with the other foot like the saphenous vein.
As for the sciatic vein, its place is at the heel from the side of the cubitus.
And the remedy for the pain of the ankle when it is because of cold blood is to perform phlebotomy.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it should include a diseased bag, and hurry: and bind the leg from the side of the ankle up to the heel four fingers, with a fine strip: it should not be visible except for that.
When it appears, then the phlebotomy should be carried out according to whatever method is most suitable to you, or according to the cut: and it is better to make an incision or to cut through the skin
For its place is safer, and in many men it is hidden under the hair
If you do not find it and do not appear to anyone: then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, for it is that which appears in the back of the foot, and is under the heel: and cause the blood to flow from it as much as you desire
Then solve the stricture, and place above the site of the phlebotomy the skin, and tighten the place.
The stricture is to be solved, and the skin is to be placed above the site of the phlebotomy, and the place is to be tightened.
Regarding the treatment of the wound, and the quality of the dressing.
Chapter XCIII.</start_of_turn>
Wounds are caused by bones, and by air, and by dirt.</start_of_turn>
The treatment of the wound is done in two ways.</start_of_turn
By scarification and extraction of blood: and the other is treatment without scarification.</start_of_turn And this treatment which is without scarification is done in two ways.</start_of_turn
Or with heat.</start_of_turn
Or without heat.</start_of_turn
And the wounds which are treated with scarification and extraction of blood are in fourteen places of the body.</start_of_turn
These are the wounds which are treated with scarification and extraction of blood: Alnocrati is the most posterior wound of the head: Alkehel is the middle wound of the neck: and the wounds of Alhagdahim are two layers of the neck from two parts together: the wound of menti is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth: the wound of two spatulas: the wound of Alachosos is over the end of the tail: and the wounds of two focilia are in the middle of the two arms: and the wounds of two crura: and the wounds of two caudae.</start_of_turn
And the treatment does not draw out blood from small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of this does not cause the emergence of pus like that which happens in phlebotomy.</start_of_turn
Neither is it necessary to administer the cautery with fire, nor without fire in any ailment that arises from excessive swelling, until the entire body be evacuated.
Whenever the need arises on account of an ailment, or by custom, we administer it at the beginning, at the end, and in the middle of the month, and at any other time as required.</start_of_turn>
For in man, when his blood multiplies excessively in him, until it requires extraction by cautery, it generates in his head a grievous swelling, and pain.</start_of_turn>
And from this is that it appears in his face, head, and neck swelling, redness, and distension.</start_of_turn
And from this it appears on his face itching, and a rash, and shadows, and dimness in his eyes.</start_of_turn>
And from this it is that the place of the cautery is scraped.</start_of_turn And from this it is that his laughter multiplies.</start_of_turn
And from this it is that the taste of blood appears in his mouth: either the tongue swells and expels blood.</start_of_turn
And from this it is that his sleep multiplies.</start_of_turn
And from this it is that he vomits in his sleep blood, redness, and froth, and spots like these.</start_of_turn When we see any of these things, or even two or three days after the beginning of the month: we then order the cautery to be performed immediately, after two or three hours have passed.</start_of_turn The application of the Ventouse of the Neck is: because it itself causes weight in the head, and what flows down to the eyes.
