After I have finished with you, my son, this book, which is the most recent treatise on medicine that I have composed, together with its completion, I have reached the end of it through its exposition and statements. It seemed to me useful to complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of surgery, that is, of the art of healing with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand lies low in our age and in our time, and has disappeared from our age, except for a few faint indications in ancient books which have been altered by the hands: and there has arisen from this a fault and hesitation, until the intention of these things has been closed and prolonged. It is necessary, therefore, that we should speak of this treatise in a way which is in accordance with the order of things, and with the declarations and brevity: and that we should come to an understanding of the forms of the instruments of surgery, such as the cautery and the rest of the instruments of the art, as is declared and as is necessary for their preparation.
The reason why a good surgeon with his hand is not found in our time is this: because the art of medicine is long, and the author must exercise himself beforehand in the science of anatomy as Galen has said, until he knows the functions of the limbs, their forms, and their connections, and their separation and union, and the knowledge of bones, nerves, lacerations, and their number, and their emergence, and the pulse of the veins, and quietness, and the places of their exits
Just as Hippocrates said, a name is much praised, but the work is little, especially in the art of the hand
We have indeed spoken of this at the beginning of this book.
For he who is ignorant of the science which we have spoken of concerning anatomy, will not be saved, but will fall into an error which brings destruction to men: as I have seen many of them who form themselves in this science without knowledge and experiment.
Since I have seen many doctors who have followed the old practice of applying poultices of wool soaked in vinegar to the scrofula in the neck of a woman, and have thereby caused the bursting of some arteries in the neck: whereupon the blood of the woman flowed until she died between their hands.
And I have seen other doctors who have ventured to extract a stone from a bladder which was in process of bursting, and the stone was large
So it came to pass that he extracted it with the bladder broken
Therefore the man died on the third day.
And I myself was called to extract it: and I saw from the greatness of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I have seen another doctor who took charge of a case concerning a certain Duke of our land because of medicine: and there happened to a black slave who was with him, a fracture in his leg near the heel: and the doctor, in his ignorance, bound the fracture with nails and splints, and tightened the bandage too tightly, and did not let the wound breathe.
He then died according to his desires.
Afterwards he sent him away for a few days, and commanded him not to move his ligament: and he remained thus until the swelling of his leg, and his foot, had subsided, and he perished
I myself went to him: and I found that he had to move his ligament: and there was peace, and he was freed from his pains
Truly, corruption has been confirmed in the limb: and I am unable to restrain it.
The corruption has ceased to progress in the limb, until it passes away
And behold, another physician who has opened up a cancerous tumor: and it has ulcerated after days, until its malice has been increased with its master himself
For when a cancer is pure of melancholic humor, then it does not suffice to contend with it with all one’s might, except in the limb where it can be excised entirely
And therefore, my son, you must know that an operation is divided into two parts: namely, the operation which is associated with health: and the operation which has peril in many situations And I have been instructed in all the places of this book concerning the operation in which there is fear and trembling
Therefore, you must be cautious with this, and be humble: so that they do not find fault with you for speaking too boldly, and for being dishonest.
Accept therefore measure with humility and protection, and the sick with facility and firmness, and use better methods which bring greater glory to God for the healing of souls and the praise of God: and banish from you terrible anxieties which bring fear to your soul, so that your faith and your comfort may be strengthened in you For truly, there remains in this world a greater glory to God, and a sublimity, and a great reward in the future for your souls.
Indeed, Galen has said in some of his instructions: "Medicus qui non operatur, operatur. Do not be a physician of sickness: do not be called a physician of evil.
Chapter One.
Of incision and perforation, phlebotomy and injections, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows, and things of the like: and the whole Chapter, arranged concerning the forms of instruments. ¶
Chapter Three.
On restoration, and dislocation, and treatment of torsion, and like these: the head of the capital is ordered from the head to the feet, and the form of instruments.
Glory be to God.
Book of Surgery by Albucasis.
Part I
On the Application of the Cautery, and the Dressing of Wounds: and in what complexions it is suitable, and when: and whether with iron or gold.
Chapter I
But before we speak of any operation, we must mention the quality of the instruments and dressings which are to be used: and in what complexions they should be used
I say, that the discourse concerning the quality of the Cautery, and its dressing, is a lengthy, subtle, scientific, and secret discourse.
And many wise men have spoken of this, and they have differed in their opinions: and indeed little will suffice of their discourses, fearing the length of the speech
I say, that the Cautery is useful in every complexion, whether with material or without material: except for two complexions, which are the hot complexion without material, and the dry complexion without material
In the hot and dry complexion with material they disagree.
Some indeed say that the Cautery is harmful in these
And others say the opposite, that is, that the Cautery is not suitable for scaldings, which are caused by heat and dryness: for the nature of fire is heat: and it is inappropriate to heal a burning with heat and dryness, with heat and dryness
And he said he who says the contrary: that with the Cauterium, the [substance] is an application in every hot and dry ailment which occurs in the bodies of men: for when you compare the body of a man and moisten it, to the nature of fire, you find the body of a man cold.
And I myself have observed in experience that this is true.</start_of_turn>
It is not necessary to come before this, unless one has been trained in the last exercise of the Cauterium and has learned the diversity of the temperaments of men, and the causes and accidents of ailments, and the time of their occurrence.</start_of_turn>
From the rest, however, there is no fear: especially in cold and wet ailments.</start_of_turn For I have heard that all physicians agree concerning this: and they do not dissent from the use of the Cauterium in these.</start_of_turn>
And know this, sons, that from the secret of the treatment with Cauterium with fire, and the benefit of the Cauterium with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, whose action does not persist, except on the part which is cauterized: and it does no harm to any other part connected to it, except for a slight wound.</start_of_turn
Burning medicine, however, has an action that extends beyond the part that is cauterized: and perhaps it causes an aggravation of the pain in the member that is sick, and perhaps even death.</start_of_turn
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the excellence of its substance, does not cause this, except in excess.</start_of_turn
I myself have learned this through experience, by the length of my service and my study with the art, and by the position of truth in things: and for this reason I make excuse for the length of this discourse.</start_of_turn
Know that even you dissenters of this age agree in the time when it is proper to make a cauterization, and that you prefer a better time for the patient.
I say also that a cauterization is expedient at all times: for in every case the document becomes submerged in moisture as time passes, which is attracted by the cauterization
Above all, if the cauterization is for painful and necessary evils, strong, urgent, which do not tolerate delay: for they fear the evil which arises from the delay, which is greater than the slight damage done by the document in the course of time.
Do not let it be thought by the minds of the wise or you, my son, that because a cauterization does not always produce immediate results, it is therefore useless: for it alters the complexion and expels humors which are the cause of ailments.
Truly, a cauterization surpasses medicine in speed of action, in the excellence of its operation, and in its sovereignty: and it is possible that a disease will vanish at some later time according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the disease, and the excellence of the operation: and that which is prepared in the body from the collection of superfluous humors in that place, and from the like which are exhaled from the cautery itself, except in the case of an ailment in which the cauterization is administered. A slight ailment in a limb with little excess of humors, and moisture, like the cauterization of a tooth for pain, and the like of it, is possible that it will not return in this way after the pain has vanished.
But that is done in few.
However, the matter is in few.
But that is done in few.
But that is done in few But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few But that is done in few
But that is done in few
But that is done in few
The method of cauterization is as follows: the diseased part is evacuated initially with the physician using a solution which softens the head for three nights, or four as required by the nature of the disease, its age, and its habit.
Then command him to make a mark on the head with a needle.</start_of_turn>
Then make him sit between your hands, so that you can place your hands over his head.</start_of_turn
Then place the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his eyes.</start_of_turn Wherever the middle finger of your hand rests, that is the place to make the burn.</start_of_turn> Then apply the Cauterium Olive: thus it is formed.</start_of_turn Then place it over the marked place with the burn, with a gradual downward movement, until your hand is relaxed, and then withdraw it.</start_of_turn
Then lift your hand quickly and look at the place.</start_of_turn
If you see that the burn has reached the quantity of the head's hair or the quantity of herbs, then lift your hand.</start_of_turn>
And if not, repeat the process with the iron alone, or with something else if it is cold: until you see the bone, as I have told you.</start_of_turn
Then take something from salt, dissolve it in water, and drink it in this way: and apply it over the place: and leave it for three days.</start_of_turn
Then put on it a buttered bandage and remove the burn from the place, until the eschar is consumed by fire.</start_of_turn Then care for it with four unguents until it is healed.
The more the wound remains open, the more pus it emits. It is better and more beneficial to drain it
Some people say that the skin should be cauterized until the bone is exposed: and let the Cauterium be retained until some degree of thickness of the bone is scorched
Then the wound is drained after that which has been dusted from the bone, and then it is cared for.
Others say that the cautery should be continued until it leaves an imprint in the bone, so that the bone breaks, which is like the shape of a chisel: or the instrument which the women put inside the small letter A: and they say that from this place there escapes vapor of the head, and the wound is closed for a long time.
Then it is cared for until it is consolidated
I do not know of two kinds of Cautery that are absolutely harmless in all people, except for some who are timid in this matter.
And let me say that it is better for me to give up on this, for the safety of my own health
The head is weakened from the cessation of its natural motion: as we have testified in the rest of the limbs: and especially when the head is weak by nature: and the first kind of Cautery is more harmless and better for me in health, and more effective. Work therefore with this for the sake of health
In the case of cautering the head for the whole head.
Head section III.
When there is chronic pain in the whole head: and it persists in the sick person, and when it is accompanied by fever, boils, carbuncles, oil and application of plaster
If, therefore, it has been cauterized with one cautery, as we have mentioned, and nothing else is applied to it: then consider.
If the head of the patient is strong in natural formation and is not feeble, and if it suffers from intense cold: then cauterize with another cautery under the first.
Then cauterize the very surface of the whole head with another cautery, without piercing the skin, and uncover the quantity of bone which we have mentioned
And cauterize the head with one cautery at the back of the head, in the place which is called the uas: and this is the place where the marrow is placed. Lift up the head slightly in this place, and do not uncover the bone.
For the patient suffers from this intense cold because of this. And different from the pain of the other cauteries of the head is this.
And I say concerning this: this is the cautery in its place. And it is necessary that it should be a cautery with which the horns of the head and the back of the head are cauterized, while the middle of the head is cauterized with a finer cautery.
This is its form.
In a hemibrachial headache, whether with drugs or with iron, cauterize in this way.
Head section III.
When it happens that there is pain and swelling in a part of the head, or that the pain extends to the eye, and it is evacuated with physicians who apply cooling compresses to the head, and other treatment is administered as I have mentioned in the treatises on diseases, and nothing else is applied to it: then cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with acute burning medicine or with iron The cautery, however, with acute medicine that burns, is, that you take a tooth one of another, and excoriate it, and sever its extremities from two sides.
Then split the place of pain in time with a wide incision, until there is under the skin in that place where the tooth is caught.</start_of_turn>
Introduce it into that under the skin until it is hidden: then tighten above it with a thread of constriction of a moderate size, and leave it for fifteen hours. Then remove it, and discharge the wound for two days, or three: afterwards put over it a soaked bandage in butter, until the place has healed. Then care for it with unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn
And if you wish to do this with some of the burning medicines which I have written about in the twelfth tractate, of Burning Medicines.</start_of_turn>
The cautery of it with iron is in this manner.</start_of_turn
The cautery fire which has this shape.</start_of_turn
And it is called Clauilis: because its shape is like the shape of a key, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.</start_of_turn
Then put it over the place, and hold your hand: and draw the iron gradually with velocity: and let the amount be such as is sufficient to burn from the thickness of the skin, like half of it.</start_of_turn
And lift your hand, so that it is not burned by the artery below, which brings the blood flow.</start_of_turn
Then soak the bandage in salt water, and put it over the place, and leave it for three days: then put the bandage with butter: afterwards care for it with unguent until it is healed.</start_of_turn And if necessary, cauterize this hemimanis with the second extremity of the Cauteris knife.
And cauterize from the artery incision in this hemimanis, not backwards as usual
Like cautering in the old hemimanis.
See section V
When you treat a hemimanis, when you have done what we said about treating the ailments beforehand, and what we said in the instructions for ailments, and the ailment has not vanished: if there is excessive pain, that which the first cauterization with medicine did not suffice, nor the cauterization with fire, then you must burn the Cauteris knife until it turns white when you apply it to the place of pain, where there is a line whose length is half of a finger, or almost like that: and put your hand away with the thumb and index finger together, and tighten it until you have pierced the artery, and hold it until you reach the bone. But it is necessary to be careful not to burn the jawbone, which moves during chewing, lest you burn the cheek, or the nerve which moves itself, from which a spasm results
And be cautious, and take care of the flow of blood from the artery that has been severed
For in the severance of this there is fear, and especially for him who is ignorant of this and is not studious or experienced: and he dismisses the operation immediately
And I come with the reminder of the management of the flow of blood in the event of an accident from the artery, according to my method, and in this place in this book
If there is excessive pain, which this Cauterium does not suffice for, and if the patient's body tolerates the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, then take care of the wound, until it is healed
And if necessary, administer the Cauterium, as we said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery with Cauterium having two blades.
It is better to cauterize than to leave things as they are and cause more harm. In the case of pain in the ear.
Chapter 6. When it happens that in the ear there is pain from the cold, and it is treated with solutions, and the rest of the treatment that we mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the Cauterium: and that is what is called the Punctum, which has this shape
Then burn the Punctum with this, around the whole ear, as it is turned: or around both sides, if the pain is in both
And keep the Cauterium at a distance from the earlobe, after you have marked the place with the cautery: and let the quantity of the Cauterium be ten punctures in each ear, and as much
Then care for the place, until it heals
In the case of torture
Chapter 7
Torture which is cured by cautery is not except for those which arise from phlegmas, as we mentioned in the previous chapters And you must cauterize the kind which arises from dehydration and nerve spasm
When you have cured this kind of torture with urine and vomitings, and hiccups, and the pain does not depart, then you must burn the sick with three Cauteriums: one at the root of the ear, and the second a little lower from the earlobe, and the third at the junction of the two lips
And place your cautery from the opposite side of the lower part of the diseased area.
Since softening does not occur unless in the part which appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is such that you cauterize with the cautery itself at the tip of the ear slightly below the horn of the head: and the other in the temple: the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb
And lay your hand with the cautery until the quantity of middle thickness of the skin has been consumed by combustion
And this is the form of the cautery, which is like a knife, the form of which is as follows: it is not too thick, like water, but not too thin, like air. The knife should be of a moderate thickness Then take care of the place, when you have finished: until it is healed.
In the ancient apoplexy, cauterize in this way: take a cautery of iron, and make a hole in the middle of the head, about the size of a barleycorn. Then pass the cautery over the surface of the wound until the blood has stopped bleeding
Chapter VIII.
When the ancient apoplexy has hardened, and when your medicine has not been of avail, and the patient has no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over all the horns of his head, and with the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, and with the cautery in the nape of the neck, as we have said: and the manner of cautery should be as we have said.
It is also cauterized with the cautery over the bones of the stomach: and this is the last remedy.
Then take care of the patient, as we have said.
On the manner of cauterization in the Obliuione.
On the manner of cauterization in the Obliuione.
The burn should be performed first on the great hyera and then with sponge-sticks the brain should be supported.
Then the head of the patient should be secured entirely, and over the crown place a skin-flap described in the treatise on skin-flaps: and put a little more of it over it This is indeed the method of cauterization: and do this according to the order which I have said above If therefore the patient is cured by this, it is good
If not: then make him three burns on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head down to the lower part of the eye: and put between every burn the thickness of a finger
Then care for the burns, as has been said before.
If however you wish to add something, and the patient is tolerant of this: then make him a burn in the middle.
If you wish to add something more: then burn him over the two horns
Then care for him, until he is cured: and keep the burn oil-soaked according to the form which has been mentioned.
On the manner of cauterization in Paralysis, and mollification.
On the manner of cauterization in Paralysis, and mollification
It is necessary to proceed in the mollification of the head with hyeras, and with that which we have mentioned before
Then burn the head of the patient: afterwards burn the middle of the head, and the burn over every horn of the head, and burn over the back of the neck, and three over the thyroid cartilage of the neck
If, however, in an obstinate patient the mollification of the body is insufficient for several reasons, and the patient is able to tolerate it, and the disease is violent: then cauterize four times over the spinous processes of the back, and the last with the fourth, until it is consumed to the greatest extent from the surface of the skin, and elevate your hand.
Then care for it until it heals: and thus cauterize like Olive oil.
In this way cauterize in Epilepsy.
Chapter XI.</start_of_turn>
Do not cauterize an epileptic unless there is phlegm in it.</start_of_turn> It is necessary therefore that you should temper the brain of it in the first place with hellebore, and with the rest of the treatment as we have mentioned in the preceding section: when the patient is great, or is tolerant of the medicines.</start_of_turn
If, however, it is a boy, who does not tolerate the medicines, then is administered gargling and nourishing bites of food which temper the brain, many days before with good nourishment of the body.</start_of_turn
Then temper its head, afterwards cauterize it once in the middle of the head, as we have said before in this way: and cauterize once at the back of its head, and over every horn of its head.</start_of_turn
What if the patient is strong and tolerant? Then cauterize it with the cautery which I have mentioned in the case of paralysis, and the mollification of the body over the spinous processes of the neck and the spinous processes of the back: and let the Cautery be like Olive oil as has been said before.</start_of_turn If the patient is a boy, then put the cautery on superficially, according to this method.</start_of_turn
On the method of cauterizing in Melancholia.
On the method of cauterizing in Melancholia.
When the cause of melancholy is corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize with cautery, as we mentioned in paralysis-having
When the cause of melancholy is excess of declining humors causing melancholy, and the body of the patient is soft and humid, then take from him in the bath that which will temper his brain, as was mentioned before in the treatise: then burn the head of the patient, and make afterwards a circle of lead about the face, as a circle
Then put the cautery in the middle of the head: and the patient sitting upright is held fast from all sides
Then apply liniment. And it is better from old butter or oil.
And heat it over a moderate fire, as the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it.
Then evacuate it from the middle of his head in a circle, and leave it until it has cooled down
Do this to the patient every week once, with the rest of his treatment good, until he is healed
Or if you will, cauterize it by making many small points on it, besides that you hold the hand with the cautery: even if it smells badly.
For this kind of cautery humors the brain with the quality.
Then put over it a soaked sponge in butter, or fat of a hen
¶ On the method of cauterizing in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the water in the eye is declared to be finished by the signs which I mentioned in the preceding chapter, then you should begin and give the sick person the potion which will mend his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and make him sit in a warm bath for a few days.
Then command him to raise his head, and cauterize in the middle of his head. And cauterize above two temples with two cautery irons: if there is a discharge of water from both eyes at the same time: or from one side only, if there is a discharge of water from only one eye: and cut through with the cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let there be cautery marks in them of the length of the temples: and burn from the flow of blood.
And if anything else comes out from it, then immediately cut it out with whatever medicine is possible: and I will come with my wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and the cutting of them, and the care of the flow of blood.
And when cauterizing on the cheek, under two bones, with two final cautery irons.
In this way cauterize in the ancient lacrimal bones.
Chapter XXXIIII.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, tenacious: and are over the veins and arteries which are in the visible part of the head, it is verified that this is from the superfluities of cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cautery which I mentioned in the beginning of the discharge of water, the cautery in the middle of the head, and two cautery irons above two temples, and two cautery irons on the cheek under two bones.
And if digestion is inadequate, then cauterize it throughout all the sides cautiously around the eye, over the eyebrow's extremity with a small cautery.
And in the eye's socket, cauterize cautiously around the eye, over the eyebrow's extremity with a small cautery.
Chapter 15.
When you are treating this, when the medicine has not been of any avail: then cleanse it, and give him three baths at night: then rub the head of it, and cauterize it with an average cautery, with olive oil
Then cauterize it with two small cauteries, over the two eyebrows beneath the hair slightly
And guard against the artery, that you do not pierce it
This is the form of cautery for the eyebrows
And in the softening of the eyelids.
Chapter 16
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by heat or humidity: then cauterize the eyelid with one cautery, like a crescent moon
And if you wish, cauterize it over the two eyebrows slightly with two small cauteries in all parts: and stretch it out for two times: and let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the eyebrow: and do not touch your hand with the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that is to be cured of the third eyelid.
This is the form of cautery like this moon-shaped cautery
And in the cautery of the eyelid when hair is coming away from the eye. Chapter XVII.
The cautery is of two kinds: either with fire or with burning medicine.
But in cautery with fire, the patient must beforehand remove his hair, if there is any which moves over the area, until it is prolonged and equal. If, however, the wound is upon his face: then bind his eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move, until they have healed
When they have healed and become equal, then place the patient's head in your lap: then mark upon the edge of his eyelids with the cautery, a sign which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be close to the hair
Then put a soaked compress of alum or of hair-gum upon the eye.
Then burn the cautery, which has this shape.
Then burn over the figure which you have drawn gradually in many places, until the surface of the skin is burnt, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, throughout
And the sign of the completion of your work is: if you touch the edge of the eyelid with your finger and pull out the hair at the puncture of the eye.
Pull out your hand then: and let him go in three days.
Then put upon him a compress with butter, until the scab has disappeared.
Then care for him with an unguent until he is healed.
But if some hair remains after an hour, and you soften the eyelids: then burn the cautery over the place once more, as you did at first.
If, however, the hairs are in the lower part: then cauterize it itself, until it rises to its natural place: and make even that it does not prick the eyes.
In such a case, cauterize with the burning medicine itself.
Chapter XVIII
It is necessary to command the sick person to discharge the hairs, until they grow long and become even.
Make from parchment the shape of a leaf of Myrtle
Then take from soap that has been boiled, and from chalk not imbibed from one pound an ounce and a quarter or almost as much: then mix these together with good contrition, and make it with a little fire, so that it does not become cold
Then take from the pan the aforesaid over the parchment which you made like the shape of a Myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyelid of one, or both.
And put under the eye a little bit of soaked chickpea flour in albumin or oil: and the head of the sick person should be in your hand
And put your finger on the medicine and press it gently.
And you will move it whenever the sick person feels the biting of the medicine: for it will be as if it were fire
When therefore you have persevered with this and it has become evident that it bites, then withdraw the medicine and move it with your finger
When the biting has ceased, then withdraw the medicine and wash the eye with water
Consider then, if the hair has been raised by the medicine, as it is raised with fire or with an incision, it is good: and if not, then repeat the medicine over the place where it does not stick, and do not remove it, until your operation is complete, and the eyes are closed together
Then place above the very thing the ointment with butter until the covering layer of the wound is eradicated.
Then treat the thing with ointment, either soft or hard, until it heals.
It is also necessary that you keep guard during the operation, lest something from the medicine should fall into the eye
If after a few days the eyelids become soft and something from the hair gets into the eye, then repeat the medicine over the place which softens from the eyelids themselves, as you did at first
Then treat the thing until it heals.
This is the form of the leaf of myrrh.
And you know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape
Therefore you must take this into consideration: and do not conceal the truth from the right way of doing things, which is the study of this art
Regarding the cauterization of the tear duct.
Chapter XIX.
When you have treated the fistula, when you have done what we said in the enumeration of the diseases, and the cure does not come about: then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Command the patient to put his head in your lap and hold his head between your hands like this, so that it does not move or shake with his head
Then place ointment of alum or of gum Arabic over the eye, and then apply the Cauterium, which has this shape
It should be concave, like the shape of a feather of a vulture from one extremity to the other, as the Cauterium is: and if you wish it to penetrate right through to the other extremity, or if you wish it to be superficial, do so as you please
It is better to grasp this concavity for your work.
Then put upon it a cautery, which makes a cold flame.</start_of_turn>
And hold your hand close to the cautery from the eye to the nose, so that your hand does not go astray, or irritate the patient: and place the cautery on the fat of the eye, and burn it through.</start_of_turn>
If, therefore, you continue with the cautery from the beginning until the bone, it will be good.</start_of_turn
And if not: then repeat the cautery once, or twice if you do not digest it: and let it go on for three days.</start_of_turn
Then put on it butter with a bandage, and care for it with an ointment of desiccation, until it heals.</start_of_turn And if after forty days it has not healed: then put on it an acute corrosive medicine, until the bone is broken: and do it according to what is written in its chapter.</start_of_turn>
There is another way of cautery for a fistula, which some of the first people said.</start_of_turn
Intend to the place of the fistula and find it: then put under the opening of the fistula a thin cushion, that is, a needle with a blunt tip, whose shape is this.</start_of_turn
And pour into it the quantity of a drachma of liquefied lead, and hold your hand with a good retention needle, and do not move the patient in any way, so that it does not run, or pour the liquefied lead into his eye.</start_of_turn
It is necessary to place above the eye of the patient a soaked cushion filled with wool or in water.
Lead therefore prevents the formation of the fistula, and promotes healing in a remarkable way.
If the fistula is healed, as we have said with regard to the Cauterium and treatment, it is good
If not, it is necessary to perform a nasal perforation and reduce the fistula to the level of the nose, as it will be in its own place
Concerning the cautery of the fissures of the lips.
Chapter 20.
Many wounds occur in the lip fissures which are called Pili, especially in the lips of children
When you have cured the wounds, when as we have said in the explanation of ailments, and the healing does not take place, then you must burn the little knife carefully with this shape
And let its curvature be according to the thinness of the knife
Then care for it with the cautery until it is healed.
Concerning the cautery of the fistula of the mouth
Chapter 21
When there is swelling in the root of the tooth, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then pus forms, and it breaks: afterwards it subsides, and pus flows, and a fistula is formed: then you must burn the cautery according to the quantity that is in the fistula
Then introduce the burning substance into the fistula opening and hold your hand until the iron burns deeply, and finally: do it once or twice more.
Then care for it as we have said until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If it is cut off and heals, it is good.</start_of_turn>
And if not, then it is necessary to remove the affected part and take out the corrupt bone according to what comes to pass in its head.</start_of_turn
In the case of cauterization of gums and softening of teeth.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXII.</start_of_turn>
When the gums are softened because of moisture, and the teeth are moved, and you care for it with physicians, and do not confer: then put the patient's head in your lap.</start_of_turn
Then burn the cautery, whose form will come after this, so that you put the canula over the tooth: and introduce the burning cautery into it quickly: and hold your hand lightly, until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn
And lift your hand: then burn the cautery again a little, as you wish.</start_of_turn
Then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, and keep it for one hour: and then expel it.</start_of_turn
The tooth will then be moved firmly, and the gums will be softened and stretched, and the moisture will be dried up.</start_of_turn
Chapter XXIII.
When tooth pain arises from cold, or if cold or worms are in it, and treatment does not suffice with physicians: then Cauterium is in it according to two methods: either Cauterium with butter, or cauterium with fire.
Cauterium, however, is with butter, as you take butter scraped off, and apply it to the cavity or the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Then take charcoal and apply it to the edge of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Then immerse it in boiling butter: and place it on the painful tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools down: then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Or if you wish, immerse wool or charcoal in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth: and put on it a burning iron until the fire reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.</start_of_turn>
Cauterization with fire is also done, as you aim for the air bubble or the iron itself.</start_of_turn And let there be something of size in it, so that the heat of the fire does not reach the sickly bone.</start_of_turn>
Then touch Cauterium, whose form will become evident: and place it on the tooth: and hold your hand until Cauterium cools down.</start_of_turn
Do this several times, for pain will subside, either on the same day or the next day.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to leave an impression of the Cauterium, so that it fills the diseased bone with good butter, and keep it for an hour: then expel it.</start_of_turn>
This is the form of the Cauterium.
The cautery is to be performed with whatever extremity is convenient: and this is the form of the cannula.
Concerning the cautery of the strophes.
Chapter XXVIV
When the strophes are from phlegm, and from cold humors, and do not obey digestion by medicines, and when you wish to speed up their digestion: then make a concaved cautery, whose form is as above
Having two open extremities, that the smoke of the cautery may escape from the other extremity: place the burning instrument above the other ulcer once, and a second time if necessary, until the depth of the ulcer has been reached
If the ulcer is small: then make the cautery according to the size of the ulcer
Then remove it for three days, and place above it a softened ointment of butter, until the burnt part has healed
Then care for it with tooth unguent, until the form of the cannula has healed
Concerning the cautery of the rachid of the voice, and the constriction of the breath
Chapter XXV
When moisture is upon the channel of the lungs, and especially when it is with the coldness of the complexion: then it is necessary to evacuate the diseased person immediately with medicinal solutions
Then make the cautery in the night at the root of the gullet in a depressed place: and burn without reaching the gullet or the skin, except for what is necessary
Then cauterize with another cautery at the junction of the collar in the last rib: and let the cautery be closed according to the mode which preceded.
Then treat with that which preceded, until it is healed
As to the cautery of the lungs and the chest, and of the like.
Chapter XXVI
When there is spasm of the chest and the lungs from cold dampness, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, nor old cough: then cauterize with two cauteries above the rib in the depressed parts, in lenium, in vacuo.
And another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples: and let the cautery be closed according to the mode which preceded
And if you wish to make a cautery by pricking with a cautery, which is called Punctum, whose form preceded the pricking of the pain of the ear: and make the punctures from thirty punctures up to almost as many
Then treat with that which preceded, until it is healed And there are three branches of this mode of cautery: according to this form.
Therefore it is useful when you make it with three cauteries with oil at the same time.
As to the cautery of the thumb, in dislocation of the humerus
Chapter XXVII
When the head of the assistant has been dislocated by the cause of dampness, and does not return to its place in the hour of its return from the dislocation: until it has become accustomed to the restoration of its place, then it must be displaced by a slight movement, as we have testified to this, then it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation at once.
Then the infirm person lies upon his back, or upon the side of his sound limb.
Then elevate the skin which is inside the Tilili's area towards the upper part with your left hand: and if the dislocation has gone deep inside
Then take the Cauterium having two handles Which has this shape
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and will come out with the shape of four cauterizations
And when it has been cauterized with a cauterium having three handles, then the shape of the cauterization will be six cauterizations: and these are the handles according to their slight tension
And this is the shape of the cauterium having three handles
And when one is added over like this, so there are eight cauterizations in total.
Then put over the cauterium soaked sponges with salt.
Then make the infirm person adhere to tranquility, so that he does not move the limb for some time, until he is comfortable
And if the dislocation is towards the upper parts, and it is rare that it happens, then cauterize it upon the humerus with the cauterium claw, or with many punctures.</start_of_turn>
For the joint is strengthened, and the swelling is reduced: and the infirm person is healed.</start_of_turn>
In this way the Stomach is cauterized.</start_of_turn
End of book.</start_of_turn>
When cold and much humidity happen in the Stomach, until they have driven it out of its complexion, and multiplied its humours to it, and followed accurate methods of treatment, and did not confer: then it is necessary that the infirm person should lie upon his back, and extend his limbs and hands.</start_of_turn
Then burn with three cautery instruments, a cautery beneath the breast of the cochleus measuring the breadth of a single digit with a cautery at the claw and with two cautery instruments below from two sides of the single cautery, until the triangular figure of the cautery instruments appears.
And lengthen between each other so that they do not join together when pus forms. And the depth of the cautery should be equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin
And the figure of the cautery instruments should be in the following shape without adding anything: and if you wish to burn with a large cautery in the middle of the abdomen according to this shape: let there be one cautery following the shape of a circle according to this shape
The abdomen is cauterized by puncturing the parts that recoil from this cautery: and it is necessary that the signs above the abdomen should be equal to the quantity of the encasement. Then burn the cautery itself with the puncturing cautery. Then care for the patient until he is healed.
In this way, burn the Epar with cold.
Chapter XXIX.
When it happens in the Epar that there is pain from the cold and humidity, or from large wind, until it escapes from its natural composition by excessive discharge, and the patient is cured, as we have said, and does not suffer in that: then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his belly, and that the signs be equal to three cautery instruments according to this shape and this quantity above the Epar below the hypochondria, where the elbow of a man reaches: and let there be space between every cautery instrument according to the breadth of a digit. And let the cautery be according to the length of the body of the rectum. And do not press your hand too much with the cautery
And let the quantity of that which is absorbed from the thickness of the skin be not added to the middle quantity: and let the patient be standing on his feet.
And if he is not standing, then let him be lying down, with his limbs extended and his arms elevated This is the form of cautery.
And indeed it is possible to cauterize these carbuncles with a knife cautery, when there is skill and prudence in the art.
Beware lest you go too far with the cautery, and burn the entire thickness of the skin, thereby causing damage to the whole body, and reaching the intestines: for the skin there is thin in those places, as you know well
Concerning the cautery of the after-effects of the liver.
Chapter 30.
When an evacuation occurs, and you wish to write, if that after-effect is in the liver itself, or in its membrane: if it is in the liver itself, the patient experiences pain and swelling without sharpness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, with sharp pain which is severe: and know that I have already fatigued the physicians with their care of you
It is therefore necessary for the patient to lie on his belly
Then the figure of the after-effect with the cautery: then apply the cautery which is absorbed by the rays.
And this is its form
And cauterize with this knife once, until the entire skin has been consumed, and has reached the intestines, until all the pus has gone out: then take care of the evacuation of the after-effects, until the patient is healed
Neither is it proper that any cautery should be used without having first studied the art of medicine to a sufficient extent, for it is by experience that the disorders which may arise in this way will be recognized: only then should such an operation be attempted.
It is better to leave it alone than to attempt it myself
On the matter of cautery in the chest.
Chapter 1
The ancients say that cautery with aristolochia roots is used for a cold pleurisis in this way.
And it is, that you take from the dry roots of aristolochia some long ones, one of which is taken from that, and let it be as thick as the breadth of a finger
Then submerge it in fat: and light the thing on fire
Then cauterize with one cautery at the place where the furcula joins the neck, and with two small cauteries under guidance somewhat less steep towards the part which is under the beard
And with two cauteries also at that place which is between the fifth and sixth ribs downwards to the back: and with another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach
And three cauteries from behind: one at the place which is between the two angles: and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, the lower cautery which is between the two angles.
And do not touch your hand with the cautery, but let it be evident that the skin is smelling. And some ancient writers say that there are men who use a cautery like a nail of iron: they ignite it, and put it inside that which is between the ribs, until it is consumed with that until it comes out whole again, and comes out healed: as we said concerning the liver apostemata
But in such a perforation with the cautery there is fear, for either the infirm dies immediately, or the fistula occurs in a place where there is no healing.
Concerning the cautery of the spleen or head of the pancreas.
When you are treating a spleen ailment, given that in some cases the treatment of ailments causes a discharge, and your cure does not suffice, then the cautery is to be used in three ways, all of which are correct
The first is to make three cauteries, or four in line according to the length of the spleen following the pattern of the cauteries of the liver, which comes before it
And let there be between every cautery the quantity of the breadth of a finger, or less.
And let the mode of the cautery be as we said concerning the cautery of the liver, equally
Do not press your hand down with the cautery: and let the infirm person recline on his back over his belly
Another method of cautery is: to take two fingers and grasp the skin which is directly over the spleen, where the elbow of the infirm person's left arm rests: and elevate the skin as much as the breadth of the body, so that the cauteries may fall according to the length of the body
Then insert two fingers with the tips alight, until when the cautery has pierced the skin from the other side: then withdraw the cautery: four cauteries will remain And if you wish to make a cautery with another having three fingers.
Then take care of the cautery after you have finished with it, so that it does not emit pus for many days: for this is more harmful than all the rest which remain from the treatment
On the method of cauterizing in Hydrops.
On the method of cauterizing in Hydrops.
Cauterization does not suffice in Hydrops, except when the area is properly asclitized.
When you are treating Hydrops with methods of treatment which we mentioned in the discourse, and the condition does not yield, then it is necessary to cauterize the area four times around the navel, once on the stomach, once on the liver, and once on the spleen, and twice behind the ribs between the vertebrae, and once in the center of the chest, and once in the center of the abdomen: and let the extent of the cauterization be proportionate to the thickness of the skin
Then remove the cautery, so that pus may be emitted over a long time
Do not remove the patient from the treatment after cauterization: for two things must be done together: and it will quickly recover with the help of God.
The form of cauterization which is used for the belly is elliptical: according as its shape: and the form which is used for the back is olive-shaped according as its shape
Method of cauterizing feet and legs. Method of cauterizing feet and legs
When the swelling subsides in Hydrops, and the limb is filled with yellow fluid: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the area between the heel and the ankle: and hold your hand with the cautery, and do not move it: then raise your hand: and do not move it at all
The yellow fluid will rise up: and the cautery should be in this shape.
Then make over two crura two cauteria in every limb, and let the cautery be with the utmost limit of the knife: and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below the knee, round about the middle of the limb: and over every hip two cauteria. And let the cautery be drawn away open without treatment for a long time: that it may subside from it some water. And then treat the rest as we have said.
Then make over two crura two cauteria in every limb, and let the cautery be at its utmost limit with the knife. Let the cautery be according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below the knee, around the middle of the limb. And over every hip make two cauteria. Draw the cautery away open without treatment for a long time, so that some water may subside from it. Then treat the rest as before. Then make over two crura two cauteria in every limb, and let the cautery be with the utmost limit of the knife. Let the cautery be according to the length of the limb, one under the knee and the other below the knee, round about the middle of the limb: and over every hip two cauteria. And let the cautery be drawn away open without treatment for a long time: that it may subside from it some water. And then treat the rest as we have said.
When the belly is from cold and humidity, until the heat of digestion is weakened and retained, which are in the stomach and intestines: and that is cured with the methods of treatment, and not by nature. And the healthy man tolerates the excessive heat of the cautery; then burn the belly with a large cautery over the navel, as it was done in the cautery of the stomach with the circular cautery, and four cauteries around the navel below the ribs, and a cautery over the navel above the large intestines, or two cauteries.
And if the liquid makes the excessive heat wet, and the patient tolerates it, then burn the belly with a cautery over the loin and a cautery over every ileum: and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large intestine.
There is indeed a profitable treatment whose application does not err.
There is indeed a profitable treatment whose application does not err.
Chapter Six.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the rectum, either one or several, and they are of gross, cold, or humid matter, and they are cured by that which we have mentioned in the preceding discourse, and not by other means: then burn three times with cautery over the lower part of the spine under the almond-shaped prominence and triangularly, and burn under the navel as with two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is hardened, and his food does not digest, and his face is pale and spotted with pus, then burn him on the great stomach with a large cautery, as has been said before: and burn on his liver and on the spleen of the same, with the cautery of the nails: and leave the cautery open for some time: then care for him until he is healed
Chapter Seven.
Chapter VII.
When you dissect the head, then you ignite the cautery which is absorbed by the substance.
Then introduce the burning flame into the dissected head: and your last hand, until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood flows: do this once or twice. If there are many blood vessels in the head, then cauterize each one separately as we have said
Then take care that no blood escapes from the cauterized parts, until it is healed
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over the wound, this is the greatest remedy for healing.
Thus cauterize the fistula in the groin
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the section and the work that we have said in its place, and recedes from it, perhaps it will heal with cautery.
When this happens to a fistula, and it becomes old, pus flows from it, and the corrupted parts become wetted.
Therefore it is necessary to explore it with a fine hook
Then recognize the depth of its cavity with the hook
Then ignite the cautery, which is like the flame.
Then introduce the burning flame into the fistula and the amount in which the ligature entered And repeat the cautery over the wound, until all the corrupted parts are consumed, once, twice, or three times, according to the necessity of your case
And guard thee from the approach of madness, if it be there, or of great wounds: or if a fistula arise to the belly or to the intestine, then guard thee from all these places.
And do not do that except when a fistula is in a fleshy place: and think, for it is not penetrating.
Then care for the place until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
If however the place is sealed and is separated from the matter by that, and remains thus for a long time: then you know that it is already healed whole.</start_of_turn>
And if it is not separated from the matter by that, then you know that it is penetrating, or that a bone is corrupt in its depth, or as if from these it will arise in its place.</start_of_turn>
Thus of cauterizing the Renes.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXXIX.</start_of_turn>
When it happens in the Renes a pain from cold, or from great wind, and it diminishes because of that what is diseased, then it is necessary to cauterize it above the navel above the kidneys, with cautery over every kidney with a clamp, of which there is a reminder.</start_of_turn
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the same place.</start_of_turn
For there will come three lines.</start_of_turn
Therefore there will be four last things in the treatment.</start_of_turn
Thus of cauterizing the Vesica.</start_of_turn
Chapter XL.</start_of_turn When it happens in the Vesica a weakness, and softening from bad urine and moisture, until the sickly person does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the belly above the Vesica, where the hairs of the flanks begin, and cauterize from the right side of the belly and the other from the left of it: and let the length of the cautery on the side be according to the quantity of the node of the thumb: and cauterize with a lower burn, or with two burns, if you do not approve of that. And let it be according to what preceded the cautery clamp.</start_of_turn
How to cauterize the Matrix. How to cauterize the Matrix.
When the Matrix becomes cold and moist, and is hindered by that from conception, and its blood vessels are corrupted, its menstruation is delayed, and there is pain in its vicinity. Then it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three cautery instruments, as we said in the cauterization of the uterus, and to cauterize over the lower part of the navel, or to use two cautery instruments: and let the cautery be blunt.
How to cauterize the Ancham in dislocation
How to cauterize the Ancham in dislocation
When the moisture of the mucus is discharged from the Ancham and becomes the cause of its displacement from its place: and the sign of that is when one thigh is prolonged over the other, when compared to the other leg: and the place of dislocation is found in that cavity
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the injured part above the Ancham with a cautery similar to a circle: when you have finished marking with the cautery around the circumference of the bone: as it is restored, and let the bone itself fall into the middle of the circle.
And let the cautery be of the shape which preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then cauterize it with three cautery instruments, with a large olive cautery: and make the depth of the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole skin
Then take care of it until it is healed
How to cauterize in Sciatica Head Chapter XLIII.
When pain arises in the heel of the ankle, due to cold and moisture: the physician must treat the patient as we have said in the preceding discourse, and not neglect the treatment. In such a case, it is necessary to expel the morbid humor from the body with large pills of foetid material, or with artificial pills, and the like.
Then cauterize it.</start_of_turn>
And the mode of cautery in this case is by two methods: either with cautery and astringents, or with fire.</start_of_turn
Cautery with fire is in various methods.</start_of_turn
One of them is to cauterize over the heel of the ankle itself with three triangular cautery instruments, according to this form.</start_of_turn
And make the burn either deep or shallow.</start_of_turn
And let the space be such as exists between every two cauteries be equal to the breadth of a finger: and let the cautery be of olive oil.</start_of_turn
When the cautery is done in the middle over the heel of the ankle itself.</start_of_turn
Four cautery instruments are necessary.</start_of_turn
And if you wish to cauterize in a circular fashion, whose form precedes the shaping of the dislocation of the ankle, one: so that it encloses the whole ankle.</start_of_turn
And burn the whole thickness of the skin.</start_of_turn
This is the mode of cautery in Sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the ankle itself, and does not extend up to the knee and thigh.</start_of_turn
If, however, it extends up to the hip and thigh, then burn it with two burnings over the hip, over the place where the patient feels the pain, where the pain is, and burn your branding iron four fingers wide at the outer side of the thigh: and let the branding iron be of the culter type. And let the depth of the burn be according to the depth of the thickness of the skin.
Which if the patient feels that the pain extends up to almost the toes, then burn it there where he feels it with the cautery needle, three, four or more times, as he needs
And if he feels the pain under the knee towards the thigh, then burn it there with one branding iron.
And take care in all your burnings that you do not reach the nerves or great artery, and do not pull over the diseased part with the branding iron, but rather leave it at rest
I also know of one and the other who have burnt the thigh and left it, and the leg was swollen, until the tumor had followed the foot and burst through, and corrupted the whole foot: then the solution came from the belly and the wound after that.
If the pain is in two parts together, burn both of them in this way.
And some wise men say concerning the cautery of an abscess, this is the way to do it.
Make like a mark from iron whose diameter is half of the palm: and let it be at the side of its orifice according to the thickness of the kernel of the thumb, or less wide: and there let there be the third of its sameness inside it.
And there is space between every two fingers of the quantity of a thumb-node: and the fingers are open from two parts: and their height is like a node, or two nodes: and make a handle from iron adapted to the center of the fingers.
This is its form.
Then it is ignited in fire, until it is red, and it is sprinkled with sparks: then it is placed upon the bandage covering the healthy side over the wound
Burn thus each three rounds with cautery in the juice one
Then remove it three days later.
Then apply butter: and remove the wound many days later.
Then care for it with ointment, until it heals
Albucasis says, of this kind of cautery, or of the son of this kind, we do not use it much, because of the terror of its appearance: and because of this, few expect it over it
But it is true that from the good cautery there is relief to him who suffers, and it is found when there is its place.
And the cautery with the physicians is useful, as you do two fingers having a hole in the arm, in which the bone of the wrist comes down from the air, or from iron, the length of the side: of which two nodes are in height, or as many as them
And there is space between each two of the quantity of the breadth of a finger, and they are open beneath and above: and they contain themselves inside, according to this form
Then place the palm upon the bandage covering the healthy side over the wound
Stretch your hand over the wound several times.
Then pour between two circles of warm water, which is heated with gentle fire, and keep it for an hour: and the patient will tolerate the biting of its teeth, and the biting itself, for it finds biting like fire, until the biting subsides.
Then lift up your hand with the instrument, and wash the wound with warm water and sweet water: then let it go for three days.
And put butter on it, until the black of the wound has disappeared: and let it go on for a few days, and pus will flow out of it.
This is the end of the treatment.
Then care for it with unguents, until it is healed.
If the pain extends to the hip or the thigh: make for him a sitting position in which there is water, as you did over the wound itself
This is the way of warm water: and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of diseases
Take alkali, and burnt lime of both kinds and take a part of each: put them into a new jar, of which the lower part is pierced with a small hole according to the quantity of the radius: and put under the bottom of the jar a jar filled with vinegar: and pour over it from sweet water, so that both are covered by a finger: and when you have pressed them with your hand, compress them well: and let go of the jar, until the acute water of the vinegar has descended from the treated part of the vinegar jar.
Then mix in the whole water, and pour it over another lime: and let it rest, until it recovers
She herself is both strong and acute, and is administered in many medical operations, and in cauterization of the remainder of the limbs.
Since she has the power to perform the operation of fire herself.
And among the physicians are those who cauterize widely, as well as testicles, and almond oil, and chalk with soap, thus that both are mixed together.
Galenus himself, when narrating an ancient case, related that a certain physician had cured a pain in the groin and sciatica: and he praised her for her sharpness
He said that it did not require any other treatment, and that he was healed from a wound that had become gangrenous, so that when he left the bath he was already healed It is as it is taken from a green man: and if it is not found green, take it dry, apply it frequently with some fat, and put it on the groin, where there is pain, or the thigh, or the hip: and bind it, and let it rest for the space of three hours, or for as long as the patient feels the pain diminishing
Then immerse her in a bath.
When she becomes soft, introduce her into the basin.
For the pain departs, and she is healed.
And know that no other cautery should be used with these physicians except after the evacuation of the body.
Dioscorides also says that donkey dung, when cauterized with this, causes the sciatica to disappear: and it does this in this way
Take wool, soak it in old oil, and apply it to the deep place which is between the thumb of the foot and between the bones, and it is closer to the bone.
Then take the dry dung of asses and burn it in the fire until it is charcoal.
Then place it over wool and let it go out, until it is extinguished
Do it again.
Do not cease to do this until sensation returns through the mediation of the sense of touch up to the edge, and the pain has ceased
And this method of cauterization is called cauterization of the Vaccinum
Of the cauterization of the pain of the back
Chapter XLIV.
When there is pain in the back from various causes, such as from swelling, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, or things of this nature, from the infusion of cold and moist matter: and the cauterization will not take effect except in this single kind, which is done by the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary therefore after evacuation of the patient with foul pills and things of this nature to make three lines on the back where the pain is, as wide as the breadth of the palm of the hand, after making signs with the cautery in every line five times, or more according to the tolerance of the patient or the extent of his ailment: and make the cauterization with the cautery needle
And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with the middle caulking needle, according to this form.
Of the manner of cauterizing in the swelling of the hip.
Chapter XLV
This swelling often occurs in young children.
And the sign of the beginning of this ailment in children is: when there is stiffness in the loin with elevation, and movement: and you find it in the last lumbar vertebra and its nodes, which begin to protrude over the rest of the vertebrae
When you have finished with it and wish to do so, then burn it with a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
Burn the cautery equally over every part of the sponge: and if you wish to burn around the circumference of the sponge with the cautery, make two or three points close together
Then take care of the place until it is healed as we have said.
And be careful, lest you burn the sensitive area which is in spasm of the nerve.
In the case of podagra and joined pains. Chapter XLVI.
When the joined pains are caused by cold humors which flow upon every limb of the body, and when these cause pain in the feet, it is customary among physicians to call this podagra
When the cold cause of podagra is cured with the proper methods and the pain does not vanish, then the cautery removes it.
And it is necessary to burn around the joint of the feet after emptying with multiple cauteries: and let the cautery be of Olive oil
This is its form
Or if you do not wish to make holes on the face of the foot, then make it with the point of the cautery
If the pain rises up to the knee, or if it remains in the other joints, and this happens frequently, then burn over every knee with three or four cauteries, or from every side with the same cautery of Clauili If you need to do more than this, then burn it with the cautery. Neither immerse your hand with the cautery, but rather keep the surrounding area somewhat moist.
If, however, pain should ascend to the knee and the back: then manage as we have said with the cautery in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, then prick around the focus as two lines are unrolled
If, however, the pain remains from the digits, then prick over every node and the palm of the hand
If, however, the pain should ascend after a day to the cubits or the shoulders, then burn both from every side
Neither must you neglect the patient from the good regimen, from the recovery of the physician.
For if a good regimen is done, and the phlegm is expelled, healing will take place with the help of God with this cautery.
On how to burn in ruptures.
Chapter XLVII.</start_of_turn>
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or the bladder descends to the testicles, and this is in the beginning close to it: then one must immediately remove the cause of the pain from the patient on that day
And let him take from gentle things, so that the stool may descend from its belly
Then sit between your hands over his back: and command him to hold his breath, until the bladder or the intestine comes out.
Then reduce the limb with your fingers, and mark with the cautery under the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, with the sign that its extremity is like the middle of the circle of the body above.
Then the cautery, whose form is like this, until it becomes white, and then it throws out sparks.
Then reduce the intestine, or the bladder to its own cavity.
Then place the hand of the minister over the place, so that the intestine does not escape: and you have already opened between the ribs of the patient, and you have placed under it powder, and another servant over the ribs, and another over the breast that holds the hand.
Then place the cautery upon the very sign, your hand with the cautery standing straight
And hold it [cautery] until you reach the bone: or repeat it with it again using another, if you have not achieved it with it from the first time until the bone
And watch prudently from the escape of the intestine in the hour of your cautery, that you do not burn it, and that it escapes through that over the patient or the blood, or great malice.
And know that when you do not achieve the bone with the cautery, your operation is in vain.
And it is necessary that the cautery be fine for infants, according to their measure
Then care with the remaining unguents, until he is healed.
And let the patient lie upon his back for forty days, until the wound is healed
And it is necessary that you give him food during the time of his cure, which will soften his belly: so that the intestine does not escape at the end and be evacuated
Then when he wants to rise after forty days, then administer the ligament detached at the center, and keep it for another forty days.
When this regimen is used, the whole restoration of health is achieved.
When, however, ruptures happen in the rest of the belly, and are beginning to take place, and one wishes that they should not grow, then burn the rupture with a round cautery according to the quantity of it: and let that which is burned be as much as one-third of it.
Then cure the wound, as we have said: and do not add to it.
Others say: cauterize the rupture with a triangular cautery, according to this form
After it has been cauterized with the brand, and a line has been put which is through the width at the upper side of the rupture, and a line which is lower down And place your hand in the middle with the clamp of the cautery.
But the first cautery is easier and better In the case of pains caused by a fall or blow, or any other similar cause, cauterize in this way:
Chapter XLVIII
When in some limb there is pain from a fall or blow, and the pain has lasted a long time without any remedy with doctors, then it is necessary to cauterize with a cautery of a Point
The cautery should be of the same size as the limb, and of the same degree of thickness, and of the same hardness, and of the same colour, and of the same twist, and of the same painfulness.
If the patient is healed by the first cautery, it is well.
If not: then repeat over the said cautery.</start_of_turn>
For the custom of these pangs of pain is that they change from one member to another that approaches them.</start_of_turn>
Therefore it is necessary to follow them with the cautery until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn>
With regard to cautery for leprosy.</start_of_turn
Chapter XLVIX.</start_of_turn>
Leprosy, however, sometimes demands the greatest cautery.</start_of_turn
And especially the kind of leprosy that is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: in such a case the physician must consider the cautery itself.</start_of_turn
If, however, the leprosy is not severe, and the swelling decreases as we have said, and does not remain: and the time has come over the patient, who has grasped corruption over his whole face: then burn him on the crown of the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second below at the front near the end of the hair, and two on either side of the horns, and one at the back on the nape of the neck.</start_of_turn
And lastly touch your hand with the cautery alongside, until you make an imprint in the bone, and the fragments are loosened from each other: so as to remove from it the emission of thick vapor from it, and burn the spleen also with the cautery, as has been said before.</start_of_turn
If, however, the leprosy has become sparse on the patient, and is evident externally: then it is necessary to burn with these very cauteries which we mentioned in the head, and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on the two maxillae, and two on the two thyroids of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the joints of the buttocks and one on the very groin: and two on the flanks: namely one on each flank, and two on the knees: one on each knee, and two on the biceps, and two on the triceps of the arms, and two on the elbows. And burn the whole of the joints from the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and burn the heel of both feet.</start_of_turn
And take care of the nerves that are above the heel, that they do not burn them. When cauterizing is done with fire above the anklebone, and also above the ribcage, and also above the spleen.
You know, the more often you cauterize, the more dangerous it is, and the more harmful it is to the patient.
You know, the sickly man does not feel pain in cauterizing, just as the healthy do: therefore, because his body is already stunned
It is necessary that the cauteries should be of such size and number as are appropriate for the parts and their junctions: according as it has preceded among the kinds of instruments
The head of the large intestine
When any part is swollen and requires treatment with physicians, oils, poultices and it does not heal, then cauterize the swollen part with cauteries, according as the size of the part or its thickness
And let your cautery not penetrate too deeply into the thickness of the skin
Then take care of it with unguents, until it is healed
And when cauterizing has been done to anything that has happened to the hand, the foot, in the buttocks at the exit of the nerves that move that limb: and it will move the swelling
But do not be arrogant over this, except for one who is learned in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move the body
On the manner of cauterizing in Albaras.
On the manner of cauterizing in Albaras.
When the ancient Albaras has hardened, and no longer yields to any of the remedies of medicine: then cauterize over the cauterium itself deeply near, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the white has gone, and the color be changed.
Then care for it with barley meal and lentils with olive oil, and arnica leaves, and columbine blood, and hyacinth blood: take a little of each: mix them together, and apply over the wound, and bind firmly in place until healed
On the manner of cauterizing in Cancer
On the manner of cauterizing in Cancer
When Cancer is beginning, and you wish to make it cease: then cauterize it with the cauterium in a circle around its circumference as it turns.
Wise men, however, say that one should cauterize with the last cauterium in the middle.
I, however, do not see that: for I fear that it will ulcerate: and I have seen it happen many times. And it is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we said: or with many cauteries. On the manner of cauterizing in Adubelati
On the manner of cauterizing in Adubelati
When anyone has Adubelati, and it is delayed in maturity, either because of excessive fat, or because of its great age, when it is decrepit and has little blood, or for a long time, and wishes to hasten its maturity: then cauterize around its circumference with many small cauteries puncturing
Then let go of him.
Then let go of him. For he himself will hasten with his recovery.</start_of_turn>
If however you wish to perforate him with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, for this is its form.</start_of_turn>
And place him in the middle of the Adubelati, until it pierces the skin: and let the cautery be from that which follows the patient, so that it may alleviate the course of the disease.</start_of_turn
Then care for him until he is healed.</start_of_turn
Thus cauterize in a moist ulcer.</start_of_turn Head LIIII.</start_of_turn
The ulcer is not other than a corruption in a movable limb, and it consumes it: as fire consumes dry wood.</start_of_turn
If therefore you wish to cauterize the ulcer in a place where you can use fire with cautery, then ignite the cautery with many small and large flames, according to what will be suitable in the place where the ulcer is.</start_of_turn
Then cauterize it from all sides until you have eradicated the whole corruption, and let nothing remain of it remaining.</start_of_turn Then let go of him three days, and place over the cauterized place sulfur dust with oil, until you have eradicated all the eschars and all the corruption.</start_of_turn
Then care for him with nourishing unguents for meat.</start_of_turn
If therefore you wish, that after three days meat is born anew in a healthy state, in which there is no corruption, that is good.</start_of_turn
And if not: then repeat the cautery over that which remains of the corrupted places.</start_of_turn
The wounds are treated with acute medicine when necessary.
Acute medicine is sometimes used in the treatment of wounds.
Burning is faster with fire than with water: and I have already said that cauterization is used with acute medicine in wounds: take therefore care of it in this case when it is needed.</start_of_turn>
In the case of Clauis and Verucis, cauterize in this way.</start_of_turn The head of the bone is cauterized.</start_of_turn
Many times this painful affection occurs in the lower parts of the feet: and it is a great, diffuse matter which affects the foot.</start_of_turn> There are two ways to cauterize: with fire and with warm water.</start_of_turn
When you use fire, make the cauterization like the back of a feather: this is done with iron according to the quantity which contains the bone from all sides: and be careful of the edges.</start_of_turn
Then put the fire on the bone.</start_of_turn Then withdraw the hand with the cautery round about the bone until the cauterization reaches the depth of the bone: and leave it for three days, until pus begins to discharge.</start_of_turn Then cover it with sponges soaked in rue and salt: and leave the bandage on it at night.</start_of_turn It will disappear from its roots.</start_of_turn
Then care for the place where the flesh has been burnt, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
If they are not overcome, and many times they appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then you must apply warm water cautery: taking a tube of air, or iron, or feather, and placing it on the bone, or over the ulcer.</start_of_turn
Then throw a small quantity of warm water into the cannula: hold your hand steady and withdraw the syringe with pressure on your hand, so that the mark of the needle may be impressed at the root of the claw, and that the warm water may reach the root of the claw: and the patient should expect relief somewhat after the hour of the warm water treatment.
Then throw it away, for the claw is eradicated with its roots.</start_of_turn>
Do so once more after this, until you reach above all that is in the body from that which it is made.</start_of_turn>
Then care for the place after they are eradicated, with that which generates flesh from the blood vessels.</start_of_turn
In Tremore, cauterization is done in this way.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 66.</start_of_turn
When it happens to anyone that a tremor arises from cold in a nerve, or from a quartan fever, or from something else: then it is necessary to cauterize four times, or five over the vertebrae of the back, and between every vertebra cauterize, and cauterize in the chest, and cauterize over the stomach.</start_of_turn>
The tremor will subside with the cauterization of olive oil, and health will be restored to the cold sickness.</start_of_turn Method of cauterization for Albathir.</start_of_turn
Chapter 67.</start_of_turn
When there are expelled from the body of Albathir bad ulcers, that is, pus-filled pockets, which arise from corrupted thick material.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary in the first place, when these appear, to cauterize over every head of the ulcers with a fine cautery with a twig of myrrh whose extremity is kindled with fire.</start_of_turn
Or as with the root of long aristolochia.
Or as with the cautery of a lens And sometimes when cauterized, the pus comes out of itself in this way: and does not grow: and breaks through the superfluous matter making it thin, and heals from within.
But it must be known that this must be done after the evacuation with a phlebotomy
Regarding the cautery of a vein in a wound
Chapter 58 Many times there happens the flow of blood from a vein that has been cut in a wound, which happens outside, or at the incision of the skin, or by cautery of a limb, and the like: and this makes it difficult to close it off
When this happens to anyone, then do so with your hand at the opening of the vein, and place above it your index finger: and press it firmly, until the blood is held under your finger, and does not come out of it again Then put on the fire a small olive twig, and a great number more: and blow over them, until they are ignited somewhat
Then take from the wound one, or a few, or many, according to the wound and the place, in which the vein has been broken, and place the cautery on the vein itself: and as soon as you have moved your finger away, hold the cautery in place, until the blood is closed off
And if it comes out when you remove your finger from the opening of the vein, and extinguish the cautery, then take another cautery quickly, from those which are prepared in the fire. Do not cease to do this until the blood is severed.
Beware lest you burn the nerve in that place and increase the pain of the ailment You know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to sever it: especially when the artery is large, except with four fingers.
Or with the cautery, as we have said before
Or by extracting it, when it is not extracted For when it is extracted, its extremities are contracted, and the blood is severed.
For when it is extracted, its extremities are contracted, and the blood is severed. Or it is bound with strong ligature.
Or a medicine is placed upon it that has the property of severing blood, and it is bound with a tight constriction
Whoever performs an incision with ligature and tightening with cloth, or with the application of burnings and the like, does not confer on it sufficient pain, except rarely.
If, however, this happens to anyone and there is no physician present, neither medicine: then one should start by placing the index finger over the opening of the vein, as we have said before, and constrict it tightly, until the blood is choked from the upper part of the wound, and over the artery
And the finger should not be moved, but should be held down with cold water or ice always, until the blood solidifies, and increases, and is severed And meanwhile consider what is needed from the cautery, or from medicine
End of First Section.
Book of Surgery by Albucasis, Part II. On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in Wounds, and Similar Procedures.
We have spoken in the first chapter concerning all ailments which are amenable to the cautery of fire and burning medicines, and the occasions when these are necessary, their causes, and their instruments, and the forms of cautery. And following we shall treat of the chapters from the head down to the foot
I proceed in this chapter in the same manner: so as to satisfy the seeker of knowledge concerning this matter Before I begin, it is necessary to tell you what is omitted from this chapter which is found in the first chapter concerning cautery.
Therefore it is necessary to exercise great caution in this procedure, because in this chapter there is great bloodshed with blood vessels, with the result that there is great danger of swelling of the limb, or of wound, or of bursting of an abscess, or of bursting of an artery, or of fracture of a bone, or of similar occurrences, which are all accompanied by tremors, fear, and great loss of blood
I warn you, do not be afraid of this which is contained in hesitation, for indeed it is done in the art of man as in the art of healing the sick.
For such is the man who is enraged with his ailment: he is light in his blood: because of the greatness of his ailment and the length of his suffering
And because of the fear which signifies death.
And because he gives himself up to you, and tells you that he hopes for health, knowing that his ailment is pernicious It is not proper that you consent to those who come to you from outside, whose manner is like this.
Take care, however, lest your eagerness surpass your prudence and your ferocity.
Do not presume anything beyond what is known by science, except that which experience confirms in you the success of your praiseworthy actions.
Make use of the care of all your patients, the prognostication and the indication of that which is convenient for their health.
For in this lies for you the aid to the acquisition of fame and glory, and the memory and praise
May God inspire you, his son, your intellect, and do not take away from you direction and inspiration: for this is in his hand.</start_of_turn>
And I, too, order this Chapter to be distinguished by chapters, according as it follows in the Chapter of Cautery, from the groin to the feet: that all your inquiries concerning what is best and what is needful may be alleviated from you.</start_of_turn>
Of the care of water which accumulates in the heads of children.</start_of_turn>
Chapter I.</start_of_turn>
Know that this illness often happens to children at birth: or when the midwife tightens the head of the child without gentleness.</start_of_turn
And sometimes it happens also from an occult cause which is not known.</start_of_turn
And I have not seen this illness in anyone except children: and concerning all those whom I have seen suffer from it, I have deemed it appropriate to send them away from surgery for this.</start_of_turn
And indeed I saw from among the young ones whose heads were filled with water, and their heads grew great every day, until they could no longer sit upon themselves because of the size of their heads: and their moisture increased until they died.
Or else such moisture accumulates between the skin and bone: or accumulates under the bone upon the flesh.
And the operation in such a case, if there is moisture between the skin and bone, and the swelling is small, then it is necessary to make a single fissure in the middle of the head, equal in length to two knots, until the moisture is cured
This is the form of the sponge.
If therefore the moisture is greatly increased, and the swelling is great, then make two incisions, according to this form
If the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that the edges of the head are open from every side: and the water is squeezed out when you press your hand inwards, and it is not hidden by that: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, according to this method.
And after the incision extract all the moisture
Then keep that clean with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligament, and care for the wound with tension and care.
And do not bind the head with equality
And feed the sick man with little food of little moisture until the limb is healed, and recovered
And another method of incision is that you consider where the swelling appears and the collection of water is great
Wherever the head is more, either in the back or front, or on the right or left.
Go up therefore with the incision where you see the swelling and the discharge of water: and cut that according to what is possible for you.
Observe, that you do not cut an artery, and that there is an increase in the flow of blood, and that the patient dies from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
Concerning the incision of the arteries which are behind the ears
Chapter 2
When something falls into the eyes or chest, and it becomes old, and no remedy is of use: then the last remedy is the incision of those two arteries
It is necessary therefore when you wish to cut them, that you give the patient a sign that he should move his head.
Then scrape the place with rough cloth, so that the arteries appear
Then bind the patient's neck with anything you have.
Then consider where the pulse is beating
And the places where both are located are those which are behind the ears depressed: and they are rarely hidden, except in some people
Then sign with a scar above each: and cut each with a spatula as sharp as possible, cutting through to the bone: and do that through the width of the head
And if you wish, introduce the spatula under the artery, and cut upwards with the incision.
And let the length of the incision be like two joined fingers.
For when the artery is cut, blood flows out with the pulsation, which jumps inside with frequent jumps
If the artery does not appear to the sense, then it is necessary that measures be taken from the thumb to quantify the amount of space of three fingers.
Then signs with the thumb inwards, and find until the bone.
And that which must be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps more or less is emitted from it. All of this is according to the quantity which appears to you from the patient and the refilling of the artery of him.
Then consider concerning the pulse.
Then if anything remains to the bone from the soft part, then cut that, so that there be no cold swelling: then bind the pulse with strips of linen cloth
Then take care of it with unguents, until it is healed
Concerning the extraction of arteries, which are in time.
Chapter 3.
When it happens to a man an ancient headache, or an acute catarrh due to acrid humilities and heat in the lacerations of the times, or an old soda, or bile, or similar things: and it is not to be remedied by the methods of the medical art, then we are experts in these diseases of the arteries of the times, or their cauterization, as we have said
And the manner of the operation in the extraction of these is that the sick man grasps the hair which are in the times, and brings them to the apparent artery in the time.
And itself is often seen by you from your pulse, and rarely hides itself except in a few men, or the coldness of the air.
And if it hides itself from you, then the sick man binds his head with anything he has: then he will rub the place with rough cloth
Until the vapor has reached the place of the warm water, it will manifest itself visibly. Then grasp the sponge, which is already wet before its shape becomes visible.</start_of_turn> Then cleanse the skin with it, and with the help of this [sponge] reach the artery.</start_of_turn>
Then throw in the cautery, and draw out the cautery upwards, until you have withdrawn it from the skin, and made it recede from the tunics beneath it on all sides.</start_of_turn
If the artery is small: then grasp the cautery with the extremity of the hook.</start_of_turn
Then cut from that side as much as the length of its extremities, and tighten, so that the blood flow is not increased.</start_of_turn
For if neither of these things is done, the blood will not ascend entirely.</start_of_turn Then drain from the blood about six ounces, until three remain.</start_of_turn
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to bind the cautery in two places with a strong thread of silk: or with an silken cord, so that it does not burst before the wound has consolidated, and that the blood flow is increased.</start_of_turn
Then cut away the excess, which is between the two ligatures.</start_of_turn
Do this in an hour, or after an hour.</start_of_turn> And if necessary, cauterize the cautery right up to the bone, with the cautery of a knife: until its extremities are cut through, and it remains in the same place as before the work.</start_of_turn
It is better work if the patient has a fever, or their complexion is flushed.
For indeed, the cautery is of the things which hasten the completion of humours.
Therefore is better to cauterize.
And it is necessary after the extraction of arteries, that the cautery be applied to the ancient place: and that a little ball of wool be placed over the top of the cautery.
And after the application of the cautery, care must be taken with dry physicians, which make meat appear to be born, and with cloths, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
If during the work blood flows from the artery, then it is proper to stop the bleeding with the cautery, or to place something over the place with pressure: and clench your hand until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn
If nothing of these things is present to you, then put over the place your finger, until the bleeding stops.</start_of_turn
And bind up the place with cold water, until the pain subsides, and bandage according as is necessary.</start_of_turn
And from this it is easier and more convenient to extract the artery, namely that you cauterize the vein with this cautery which has two blades: and that the sharpness of the two blades be like that of an almond.</start_of_turn
But indeed are they of much less sharpness than two blades.</start_of_turn
For if they are acute, like two blades, they are liable to cause both heat and burn the flesh: and they do not pass through the flesh with speed.</start_of_turn
For in these things there is somewhat of the size of the work, for the hold of the fire is kept in the work, and the flesh is quickly cut through: with this therefore the work is better in every work, and more gentle, and easier.</start_of_turn
And let there be space between the two knives equal to the length of a finger, after you have marked two points with the cautery: and remove both of them ignited upwards, until they reach the bone, and penetrate each other in two places: so that the distance between their extremities is elongated.
For indeed they do not solidify with this inward cautery.
This is the form of the cautery.
Take care that the acute tears do not flow from the eyes excessively
Chapter III
When the tears are thick and flow excessively from the eyes, which are above the external part of the head, and do not cease from the eyes, and cause the face of the patient to be red, and he feels a walking sensation in front of him, like the walking of ants: and his eyes are wide, wet, because they are corroded by the tears: and the palpebrae are inflamed from the intensity of the tears: then the ancients disapproved of their treatment of these and named this treatment "Ense.
And it is necessary to shave the hair in front of the patient's face
Then make three incisions on the forehead, equidistant from each other according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be like two fingers, and let one incision be equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of the lobes of the ears, and the third from the other side: and cauterize from the arteries which are in the two sides. And extend your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let there be space between the incisions equal to the width of three joined fingers. And let there be prepared a sponge or dry cloth with which to soak up the blood
Then introduce the sponge-bag of two acute extremities, whose form follows.
From the incision from the temporal part up to the second incision: and scrape away the whole skin between the two incisions, with the sponge-bag containing the fat, which is above the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the second incision.
Then remove the sponge-bag and introduce another instrument, which is called the acute knife, through the first incision from one blunt side, not from the acute side
This is its form.
And fix its sharp edge towards the fleshy substance with the attached skin, and its blunt side towards the bone: and press it in until it reaches the middle incision; and cut through everything that descends from the head to the eyes: except that which appears on the skin
Then do the same in the middle incision up to the other incision
And when the bleeding has ceased, express from the clots the quantity of blood which has collected. Then put on all the incisions a bandage of coarse cotton, and put over them soaked sponges in wine, and wax or vinegar.
And take care that no swelling should arise.
And on the third day loosen the ligament and give a large infusion with warm water.
Then care for the wound from the basic ointment, and leave the rest of the wounds to heal: until they are healed
Regarding the care of acute tears and catarrh of the eyes from the inside of the head.
Chapter V.
When acute carbuncles or abscesses occur on someone, and the eyes are swollen, small, and the face is pale: and the eyelashes are ulcerated, and hair falls out from the body, and there is sharp pain in the depth of the head, causing pain and sneezing: then take from these signs that the matter and carbuncles do not come from one source, except from many wounds.
And the best treatment in this case is this.
It is to scrape off the front of the head of the patient.
Then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, or on the other side along the breadth, and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple: and extend the incision until you reach the bone: and pull your hand away from the edges of the wound, which move with chewing: until the bone is exposed: and you will drain all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with pieces of cotton wool, or with strips of linen.
Then tie up above with threads: and soak the threads with wine and oil, so that no swelling will occur.
And when you have finished this, and the swelling of the carbuncle has begun to subside: then it is necessary to massage the bone, until new flesh begins to form in it.
And then care for the patient with regular application of poultices which makes new flesh grow: such as if you take from wheat flour two parts, and from colophony four parts: and make from these an ointment, and apply it to the wounds
And concerning the care of the wound in the Golden Age. Chapter VI. Every substance in gold descends, is of four kinds: either a mineral lapis, or like stone, such as iron; or is from a plant, such as cicer and beans; or is a flowing substance, such as water and vinegar, and like these. Or it is an animal.
When any substance descends into gold, either a lapis that does not coexist in the gold or that does not grow in it, it exposes the gold to the air: if the lapis is removed, something is distilled out of the gold that was previously dissolved or mixed with it
Then perform the extraction, and make it adhere firmly with conditions, and seal up the nostrils near the insertion of the plug, after you have placed around the circumference of the ear a barrier of cotton wool, or wool, and extended the gold upwards
Many things depart with such care.
If they do not depart, then perform the extraction with vinegar, that is, subtile pins. Which are of this shape
If they depart with vinegar, it is good.
And if they do not depart, then perform the extraction with a blunt needle of small size. If they do not depart by that, then make a hole in the air, and insert the end of the tube into the ear many times, and seal up what is around the tube with wax mixed with oil, so that there is no air except the tube: then draw out with your hand with great force. Many things depart with that which we have said
If they do not depart in this way: take from barley or from vinegar, that is, prepared gluten, with which birds are caught, and put it in the extremity of the radius after you have enveloped over it the middle part well positioned: then insert it into the ear with ease, after you have dried the gold from moisture
If, therefore, it does not depart with all that we have said, then it is proper to split [the wound] before the callous swelling or spasm occurs.
The method of splitting is as follows: like a phlebotomist I first prick the head of the patient, and from the blood I extract according to the measure of his virtue.
Then I make the patient sit between my hands, and I support his head above, and I find the proper split at the root of the ear at the hollow place of the ear: and let the split be in the shape of a crescent, until you reach the stone: then remove it with the instrument.
Then withdraw the split with your hand at the time, and take care of the wound, until it heals.
If anything falling from the ear is from a seed that grows and swells: then I direct the extraction of it
If it does not obey your order to come out, then grasp a small sponge, fine and subtle, according to this shape.
And manage with it the excision of that kind from the seeds that fall into the ear, and do not make it bleed when you think that it is already softened by the vapor of the ear, until you place the sponge firmly: then remove it with hooks or with fine graspers, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction alleviates it
When water enters the ear, the patient must sneeze at the beginning: and I put the ear to the bottom of some cotton wool: and it is lying over the ear in which the water is.
If it comes out through this, that is good.
And if not: then grasp many stones, according to the length of a finger, tight, fine, and warm them with fire next to it, and let the patient put one of his ears into the ear: and I will sprinkle one foot of his with salt from this side, and I will strike with the other stone on the stone which is in the ear.
Until all the water has drained out, do not cease to do that with stone and stone.
When the water has drained out, take some charcoal or alum and insert one extremity into the fire: and bring the other extremity close to the fire until most of it is consumed by the flame.
Then repeat the process with another piece of alum, and do this many times until all the water has drained out: and extract it with a needle as prescribed in the stone
In the extraction of an animal that is within the stone, such as a flea or anything like it, care for it as I have said in the explanation.
But if it is a large body that appears to the sense: then manage its extraction with the hands and needles: and it will be easier for all who hold it in the fire.
When the worms are generated in the fire, when you have cared for them as we have said in the explanation of distillation, and in the treatise on distillations, and your care has not availed: then it is necessary to uncover the fire.
If anything appears there from the worms: then extract it with the hands or with fine needles.
If nothing appears there: take a needle whose shape is like this, narrow below and wide above: and insert the lower extremity into the fire according to the capacity of the sick person: then draw it out with that strong suction.
Do this many times until all the worms have drained out.
If they do not obey you to come out, then encircle the needle with lead, as I have said in the stone
If they do not depart with it as we have said: then perform distillations which the ancients are experts in in the handling of worms: and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be such as when you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument whose form is depicted here
Like water, make it from silver or lead, lower it tightly, in which there is a small hole, wide above.
Let the driving force which is in the curve of the tube be made of air centred
And if you wish, take a sphere, and put it at the end of the tube with a cover of cotton: then pour oil, or gum, or whatever you wish of these medicines into the tube: and let it be in the ear: then introduce the sphere with the cotton above, and press it with your hand cautiously, until the oil is driven into the curve of the ear, and the patient feels it inside: and whatever is poured into the ear will be warmed with fire immediately: and beware that nothing which is distilled is in the ear when it is cold: for medicines do not tolerate this.
Of the care of the accident of the ear.
Chapter VII.</start_of_turn>
Whenever some children come out of the mothers' wombs unpierced.
And sometimes it happens to some people that their ear is operated on in meat by a wound, or is born with a cleft in it
And this operation is sometimes done in the deep cavity of the ear, which does not follow custom: and sometimes it happens outside the cavity of the ear a little, and follows custom.
Whatever happens in the depth of the ear, which the sight does not grasp, is difficult to heal in many arrangements.
It is necessary that you put the ear of the patient in the sun and gaze into it: then, if you see the apparent removal of hair, open the ear with a fine spatula, whose form is this which follows, so that its extremity is in that part which has a small breadth, and that some part of it is acute: and the rest of the spatula should be soft on both sides, so that it does not harm the ear
If, therefore, the hair is of the nature of that which grows in the flesh of the ear: then hold the ear with a fine hook, and cut through it with ease until the whole flesh is removed.</start_of_turn>
If the hair is in the depth of the ear: then grasp a thin, soft stick, and warm it with fire: then insert it into the ear.</start_of_turn>
If you sense hair with this, which the patient has with great suffering of hearing, try to open it with ease: and be careful, lest you injure the nerves of the ear.</start_of_turn>
Then put in the ear a plaster according to the quantity of the breadth of the hole which you have made in the unguent of Egypt: do this for a few days, until you are secure of the consolidation of the wound.</start_of_turn>
Or take plaster, and mix it with rose water, and sprinkle upon it powdered gypsum, and use it.</start_of_turn
If you see the ear already blackened: then you must extract the plaster, and allow it to be covered with another plaster, which you mix with powdered gypsum, which is made with rose water, until the swelling has subsided: then care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If blood flow increases: then immerse a sponge, or pack the area with cold water, and place above it a bandage: and employ the remaining treatment which separates the blood flow as described in the treatise on distillation.
On the care of the eyelids.
Chapter VIII. These Altheli which happen in the eyelids are either wet or dry
It is necessary therefore to keep the edges moist with tears or with an ointment: or with a single [ointment] and remove them with a sponge from their roots
Then place over the place a soft cheese
If blood flows from the eye, then cauterize the blood vessel with a fine lancet.
And the cauterization is better after the incision
Many of them return when something remains from their roots
And when cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return
On the care of the great eyelid of the eye
Chapter IX
Many things happen in the eyelids something which assimilates the Crandinum in its hardness and its toughness, and because of this it is called the Great one: and it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids
The operation therefore is as follows: if there is a Great one proceeding from the eye, which appears from the eyelid and moves to every part, and its resolution is easy
Find therefore above the edge a fissure for the width.
Then cleanse the wound from all sides with ease, until it is satisfied.
Then suspend the wound with one thread, and cut it off.</start_of_turn>
If indeed it is not prepared for cutting, except after you have pierced the lid with a small incision, then it will harm the patient in some way.</start_of_turn>
If the wound is large: then gather it together with sutures: and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn
And if it is small, it will not cause you any harm.</start_of_turn
The ointment will restore it and make the wound flexible.</start_of_turn
And if it is great and extends downwards towards the inner parts of the ear towards the surface inwards: then pierce the lid and suspend the large blood vessel with one thread: except that you will not need an incision, and press the wound from all sides.</start_of_turn
And if the lid is elongated by the incision, it will not cause any harm.</start_of_turn
Then wash the eye from the incision of the great vessel with salt water: and care for the place with it that is flexible, until the patient is healed.</start_of_turn
On the care of the eyelashes.</start_of_turn
Chapter X.</start_of_turn>
The eyelash is a gland that is generated in the upper eyelid: and mostly it happens to children: and it weighs down their eyes, and causes them to shed tears in the mornings, and they cannot see the sunlight because of this, because the tears run down their faces always, and over their eyes while they sleep, and their eyelashes are always wet under their eyebrows because of the swelling: and the prominence of the eyelash is seen in the eye, and when you touch the place with your fingers, you feel the eyelash between your fingers.</start_of_turn
And thus is the manner of his operation, that he place the patient's head in your lap.
Then grasp a towel, and prepare it in such a way that you make from it a circle according to the quantity that contains Axirnath from all sides
Then place him upon the [incision], and press with your fingers from all sides, so that Axirnath is gathered in the middle of the circle
Then find in the middle thereof moisture with a sponge, and do not make a wound wider than that which is made in phlebotomy in depth.
Or it is necessary that you find the whole skin, until you reach Axirnath in many positions, because Axirnath comes out of the wound according to the shape of the white pith of barley.
Extract therefore the said towel which you have infiltrated between your fingers outwards: and you will move your hand to the right and left, until it is scattered: and take care, lest you add to the wound, that you do not reach the eye with the sponge, and stain it
But if indeed Axirnath does not appear at the beginning of the wound, you will add a little to the wound with ease, until Axirnath comes out.
Then extract the said towel, as we have said.
Then soak the towel in vinegar and water, and place it over the place, and bind it with wool threads.
And from men there are some who anoint salt, and place it in the hollow of the wound, so that the remainder of the moisture may liquefy.
Then care for it until it heals
But if there arises in the place of the after-boil a thick pus, then care for it with soothing poultices, until it heals.
Regarding the methods of treating the eye when the eyelids are softened, so that the eye does not bulge excessively.
Regarding the methods of treating the eye when the eyelids are softened, so that the eye does not bulge excessively.
When additional hairs grow in the eyelids surrounding the eye, and when they are excessive: then they harm the eye, and cause the methods of treatment to fail, such as excessive tears, softening of the eyelids, and inflammation, until such time as the cause of the eye's destruction is eliminated.
And Ataxmir of the eye is cured according to four methods. Or by cautery with fire.
Or with acute medicine, as is mentioned previously in the chapter on cautery
Or by incision and suture
Or by cautery, as I shall say
It is necessary to place the head of the patient on your knee
Then grasp the lower eyelid of the eye with your left hand
If it turns easily, that is good.
And if not: insert the needle through the fold of the lower eyelid, where the hair is, and pass the needle with the thread close to the base of the hair, and draw the thread up to the upper eyelid with the eyelid, and join the needle to the surrounding tissue.
Then find inside the eyelid under the added hair a space corresponding to the greater and lesser tears
Then draw out the thread and put under the eyelid a small piece of cotton or gauze: then sign over the eye with cautery, so that it looks like the figure of a myrtle leaf
The wound must be properly closed, so that it forms a figure according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for it is altered in different people.
The wound must be properly closed, so that it forms a figure according to the quantity of the eyelid and the elevation of the border: for it is altered in different people. When the suture has been found over two lines which you have marked, and you have commenced from the greater lacrimal gland up to the lesser, and there is one opening near the natural hair, as is the thickness of a radius.
Then introduce the needle through one of the two angles of the skin. Then remove the whole. Then gather together with the suture two lips, with a needle and a thin thread: and stop the bleeding, and make fast that which is superabundant from the threads over two superciliums, with some useful substance, if you wish to do so: or if not, do not worry about it.
Then remove the suture and the thread for three days, or four: afterwards care for it. And if you wish, remove the wound without suture, and care for it, which will dry up and contract
For the eyelid is elevated at the sealing of the wound and the gathering of its parts: but the future is better.
This is the way which the old men of Atarax taught to cure it.
There is great solicitude over the sick man, and it comes from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another way is in Atarax: and it is that the sign on the eyelid should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then lift the eyelid with three separate hooks, or aggregated, according to the form which follows, and then cut away what is superfluous with small scissors, according to the same form, with equal incision.
If, however, it is not possible to hold the hook, and it does not equal: then grasp the point where the thread lies and introduce it into the middle of the figure: and introduce another thread near the greater lacrimal, and another near the smaller lacrimal: and gather together the threads between your fingers with equality
Then lift your hand for elevation equally: and lift the skin above that which is signed with the mark of the limb, as we have said.
Then gather together the two lips of the wound with suture: and care for it until it is healed.
If, however, swelling should arise at the incision or wound: stop that swelling with powder, and with similar things, from the sponges which are sitting.
And when the eyelids are also swollen, as their hair is converted.
Concerning the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is, that you cover the eyelid, and split the wound which is inside, according to what I have said.
Then make two incisions, or two small sticks underneath: whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of them is less than the width of the pupil: and I put in the stitches at the extremities from both parts where you have the thread
Then gather together both things with slightness over that which is superfluous from the eyeball, and string two threads from both parts tightly, and let go of them every few days The skin, when tightly closed, will die, darken, and putrefy until it falls away by itself.
If delayed, then cut it open with scissors.</start_of_turn>
Then care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
When it has consolidated, elevate the eyelid: and do not pierce the hair.</start_of_turn
And this is the form of two incisions which you make according to this figure and their quantity in length and breadth.</start_of_turn
Regarding the elevation of hairy punctures in the eye with a needle.</start_of_turn
Chapter XII.</start_of_turn>
The operation in this case is to take a fine needle and introduce it under the silk thread, which is soft.</start_of_turn Then join the ends together, and make knots at each end with a fine loop: and let the length of the thread be equal to one palm.</start_of_turn
Then make another fine loop of thread under this one in a short space, and knot the ends if you wish.</start_of_turn
Then put the patient's head on your lap, and let it be near the heel so that the operation is visible: because it is a slight operation, or even a minute.</start_of_turn
Then insert the needle with the loop at the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you have pulled out the natural hair.</start_of_turn
Then pull out the hair until above the loop: and insert into the loop the tip of the hair: if there is one, or two, or three, not more.</start_of_turn
Then draw your hand with that which is towards the elbow, until the hair escapes with its root adhering to the eyelashes with the natural hair.
Then draw your hand with that which is towards the elbow, until the hair escapes with its root adhering to the eyelashes with the natural hair.
If the hair is short, then either associate it with a long hair from the natural hair and elevate it with that: or dismiss it and let it grow out again, and then elevate it.
Concerning the care of the eyelash which occurs in the upper eyelid.
Chapter XIII.
When this happens to the eye, it is called a Leporina.
This eyelash is either natural or accidental
Accidental, therefore, is from the consolidation of a wound, or section, or cautery, and things like these
And the method of operation in this is that you find the consolidation and separate its lips, and put between them a bit of lint from linen, and bind it, until it is healed
And do not use in the treatment anything which excites and contracts: for if you do, the eyelash will deteriorate more than before: rather use those things which soften, such as barley flour: and embroil with water, in which be dissolved aloes, poppy seeds: and oil of almond, which is liquefied with some oil: and mix with this lint, and care with this.
Your store of remedies is, that you may be prepared with every ingenuity, that it may not be shaken, following the form which was in the first place.
This operation, as we have said, is not without some rectification of the Alxatrati, that it may not return to its former shape altogether Regarding the care of the Alxatrati which is in the lower eyelid, and is a swelling or contraction above to the right and left.
Chapter 123.
This swelling of the Alxatrati which is in the lower eyelid, is what is truly called the Alxatrati.
And it is natural, and is accidental.
And it is accidental from a wound, or a tear, or a burn, and such like things.
And the way of operating in this is that you take a needle, in which there is a doubled thread, and you pass it under the meat, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal gland up to the right lacrimal gland, until the thread reaches the two extremities of the meat.
Then stretch the meat upwards with the needle, and cut the vein with a wide blade
If, therefore, the figure of the eyelid returns to its former state as it should be, that is good
And if not, grasp the edge, and put it into the wound, and close it with it: and find two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the extremities of the two incisions go from two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle: until when they meet they form the figure of the two letters together, which is the Greek letter lambda
And then remove that piece of meat by as much as the width of its acute lower end, from that which follows the eyelid
Then gather the separated parts: such as with a thread of wool.
Then care for them as we have said, with soothing medications, and ointments, until they are healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the Alexatrati occurs from a wound, and the suture, or cautery: then it is necessary that you find the wound flat under the eyelashes, even as before.</start_of_turn
Then separate between two lips with ointment, as we have said.</start_of_turn
And the sum of the sermon about the care of the Alexatrati, when it is above, or below, is that you should care for it in that operation, according to the form of the Alexatrati.</start_of_turn>
For itself, there are many variations in form: and the prudent artist prepares the ingenuity in any way that is possible for it, until it returns to its natural form, or almost so, and the patient himself, according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in many arrangements.</start_of_turn>
About the adhesion of the eyelashes to the conjunctiva, or the cornea.</start_of_turn
Chapter XV.</start_of_turn
When this consolidation happens to many people, it is like the upper eyelid to stick to the white of the eye, and to prevent it from doing its natural operations.</start_of_turn
Therefore you must introduce the edge of the radius under the eyelid, and raise it upwards: or extend it with a needle: then cut the adhesion with a fine sponge, which is not with the sharpness of the knife, but rather blunt, so that it does not irritate the patient during the operation, and that it does not move the eye from its natural position: and that the incision be like that which you would make to scratch that adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is completely healed.</start_of_turn
Pour water into the eye, while the water washes it out: or distill it into it from a vessel made of lead, from vinegar dissolved in water.
Then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a strip of linen: and place above the eye wool infused with alum or gypsum: and after three days use the vessel, and with the solidarities, until the eye is healed.
Regarding the incision of the nail and the prominence of the carnis lachrymarum.
Chapter XVI.
You know that the nail exists in two ways. It is nervous: and is similar to hard sand, thin.
Or it is not nervous, similar to frozen white moisture: which when it touches iron, or you try to grasp it with a hook, it breaks, and does not remain in the nail
Both of these species do not begin, except for the greater lacrimal gland, until it has gone slowly, until it covers the whole area, and hinders the light, and the movement of the eye
And the way to operate on its incision is: as you place your thumb on your cheek.
Then open its eyes, and lift its eyelid with your hand
Then gather the nail with a hook of few doublings, and extend it upwards
Then take the needle, and introduce it through the hair of the horse, and blood, or urine: and make the thread strong, and double the end of the needle slightly, and fix it in the middle of the nail: and pierce the nail with the needle, and ligate the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards: and remove the hair surrounding the pupil, as if you were trimming the nail until its end
Then strike the remainder to the root of the lacrimal bone with a fine spatula, or with small forceps: and discharge the natural flesh of the lacrimal bone, so that it does not obstruct the course of the tears.
And when the nail extends with a single claw: or with a thread, as we have said.
Then it is to be scraped away with a gentle spatula, of which this is the form
Beware, lest you touch the tough membrane of the corneal tunicle, and cause a break therein, and perforate the pupil
Then after the incision, pour upon the eye some salt dissolved in water, or take some from a sieve made of lead, and discharge it until tomorrow.
Then care for it with what is necessary, until it is healed If the nail is not sensitive and does not have soft tissue to impede its insertion, nor does it protrude in it, then it is to be treated with many medicines, and will be healed as I have said in the discourse
If you wish to make an incision, then open the eye of the patient, and take a fine spatula, gentle and delicate in its sharpness, of this form
And remove the nail from above with care and precision
If you see that it is becoming rarefied and crumbling, and that it has been crushed in the ratio, then pour out from your hour glass into the eye from a sieve made of lead, or from a sieve of red lead, or from salt: and bathe the eye until tomorrow
Then repeat the operation above until the whole of it is healed
Unless the contrary be the case, if there be a callous swelling in the eye, let it be discharged and the eye be cared for until it is healed. And then repeat the operation until the reason has ceased, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
But the prominence of the caruncle of the lacrimal gland, if it causes great pain in the eye, is to be severed with a single incision, and not to make the last incision, lest the tear duct be injured.</start_of_turn>
And then let there be a sticking in the tear duct of a red stuff, or made from alum, until it is healed.</start_of_turn As for the incision of the Algardene, and the native tissue in the eye.</start_of_turn
Chapter XVII.</start_of_turn>
It sometimes happens in the eyes of men that a red mass of flesh is formed, either superposed or underlying, which covers the pupil, approaches or tightens over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outwards: and it consumes the pink of the pupil.</start_of_turn
And the operation for this is also to put the diseased head in your hand.</start_of_turn
Then open his eyes and collect all the flesh with hooks which are suitable for this: and hold it with one hand.
And then cut the flesh at first, until all of it is finished with a knife.</start_of_turn
And burn away from the eye, so that you do not harm it during the operation: and let your incision be like that of the nail, which we have mentioned in the incision of the nail: or with small forceps, with which the hair is collected, as it will be after this head.</start_of_turn
When the incision is complete and the entire garden of nerves is restored, then put the eye out from the salt that is crumbled: or distill it into the form of red powder, and similar things are done by physicians with corrosive medicines: and put over the eye a compress of alum with vinegar or urine: that it may be protected from the heat of the afterburn.
When anything remains of the nerves and the blood is warm, and the afterburn is imminent: then withdraw the eye and care for it with that which will soothe the afterburn.
Then repeat over it with the operation until it is healed.
And do the like with meat added which has happened in the eye of this kind.
It is true that one must be wary of the natural disposition or any accidental misfortune, working with iron: and do not insert your hand into any such operation until you are certain that the limb can tolerate it.
Of the collection of the eye-fat.
Chapter XVIII. The fat surrounding the eye is of a red color and covers the eye: it hinders the operation of the water and weakens the eye with the length of the days.
It is necessary therefore that you should first consider whether the eye in which the fat is, is strong and has no other ailment besides the fat: then collect the fat from it
And it is necessary to take great care that you do not put your head in danger.
Then suspend those veins with one or two sutures according to your prudence: and let the suture be of fine thread, two together in one body, or two separate threads of equal size.
Then collect with fine forceps those one or two which are under the skin, and remove the blood hour after hour, until the matter has receded: and take heed lest you damage the eye with the extremities of the forceps.
Let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation lest you cause harm to them
And when you have completed your work, then pour into the eye a cold or red sponge: that its sharpness may consume what remains of the clot.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then close the eye with wax, which will quieten the pain of the eye: and leave it for a few days, until the pain has subsided: and keep it from the cold: and repeat the procedure above until it is healed.
This is the form of the forceps.
(The provided text does not include the next sentence, so I cannot translate it.)
Chapter XIX.
Doctors call the swelling of the eye Arissa Fistula, which they cure with cautery or with acute medicine that burns, according to what is necessary in each case.
And if it does not heal, then there is no wisdom in it: except that you find pus on the edge of its swelling, and extract all the moisture which is in it and pus, until the bone is exposed
When the bone is thus exposed, and you see corruption or blackness, then close it with an instrument of this shape
And this is called the closing of the head
Make it of iron wire, and let its head be round like a nut, which is pierced with the point of a needle, or with the point of a needle and a fine awl: and put it on the place of the corrupted bone Then withdraw it between your fingers, and touch your hand lightly, until you know that no damage has been done: and do it often.
Then withdraw it between your fingers, and touch your hand lightly, until you know that no damage has been done: and do it often. Then restore the limb with the help of astringents and haemostatic agents.</start_of_turn>
If, however, consolidation has taken place in the part, and swelling has occurred therein, and the flow of blood has been interrupted: and it remains for forty days, and does not recover, and does not soften, and does not become red, then you know that it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if not, then it is not in that limb, except by reducing the swelling to the size of a bean, according to this form.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary to grasp the bone with a second hand, with a pointed instrument or with acute medicine: and when it is grasped, then take hold of the limb according to this form, whether the handle be of iron, triangular: and the wood of it be a protracted pyramid until the extremity, like water.</start_of_turn
Then place it over the bone itself: and let it be near the tear-duct: and pull your hand away from the eye a little.</start_of_turn
Then withdraw your hand with the limb, until it penetrates the bone, and you feel it to be weak: by this you will know that something has escaped from there, when you keep your hand on your nose.</start_of_turn
Therefore restore the limb with astringents and haemostatic agents, as I have taught you.</start_of_turn
When swelling has occurred in the part, and the limb has become hardened: then the matter which had flowed outwards returns to the nose: thus it is more gentle over the wound.</start_of_turn
¶ On the reduction of the swelling of the Eye.</start_of_turn> Chapter XX.
When the eye emits with its entirety, and does not subside in any liquid remedy, neither diminished: then it is necessary to lance the diseased part: then perform phlebotomy: afterwards place poultices upon the wound without incision, but with suction.
Then put upon the eye an ointment which is made from acacia, and aloe, and oil, and beeswax.
Then bind the eye above upon a pad with many feathers.
And the manner of feathers is: that you take down feathers, many, and fold every feather from four sides: make from these many: then put one upon another, according to the quantity that the eye needs: then bind over them with a hard cloth of strong structure
And repeat the poultices with suction without incision.
Then remove the poultices, and keep the eye closed day and night.
If however the ligament is again softened, then it is necessary to bind it much: then remove the ligament after a day and a night, as we have said
If therefore you see the eye again become swollen with swelling, it is good: and if not, then repeat the pad, and the feathers, and the binding, and the poultices, until it is healed.
¶ On the incision of the fifth part of the tunica.
Chapter XXI.
When there occurs a rupture in the tunica of the pupil, then it emits and proceeds outside the eyelids like a grain of the pupil, and becomes swollen in the shape of a man because of this, and the eye is incisored for this: then the operation in this is as we have narrated: and it is that you introduce the needle into the root of the pupil from the lower part to the upper part.
Then introduce another needle there where the double thread is at the tear duct, and make it penetrate: and withdraw the first needle according to its own arrangement.
Then pierce the place of the double thread and ligate with it a part of the vein around the needle: and tighten it much
Then withdraw the needle and place above the eye a wool plug in the abscess: and withdraw it, until the thread comes out with the vein.
Then care for the eye with it, which soothes it, until the wound is healed.
And when the vein is tied from every part with a circle of cloth, until the eye regains great prominence.
Then pierce with a fine sponge, which reaches the depth of the eye, and let out the moisture of the abscess, and let the eye descend, and mix: then tighten it, until it is healed
(End of translation
(End of translation
This ailment which is called Alcomnati, is not, in fact, except for health, which arises in the eye, similar to descending water, and is not itself.
And the method of treatment for this is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat, or directly
Then take hold of his head with your hands from two parts, and move it, until you see health rise up to the lower part of his eye
Then keep it still, and do not let it descend, and open the light: and he will see the infirm as he saw before: and if it does not descend downwards, you know that it is water.
If the descent of the bowels is not prepared as we have said, then sit the patient between your hands. Then grasp the sponge gently and find where it is above the fatty tissue around the junction of the joint with the cornea in the crown, until the bowels issue forth
When they have issued, then pour into the eye lukewarm water in which you have mixed honey: or water in which you have pounded barley and honey; then care for it with the rest of the treatment until the patient is healed
As for the care of the water which descends into the eye, or a cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have said concerning the kinds of water which are useful for irrigation, and which are declared and recommended, then grasp that which is suitable for the health of the patient.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands square, opposite the light, near the heel: and fix his eye well, and bind it tightly: then with your right hand grasp the eyelid of the eye which is opposite the eye which has the water in it, if the eye which has the water in it is the left eye: or with your left hand if the eye which has the water in it is the right eye.
Then grasp your right hand with the sponge, if the eye is left: or your left hand if the eye is right.
Then place the edge of the sponge near the crown over the length of the radius in the white of the eye apparent to the lesser lacrimal gland: then press the sponge with force: and you will draw back your hand until the sponge penetrates the membrane of the eye: and you will feel that the sponge has reached the bottom of the eye
And you must measure the distance of the descent of the sponge to the depth, the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black of the eye: and this is the circumference of the eye
You will see it in the very pupil of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal tunic.
Then put the almond right up to the place where there is water.
Then press the lower part of the eye with one hand after the other
If therefore water descends immediately, then the diseased part swells up immediately over that which opened the pupil, and the almond in the eye
Then rest for a little while.
If water descends again, then take out the almond once more, except that which has come out already.
When it has settled down, and does not ascend: then draw out the almond easily: and you will turn your hand slowly Then dissolve in water something of the clear salt of a pearl: and wipe it away with that when the eye is closed
Then put over the whole eye a bandage, or soaked lint with rose oil, and alum: and bind it with this to the healthy eye.
And we, and those who are with us at this time, put on the eye a plaster of beaten alum with egg white.
If it does not admit the almond to enter the eye because of its hardness, because it is from a man whose eye is hard and dry: then you must take sponge-wool, which is called Alberid, of this shape
Keep it closed with this as well, and do not touch the hand in the wound: and do not do anything else except to make the almond enter the shallow part of the eye
Then insert the almond as we have said
And besides that, the patient is prepared in the middle of the room, having been placed upon his back in a dark chamber: and he is to be guarded from all movement, and from coughing: and food is to be given him of that which will soothe the natural qualities of his body. He must not move his right or left hand at all.
And let the ligament be kept in its accustomed position until the third day. Then loosen it in that dark chamber, and let him experience its effect: and make him drink something.
Then reduce the ligament until the seventh day.
And it is not fitting that he should do this at the hour of care, or immediately after the incision: indeed it is better that others should do this, because the water ascends quickly through the aspect which is inflamed
If, however, a cold abscess occurs: then it is fitting that you open the eye before the seventh day: and close it when the abscess has subsided: then give him food by mouth, which will restore his appetite in those few days, even though he is in that dark chamber.
Then let him gradually go out of the room, and return to his home.
And know that in this state the pupil is not excused from the vision of others: then indeed he will hear about the operation
And indeed it has come to our attention from some of the people of Alayrach that there is a perforation in the magdano of Alayrach through which water flows out
But indeed we do not see anyone in our land who has done this, or have read of it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that this is something new
And these are the shapes of the species from great things, that they remain above those who ignore them.
Be like air itself: and their extremities are like those of a triangle with the base equal to the height, and the apex acute
Great things.
On the care of the newly born flesh in the nose.
Chapter 24
When meat of various kinds is born in the nose, there is something which is assimilated from scorpions of many feet: from this is cancer, stone, brown flesh: from this is what is soft flesh, not brown flesh
In these things which are soft from the said meats, not fraudulent, neither cancerous, it is necessary that you make the diseased part rest between your hands opposed to the solid object, and open the pores of the nose, and throw out the mucus from them: then draw them out to the exterior, and cut away what you have seen from them with a fine sharp knife from one side until you know that the whole flesh has been removed
And if anything remains from that from whose excision is not possible: then remove that with a fine instrument with ease, until nothing remains of it.
If blood is dominant, or there is a thick pus: then oppose to it that which is appropriate: or that there are malignant abscesses, then burn them properly until the blood is shed, and remove all the flesh
Then spit in the nose after the incision of the bone, and water, or liquid.
If the nose is opened, and moisture proceeds from it up to the palate, then you know that it is healed
If, however, the moisture has not penetrated, according to what is required, then you know that it is within the flesh that has been born in the upper bones of the nose, which does not come out with the incision of the instrument.
Therefore it is necessary to introduce a thread of linen which has some thickness to it, and to make knots in it: and to put between each knot the quantity of digit, or less: and the infirm person will draw out one extremity of the thread through the nose with a handle, or in any way he can manage, until it has reached the depth, and has gone beyond the soft parts
And many people do the same thing as this boy Attom in schools: and it is an easy thing for him who wishes it.
Then place two extremities of the thread, one which comes out through the nose, and the other which remains in the nose.
And then bind up the wound of the flesh with the knots which are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is together with the knots of the thread.
Then draw out the thread: and put in the nose after washing the blood out with a bandage of Egyptian unguent: do this three days, or more, until the unguent has eaten away all that remains of the flesh.
Then put in the end of the matter in the nose a lead weight, for a few days, until it is healed.
But if further care is needed, use this also
For making the head-sweat, with which are distilled oils and other medicines into the nose, do this from silver, or from an air-vessel: which is like a small lamp, open like a snail, and its substance is like that of balm
If one wishes to make a closed cannula, like a tube.
If one wishes to make a closed tube for the head of a wound, let it be full, with a handle at its back, so that you may grasp it, when you heat it in oil, or whatever you wish from succus, and fluid substances.
This is the shape of the instrument. Of the care of the nose
Chapter XXV
Many times the Thelul of the nose is born at the extremity of the nose, and it grows large and increases with the days, until it becomes the aspect of the face.
And for this reason it is necessary, that in the beginning of its appearance you should cut away all of it
Then put upon it a plaster, or cautery, or burning medicine which is in its place
If therefore its incision is delayed until it has grown large, then consider, if it is stony, hard, of the color of soot, with little sensation: then do not touch it with iron: for it is cancerous.
Many times indeed wax flows from the apostema which has happened from it a great malice over the substance which had it
And if the apostema is soft to the touch, not of the color of soot, and wax flows from it because of the possibility of incisions throughout its entirety, then evacuate the infirm person and cut it without fear, without hesitation: and care for the place with oil which exudes and contracts, until it is healed
Of the stitching of the nose, and the lip, and the ear.
Chapter XXVI
You know that when solution of continuity is accomplished in a cartilaginous substance, it does not suffice in that operation, except in certain individuals.
It is necessary therefore when anything has happened to something else from that [cause], as for example when a wound is accompanied by blood: then join together the two edges of the wound with suture: then care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
And if the solution of continuity has been accomplished and the lips are already separated, and each part is sound: then it is necessary to strip off all the surrounding parts from the surface, until the bleeding has ceased.</start_of_turn>
Then join together the two lips with suture, and tighten them, and spread over it dragon's blood and pounded olive oil: and place over the powder a piece of sponge and any other firm substance: and leave it bound for two days, or three.</start_of_turn>
Then loosen it and give the medicine: and leave it until the stitches dissolve by themselves.</start_of_turn> Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.</start_of_turn>
The manner of suturing is that you join together the solution of continuity, or with an awl, as we have said in the suture of the belly: or join together the solution with thread, as you have been told.</start_of_turn
Regarding the extraction of the nodes of the lips.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XXVII.</start_of_turn> Many people in their inner lips have swellings like hard grains of grass: and some of them are small, and some are large.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to cover the lips, and find over every node of it, and suspend it with a needle, and cut away from all sides.</start_of_turn
Then apply the compress to the place where the incision has been made, until the blood has clotted.
Then apply the compress with the vinegar, and care for the place with it, where there is a haemostasis, until the wound is healed.</start_of_turn>
After the excision of the flesh from above the jawbone.</start_of_turn>
The head is held back.</start_of_turn Many veins are born from the jawbone, which the ancients call abuluss.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore to suspend the veins with a hook: or to tie them with forceps, and to cut them at their root, and to let the blood run out, or the blood clot.</start_of_turn
Then put over the place where the incision has been made, or some other powdered astringents, dried.</start_of_turn
And if the flesh returns to its place after the treatment, because many veins have returned, then cut the vein again at a second place, and cauterize it: for it does not return after being cauterized.</start_of_turn
About the reason for the tooth with the iron.</start_of_turn
The head is held back.</start_of_turn
When they gather together on the surfaces of the tooth from the inner and outer parts, and between the gums, rough, hard, and sometimes when they decay, and the gums become soft and yellow, until corruption reaches the jaw, and teeth are formed from it.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore to make the patient sit between your hands, and hold his head in your lap, and grasp the tooth and the gum, where you see the cortices, like sand: until something remains from it, and do the same with the blackening, and the yellowing, and the yellowing of the gums.</start_of_turn
If anything is to be removed from the beginning which is the cause of the disease, it is good; and if not, repeat over the cause every other day, the second day, and the third day, until the study reaches the end of the matter concerning which you inquire.
You know that there are diverse kinds of surgical instruments of various forms: according to the way you prepare the operation which you are about to perform: for, the instrument which bites from below is different from the one which bites between the teeth, according to other forms.</start_of_turn>
And these forms of instruments are prepared for you, which you require.</start_of_turn>
Of tooth extraction.
Chapter XXX.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary to cure the tooth from its pain with all possible ingenuity, and then to eradicate it.</start_of_turn
It is not in any way possible to replace it when it is eradicated: because it is a sublime substance: until such time as there is no excuse for eradicating it, then it is necessary to compel the patient to eradicate it, so that it will strengthen, and confirm to you that the tooth is painful.</start_of_turn
Many people indeed suffer from the patient's pain, and think that it is in the tooth itself and eradicate it: but the pain does not depart, until the diseased tooth is eradicated.</start_of_turn
For indeed we saw it happen in the case of phlebotomy.</start_of_turn
When it is confirmed to you that the tooth itself is painful, then you must sacrifice around the tooth with sponge sticks, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is separated from all sides: then move the tooth itself with your fingers, or with fine forceps at first slowly, until you have loosened it.</start_of_turn
Then place the large forceps at a good location in that area, and the head of the patient between your knees: as you have kept it well, so it will not move. Then draw out the tooth following the rule of correctness, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then grasp some of those instruments and introduce it under it from all sides with ease, and try to move it, as you did at first
If, however, the tooth is perforated or corroded: then it is necessary to fill the hole with a piece of cloth: and tie it with a thread of fine radius, so that it does not break during your constriction with the forceps.
It is also necessary to cauterize around the gums from all sides much.
And keep your courage, so as not to break it, and remain firm with some of it remaining, and bring back the patient from this pain which is greater than its first pain
Beware, do not do what the phlebotomists do in their frenzy, and over-confidence in your ability to eradicate it, beyond what we have said.
Many indeed make them worse for great illnesses of the body which are more difficult to break, and remain with all their roots, or some of them: or that they extract it with some of the teeth of the jaw: as we have often seen Then it should be bound up after its eradication with wine, or with vinegar and salt. If there is a flow of blood from the place (for many indeed such things happen), then there is something from the sponge, and introduce it into that place: and if not, cauterize it if it does not bring you the sponge.
The forceps are of fine make, their long handles, short thumbs, broad blades, so that they do not double when laid upon the tooth: like the arms of wrestlers, until, when they are bound with the tooth, they do not hurt themselves, neither do they double: short handles. They are of iron or forged from the center, their handles directed straight; and in their extremities are teeth, some of which enter into some, and bind the constriction loosely, strongly.
And sometimes their extremities become like the beak of a bird called a ciconia, and they are strong constrictions
Of the extirpation of teeth, and the extraction of fractured mandibular bones.
Chapter One
When there remains in the extirpation of a tooth which has fractured something, then it is necessary to place butter on the socket for one or two days, until the place is softened: then introduce into the cavity either an algi or forceps, whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called a ciconia
The form of these forceps is as follows.
Their extremities are made like a file or an awl
If, however, they do not obey you at the extraction with these forceps, then you must place the gauze over the root, and remove all the flesh, and introduce the small hook, which is of this shape
Let the handles be short, the blades broad: and do not be wet, lest they break
If the root comes out through that, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to bite with these instruments again which have this shape
The form of the first triangle of the extremity, in which there is some bulk.
The shape of the triangular extremity is slight
It is also made with this instrument having two branches, of which this is the shape. And with other instruments and materials which proceed in the ratio of teeth.
It is also made with this instrument which is similar to a large bowl, of this shape, the triangular extremity twisted, in which there is some bulk, so that it does not break: and let it not be soaked
You know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly the rest of the instruments do not fit together, and the skilled craftsman, skilled in his art, discovers by himself the appropriate instrument for each operation and its difficulties.
Because of the various types of materials which they are made of, as the ancients did not speak of these instruments.
If however the bone breaks from the mandible, or from any other bones of the mouth, or becomes putrid: then to look upon it in its place with the instrument and forceps which I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and to grasp it with the hand, whose shape is this
There is some bulk in it gradually, so that it is bound, or is held with the bone, and does not flee and slip away, until the bone is driven out: and restore the place with the physicians who are suitable for this
But if there is a small putrefaction in the bone, then remove it from its putrefaction and care for it, until it is healed
Of the closure of the teeth which are prominent over others.
Chapter two.
When teeth deviate from their natural course, a wound is formed in that way: and especially when this happens in women and girls, namely in those who are unwed.
For if a tooth has been born after another tooth, and has not found its place, or if it is possible to close it, or to file it down: then it must be extracted. And if it is attached to another tooth, then it must be fractured with this instrument which has this shape.
It is like a small face, made of iron, with acute extremities at the edges
And let your incision be such that you can cut through it on many days, because of the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not damage any other teeth.
But if it is exposed from the liming of your teeth: then file it down with a file made of iron, which has this shape.
Let it be all of iron, and its handle have minor points of various sizes, like a file which is used for filing teeth little by little over many days with ease, so that it does not damage the tooth, and that it falls out: then smooth it, and finally finish it off with some rasps
For if a tooth has broken off, and has wounded the tongue: then it is necessary to file it down until the roughness of that fracture has disappeared, and it is evened out: and it is flattened, and does not wound the tongue, nor corrupt the speech
Of the reposition of teeth with gold wires.
End of book.
When teeth in front are struck by concussion and commotion from a blow, or in a case: and it is not possible to support them so that they do not fall out: and it is necessary to place them with physicians' styptics, and it is not useful to treat them: then it is better to leave the wisdom in its place and to string them with a gold wire: for gold does not become soft, and does not rot after days: but silver always changes.
And let the middle thread be in tension and bulk according to the quantity that it takes between the teeth.
The form of the suture is such that you take the thread and pass its double through between two sound teeth: then you pass the two extremities of the thread between the teeth that are affected, whether one or more, until you have passed them right up to the sound tooth of the opposite side.
Then you repeat the process until you reach the part from which you began: and keep your hand steady with attention, until it does not move forward: and let your tension be such that it does not slip from the roots of the teeth.</start_of_turn>
Then cut off the excess threads with scissors: and gather each together, and unite them with a knot: and hide them between the sound tooth and the affected tooth, so that it does not irritate the tongue: and let it go so tight as to remain firm.</start_of_turn>
If, however, it comes loose or breaks, string it with another thread, and hold it like that for the whole time.</start_of_turn>
And this is the form of the teeth, and the figure of the suture of two sound teeth, and two affected teeth, as if you were drawing them.</start_of_turn>
And when it is finished, as when one tooth, or two after an abscess, has returned to its place, and has been sutured as we have said, and remains: and this does not happen except by a skillful and experienced artificer.</start_of_turn>
And when some bone or piece of cartilage has been adjusted: and it is made like a tooth, and is placed in the place from which the tooth was removed and is sutured, as we have said: and it remains, and serves its purpose for a long time.</start_of_turn
On the incision of the ligament which happens under the tongue, and which hinders speech.
On the incision of the ligament which happens under the tongue, and which hinders speech.
Which if there is anything hard and nodular, and which comes from the consolidation of the wound: then remove that piece of cartilage, and find the nerve of the ligament through its breadth, until you have cut through the ligament, and the knot is freed
If however the flow of blood should happen, then put upon the place some soft wool If blood should stain you, then burn the place with a burning lentile which is suitable for this: then care for yourself with the rest of the treatment, until you are healed Of the extraction of the ranula which is under the tongue.
Of the extraction of the ranula which is under the tongue
When there happens under the tongue a small abscess which assimilates the small ranula, hindering the tongue from its natural operation: and perhaps it becomes so great that it fills the mouth.
If, therefore, you see the wound itself of a dusky or black colour, hard, from which the sick person has no sensation: then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it inclines towards whiteness, in which there is moisture, then project into it a fine needle, and strike it with a small hammer, and free it from every part.
And if blood incites you in the hour of your operation, then put upon it a soaked sponge, until the blood is absorbed: then return to your operation, until you have extracted it with its complement.
And then it shall be bound with vinegar and salt: and care for the rest according to the suitable cure, until it is healed
As for the care of the aftereffect of two Amigdalar, see the section on that matter.
Chapter Six.
And then either pierce it through: or rupture it by itself
If it is of a white colour, round, and its root is thin: then it must be cut through
And the operation in this case is such that you must consider before performing it, if the after-effect of your procedure has become quiet and complete, or if there is imminent diminution: then do this: place the patient face down on the bench, and let his head be in your lap: open his mouth and take hold of the instruments between your hands, and pull down his tongue with the instrument. Do this with silver, or with an instrument which is as thin as a knife.
When you have done this, and you have pulled down the tongue, and the after-effect appears, and the wound has closed: then grasp the instrument and fix it in the flesh, and draw out what is inside as much as possible, without tearing anything from the clothes.
And then cut the wound with the instrument which has this form.
Thus are the forceps: truly their extremities are bent, so that the opening of each is at a right angle to the other: take care that it should be of iron or wetted with alum.
If this instrument is not present, then cut with a scalpel whose form is this
Acute at one end, not acute at the other end.
And after you have cut through the flesh once, cut the other according to this same kind of incision.
Then after the incision let the patient gargle with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flows, gargle with water in which are boiled almond shells: or leaves of myrtle, and things like those from sponges: until the bleeding stops: then care for him until he is healed.
And when there appear in the throat other after-effects besides the two tonsils.
Proceed thus, as I have said concerning the incision of two equal amygdalar.
I have also treated a woman with a swelling in her throat, which was born between her ribs and caused her to choke, with little consciousness. She breathed with difficulty from her narrowed throat and I forbade her from eating and drinking. She died within one or two days.
The swelling only ascended as far as to emit two branches, until it went beyond the two nostrils
I therefore acted promptly and bound it with one bandage
Then I pulled out a great piece from it
Then I cut through the skin at the root of the nose
Then I removed the diseased tissue from the other nostril
Then I opened his mouth and pressed out his tongue. Then I bound the bandage to the swelling. I then cut away a part of it, but there was little blood. The woman immediately began to drink water and ate food immediately
I did not stop cutting from that swelling for a long time. The swelling returned to its place where I had cut it, until it became prolonged and remained there.
I devised a plan and cauterized the swelling between the ribs.
It stood still from that moment on: then I went away and do not know what God did with her after me
On the incision of a small swelling.
Chapter 7.
When the catarrh descends to the lower parts and causes swelling, and is long, it is called a perpendicular swelling. And if it is in the lower part large and round, it is called a double swelling
When the ailment is treated with that which we mentioned in the discussion, and the treatment does not suffice: and you see that the after-effects of the caldum have subsided from it, and it is slight: then it is necessary to cut it out.
And what has become rounded from it, and has no length, and is blood-red, or of a tawny or black colour, and has no sensation: then it is necessary to make an incision in it.
For in these cases there is fear of the diseased part
It is necessary therefore, when you see that the after-effects of the white substance have subsided, and its length, that you make it sit upon the diseased part alone: and you grasp its tongue with an instrument which I have mentioned previously: then you will fix the ligature in one place, and draw the diseased part downwards: and you will cut through the diseased part with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned in the cutting of two carpo-metacarpal joints
And you must not cut through it except that which is beyond the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut through it more, you will cause damage and speechlessness.
Then after the cutting, use what we have mentioned in the cutting of two carpo-metacarpal joints: and care for it until it is healed
If however the diseased part returns from the cutting: then it is necessary to use your skill in cauterization without fear and timidity.
And the method of cauterization in these cases is not except with acute water: and it is that you place the head of the diseased part in your hand.
And grasp its tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned.
Then take from the water which I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with burnt charcoal, and put the diseased part not thick nor thin, and touch it with the concave side of this instrument.
The extremities of it are placed in which medicine is contained, like the radius of a cone.
The instrument is placed with the medicine above it: and the patient lies with his side facing upwards, so that the discharge from his mouth may flow inwards of the medicine, without descending to his throat, and irritate him
Then take hold of your hand with the medicine.
And you from the first part above the quantity of half an hour, until you perceive it to be softened, and the biting of the medicine to cease
And if you wish to grasp the limb, and cover it with the medicine, and give the limb a support with the medicine, and insert the radius into the cannula above, until the limb adheres to the upper part Do this many times, until you have finished with the cautery of the vein.
Then remove the instrument: for it itself will dry up and fall off in three or four days.
If you do not understand how to proceed, repeat the medicine: and after cauterization, remove the surrounding parts of the vein with the thumb and bathe in butter, and mix with that which is in the vicinity of the medicine: and bind with cold water.
And care for the outside with bandages, and for the inside with gargles, until the patient is healed.
Thus is this kind of treatment better than an incision and is longer lasting in fear of infection.
And when the vein is healed even with the gentler methods than cautery and incision: it is healed by fumigation, according to this manner.
Take calamine, and hyssop, and origanum, and rue, and sassafras, and chamomile, and angelica, and similar herbs: and mix these all together, or some of them in a pot, and immerse with vinegar, and let them boil: and the pot should be covered with a lid: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, above which the instrument is composed according to this manner.
Let air or silver issue forth; and let the extremity be introduced into that which contains the pomegranate, until the vapor ascends to the upper opening of the cannula, until the opening becomes much obscured.
Then repeat over the surface many times, until it boils over.
Take heed, do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an attack of inflammation.
Let there be added some plaster in the inflammation: and it is not permitted to do this except when the inflammation has subsided
If therefore this instrument is not present, then take a tube and fill its extremity with cork or pith: so that the bone of the sick does not burn: for the pith of cork hinders the vapor from burning the bone: and this is an excellent treatment with health.
Of the extraction of thorns, and bones from the gullet.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Many thorns of fish bones or other things adhere to the gut
It is necessary therefore to extract what is apparent on the surface of that which has fallen down, after having passed the tongue with the instrument at the root, and it is declared to be in the gut
And what is not apparent to you and is hidden in the gut, you must make the sick person vomit before the food is digested in the stomach
Perhaps therefore the thing which is annexed will come out with the vomit.
Or the sick person may swallow down a piece of dates, or the root of lettuce, or swallow down a dry breadcrumb: or take up a dry sponge of sea-moss: and bind it up in a thread, then swallow it down
When the limb approaches the place where spines or bones are extracted, it is then withdrawn. If it does not withdraw when pulled as we have said: then use a lead instrument according to this shape.
Let it be thicker than a radius small, and have a curvature at its extremity, which intrudes into its gut with ease: and let it have its head elevated above itself.
Beware of its touch of its epiglottis, that it does not cause it to cough, and drive with it bone, spine, or let the physician himself introduce it with his hand
Truly that the patient intrudes it is better: because of his science of the place of the annexed thing: and drives downwards, or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, the whole of this according to the quantity that is prepared for it, until it comes out
Of the extraction of bloodletting
Chapter XXXIX.
When bloodletting is medicated with what I have said in the treatise on curing with the physicians, and it does not help, then consider in the belly of the patient before the sole, or behind the tongue after having moved the tongue with the instrument which I mentioned.
If your hand should slip from the bloodletting, extract it with a small hook, or with fine fingers from the middle.
If this is not possible with these: then take a curved needle, and introduce it into the belly of the patient up to the gut: then introduce the burning iron into the curve of the needle.
Do this several times: and let the patient abstain from all water throughout the day
Then he shall take a full measure of cold water and open the mouth of the [patient] over it: and he shall gather his jaw with it, and shall not swallow anything from it: and he shall drink the water an hour after the other with his hand.
The blood-sucker will feel the water falling from his lip.
If, however, he does not depart from this as we have said, then he must suffocate the patient with sponges or with a tube as with the cannula of the nose or the ear
Do this often, for it is falling from him.
And the mode of operation in suffocation is that you take all the urine which is in the bladder with fire: and the vessels be covered with a covering, in the middle of which is a hole: and make an incision in that hole the extremity of the instrument
Then he will expel the suffocation, and place the patient's jaw in the extremity of the cannula, and clamp his jaw, so that it does not depart from the suffocation, until you know that the suffocation has passed to the blood-sucker
For the blood-sucker is immediately falling from him.
If it does not fall, do the suffocation often again
And the patient will tolerate sitting, and will eat garlic and onions, and will not drink water. It is necessary therefore that he depart from this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood-sucker is extracted from the gut when it falls upon the urine.
It is like tweezers, like urine: except that it has that curvature which enters the gut
And its extremity is like that of an owl's wing which is called the ciconia, in which there is harshness of the lime: when it grasps something, it does not relinquish it entirely.
And concerning the opening of abscesses, their section, and their care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of abscesses, of various degrees, according as the nature of the pain remembered: for some there is one cause, for others two in this book. They are diverse in their perforation and their sections are of two kinds.
One of them is the kind of abscess which arises from moisture.
The other is due to the place where it occurs in the body
Because an abscess occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the foot: and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in a joint. And each one of them has its own judgement according to its operation
And there are abscesses which do not require perforation, except after the ripening of health in the flesh, and the completion of its action: and there are those which require perforation while they are raw and have not ripened according to their completion.
Like abscesses which are close to joints.
For an abscess which occurs near a joint and which persists, until it putrefies, that is to say, when the surrounding parts are perhaps corrupted, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be ruptured. And this is the cause of the closer contraction of that limb
Or an abscess near a main limb: for if you delay its perforation until it ripens, the bone may break or become deformed, or the limb itself will be spoiled
If it is close to a bone, perforate it immediately: it does not matter if the abscess is incomplete, except that it be close to the bone, lest it putrefy deeply and reach the intestines, and form a fistula, or remain unhealed at its end. It is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess, which is according to the maturity of the lesion: and it is among the relaxation of pain, recession of fever, decrease of redness, pulse, and severity of the headache of the abscess: and the other signs. It is necessary that you make the perforation in the lower part of the abscess, and immediately above the apex: and let the perforation be wide in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of lacerations, and strings, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all the places equally, where there is no reflection
In these, however, which reflect, act with the perforation according to that limb.
When indeed the abscess is in the parts of carnis: then it is better that you delay the perforation of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the maturity of the lesion.
Because if you perforate it before that, you prolong the course of the infection, and there is much pus and dirt, and perhaps the edges of the wound will adhere to each other, and its depth.
And some abscesses are perforated throughout the body according to necessity: or according to that which is necessary for the limb.
And it is necessary that you administer in small abscesses a moderate perforation, and in large abscesses a wide perforation: or multiple sections according to the similarity of the size of the abscesses.
There are also from the apostemata, in which it is necessary that the skin should be concaved: and it happens when it has been made like a cloth, and has been made at the end, when it is dead: as it happens with many things, as with a dubelet and a bubon.
And there are also those which are cut with a section having three angles.
And there are also those which are cut like the figure of a myrtle leaf
Like the inguinal apostema.
And there are also those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered: and similar things from sections
This, however, which has no head, like the superficial leninous apostemata, must be perforated through a superficial perforation, or only with a plane cutting tool
And it must be performed when the apostema is thick, and when it has collected much blood, and you must perforate it so that you do not tear and extract all the pus at once: rather extract from it part of it
Then anoint the apostema until another day.
Then extract some of the pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree, until it has gone: especially if the patient is feeble in spirit, or a woman in childbirth, or a young child, or an old man decrepit: for the spirit of the animal is dissolved from the animal with the evacuation of the blood: and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive it
Therefore take heed of this chapter, for it contains great caution
And after you have perforated the apostema, which you must perforate, you must remove the clot: and consider carefully
If there is a small abscess of the apostematis, either perform a plane section or administer a dose of laudanum or coto from an old container.
If the abscess is large and there are many holes in the perforation, it is necessary to introduce medicine into every hole until the bleeding stops
If you have excised a piece of skin from the abscess, or if you have cauterized the circumference: then you must apply an old coto, or as when a cloth is taken away, or sprinkle with lint without moisture: and bind it tightly until the third day.
Then remove it, and care for it with oil until it is healed
If, however, blood flow occurs in your operation at the hour, then administer cold water and vinegar, after they have been drunk on a piece of cloth: and put it over the place of the blood flow many times over
If the bleeding persists, then you must administer regimen, care, and powders, which I have mentioned in many places of this book, and from experience.
If it is in the winter, and the place of the abscess is of many nerves: then you must infuse sponges with wine and warm oil: and put them on the place.
If it is in the summer, and the place is fleshy: then you must put sponges soaked in water, or oil, or both with wine and oil, and keep it cold.
Until then, as we have said, on the third day you must drain the abscess, evacuate it, and administer treatment that suits it, until it is healed.
This is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general
According to the sequence of positions, concerning the difference, as I have already said concerning all apostamata, how it is possible to treat it singly.
Concerning the section of the apostomas that occur in the head
Concerning the section of the apostomas that occur in the head
The small apostomas that occur in the head are of the kind of nodules, which contain sacs, like the houses of hens.
And their kind is many.
Some are fat: and some contain moisture like slime: and some contain moisture like blood clots: and some are like stones
And in the section of all of them, and in their extraction, there is no fear, as long as it does not touch the artery during the section
And the operation in the section of these is, as you will experience with the instrument which comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains
For if it contains moisture, then dry it out with the superficial section: in this form.
Begin with the incision from point b to point g. When the moisture has been evacuated, remove the sac which contains it, and do not leave anything behind
There is much risk of infection if anything is left behind Then immerse the wound in Egyptian unguent, if it is there: and if not, in water and salt: and apply with oil, and remove it on the next day.
The oil will dissolve what remains of the sac Then repeat over the said heel with the second and third fingers, and if you find it still painful, do not trust that it will not recover from the swelling, then take oil and unguent, until it is healed.
If the swelling contains a knot of fat: then dry it again in this fashion, by cutting it through in the shape of a cross: and project the nails between the two lobes of the cut, and scour it from every part: and try your skill in extracting the membrane which contains it
If, however, it opposes you, the artery: then do that which I shall tell you afterwards.
And similarly do in a swelling which is bony, by cutting through and curing in the same way as we have said before. And the cutting through of a bony swelling is easier: because there is little blood and moisture.
And whenever there are some hours of swelling which are in the head in some men, when there is no moisture in them.
Or make the perforation always from below upwards, so as to preserve the course of the healing towards the lower parts.
Then care for it with that which is suitable for it
(The provided text does not include any information regarding the section of the thyroid in the neck, so I cannot translate that portion of the sentence.)
Head Chapter 42.
Many wounds occur in the jaw, under the armpits, and in the groin: and sometimes in other parts of the body.
And above all that occurs from these wounds in the jaw are one, and many: and they are generated from the inside: and every swelling from these wounds is within its own sheath, as in the nodes and the head wounds which we have mentioned
There are many kinds of swellings
And from these things are fatty swellings: and those which contain humors: and malignant swellings which do not obey treatment
When, therefore, a good humoral liquid appears in the touch, which is evidenced by its proximity to the color of the skin, and which moves to every part and is not connected with the nerves of the jaw, nor with the veins, nor with the arteries, nor is it deep: it must be excised by a superficial incision from the upper part to the lower part of the body from the line A to the line G, and the surrounding skin should be stripped away from all sides: and two lips of skin should be spread out with one or with several sutures, if necessary, as we have said in the head wounds, and the contents should be gradually extracted
It is important to take care not to injure the bone or the nerve.
And let the incision not be acute, but rather wide: so that it does not bring your hand near the incision, or cause the patient pain, and you will cut only what is necessary.
If, however, you cut the bone, or the artery, or if you are forbidden from the operation, then put in the wound some sponge which absorbs blood, or some powder which sheds blood, and tie the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides: or begin to putrefy it
The blood is severed by the ligature and hangs ready for the operation until you complete it.
Then take care of yourself.</start_of_turn
If the whole trophlet is cut, then it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound: and hold them fast, after which you must wash because there remains no excess.</start_of_turn
If however you wash and find that there remains excess because of the size of the trophlet, then it is necessary that you bring an incision to the root of the latter and extract it: and administer the suture as we have said.</start_of_turn
And whatever remains of the trophlets should be perforated with a superficial perforation: so that you may see the seat of its maturity: and put the perforation below that which follows from the lower part of the body as we have said.</start_of_turn
Then administer after the perforation some lint with unguent, and like that, so that it consumes what remains of the corruption, until when you wash the wound is seen to be healed: then take care of yourself with the unguent of generation of flesh until it is healed.</start_of_turn
As for the excision of the epiglottis from the epiglottis to the gut: this happens by chance.</start_of_turn
Head Chapter XLIII.
They say that the ancients did this section in the epiglottis, and they did not know of anyone on our land who had done it: and this is the writing of their words.
But in the case of haemophilus, the surgeon must perform a section of the epiglottis: for if it is not done, there will be no remedy for it: because all the veins and the lung are weakened
In those who have a callous swelling in the mouth, or the gullet, or the two tonsils, when there is no inflammation in the canal, the surgeon must perform a section of the epiglottis in order to escape the destruction that comes from their prolapse. It must therefore be performed when we wish to do so, that we cut the epiglottis under three circles of the epiglottis, or four, with a small section through the width, in the place where there is between two circles the quantity which is the section of the cartilage, not in the cartilage itself: and this is the convenient place for the section, because it is bare of flesh, and the blood vessels from it are long.
If the surgeon is timid, then it must be extended with the tongue
Then find the skin until it reaches the canal: there will be blood vessels if there is anything there.
Then cut the cartilage as we have said: and it is signified above the section of the canal by the phlegm that comes out of it, with that which is broken, and the cutting of the vessel.
And withdraw the wound open at some time
When the time has passed in which the prolapse takes place, gather together the two lips of the wound with the skin only, without the cartilage
Then administer the medicines which make the flesh grow until healing is complete.
Albucasis wrote: Then administer the medicines which make the flesh grow until healing is complete.
The sum of this sermon which we have narrated is this: an exposed wound cannot be closed until the inflammation has subsided; for when the wound is closed while the inflammation still persists, the patient will die. Therefore it is necessary to leave the wound open until the inflammation has vanished, which is about three days. Then the wound can be closed.</start_of_turn>
And this which I have heard from myself is that a maidservant once took a knife and put it into her own gut, and it pierced a part of the windpipe.
I was called to care for her, and I found her already dead, just like a corpse.</start_of_turn>
I saw that the wound had been opened, and blood had flowed out of it from the little finger.</start_of_turn
I am confident that she would not have died if she had not been abandoned: neither did she guide herself. The wind was coming out of the wound.</start_of_turn
I treated her, and closed the wound, and cared for her until she was healed: and the maidservant did nothing else but groan in the water. She recovered after a few days.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is clear that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.</start_of_turn>
About the section of the hernia of the gut.</start_of_turn>
Chapter XLIV.</start_of_turn>
This hernia of the gutturis is named after the hernia of the gutturis, and is a great hernia, according to the colour of the body: and it is much in women.
It is according to two modes: or it is natural: or it is accidental In the natural mode there is no ingenuity
Accidental it is according to two modes: one of which is like a swelling of fat.
The other mode is like a hernia which arises from a knot of an artery
And in this there is fear, and it does not behoove that presumption should be made towards it with the hand, except in the case where it is small: and you must prove it, and investigate it with the intestines.
If therefore you find it like a swelling of fat, and it is not suspected with any other swelling: then dry it up like swellings are dried up: and extract it with the thing which contains it from the bag, if it is in a bag: and if not, then investigate all of it
Then take care of the place with it which should be cured until it is healed
Of the cutting above the species of swellings.
Chapter XLV.</start_of_turn> There are many species of swellings, and I have mentioned all the species of them in their order: and it is necessary that I tell you the difference between the Node and the Extrude: in case of doubt I say therefore, that when the Extrude is cold, and without fever, and without pain which excites, until the ebullition of the superfluous has ceased, and the putrefaction is completed: then indeed the fever and heat cease
When the Node however is not cold, neither feverish, neither painful, and contains its own bag, which is its own sac, and is according to the colour of the body: and is like a cicer, and makes like a batter, and is greater and less.
There are two kinds: either fat [tissue] or containing moisture.
The colours of moisture are many, as I have said in the previous discourse It is necessary therefore, when you are dealing with the Node, to experiment with it and inquire about its character at the outset using the instrument called the Intromissum, as its form will be shown in the following chapter.
The way to inquire about the posterior parts and the Nodes in general is to take hold of this instrument and introduce it into the moist place which you find in the posterior region: then gradually withdraw your fingers until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin
Then lastly touch the hand according to the measure of the size of the posterior region
Then withdraw the Intromissum and consider what comes out of its wound
If therefore moisture runs out, whatever its colour may be: then dry it out with a superficial section, as I have said in the other chapters concerning the posterior region.
If it does not run out, then you know that it is fat: dry it out therefore with a section having the shape of a cross, as it has been shown to you: and suspend it with sutures, and scrape the skin from all sides with ease: and hold the tissue firm if necessary, until you have extracted the Node safely.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the bag is burst during the operation, and it is not possible to extract the Node whole, much the same happens in this case: then extract the latter with forceps, until nothing remains of it.
For if anything remains of it, little or much, the Node returns most frequently.</start_of_turn>
If it swells and remains so slightly: then let you insert a thorn into the completion of your work, with some corrosive powders of sharp points: and bind the thorn, and place above it that which sits upon the cold heel, and care for it along with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
If there is a large node, then split its two lips and care for it with that which is contained within it If, however, there is a contrary swelling which is not pulsating, or which is pulsating: then clean the area thoroughly, and insert a splinter of wood into the place of the bite, and keep it tight for two or three days, until the thorn has rotted and the boiling of the blood has ceased: and then return to the incision which remains of the node.
Of the instruments outside which are for incision and perforation
Chapter 46.
From these are the forms of the instruments which are introduced, and there are three sorts of them.
From these again are the great, the medium, and the small
Let them be of iron, square at the extremities and hollow in the middle, that they may hasten the entrance into the heel
And these are the forms of the instruments of experience, and no, that is, perforating: and one of them is called a beris, that is, a piercer, and there are three sorts of them
From these again are the great, the medium, and the small
They join, that they may be investigated through the heel, and the exit, and the fistula, and the bubble from that which is between the bones
And others are round, triangular, blunt, like a great needle which has under it nails, of citrine, or of brass, or of iron, or of silver. And the better things are those that come from the citron.
And experience is also obtained from black lead, which joins with these [instruments] so that through them one may experience fistulas, whose cavities reflect like lenity itself with those reflections.
There are three things that are of three kinds For indeed from these three things are things long, things medium, and things short, according to the quantity of the breadth of the fistula and the stricture of it The form of the needles, and there are many kinds of them For indeed from these three things are things simple, namely those which have a single curve: and there are three kinds of them like liquids, great, medium, and small.
And from these three things are blind neighbours: and there are three kinds of them
And from these three things are needles having two curves, and there are three kinds of them: and from these three things are needles having three curves, and there are three kinds of them: and all of these are necessary in their place
And these are the forms of scalpels, which cut and scrape nodes and excoriate: and there are three kinds of them: for indeed from these three things are great, medium, and small.
Their extremities which make the cut are acute, and the other extremities are not acute: and they are not placed thus, except when there is a deliberate intention for excision of nodes near the fear of the cutting edge of the vein, or the nerve: and in order that the patient may recover more easily from the pain than from the excision of the abscess
These are magdas, and there are three kinds of them
The air is their origin, and they are like radium, as with which wine is made: and at their wide end is a hidden Spatumilis point: and within it runs inwards and outwards as desired, like liquids.
The Spatumili form which go between the fingers at the perforation of the apostematum: they are not perceived by the patient: and there are three kinds, great, medium, and small
The bubbles of the wind when they break up the flow of blood: and there are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
They are from the air, or from citron, round, to a short length, like liquids: and they are solid.
And it is necessary that these kinds of bubbles should be great and small among you: so that you can break up blood quickly when necessary, and then when there is no physician present
But do not use these substances to break up blood in any part of the body, and do not use them except in carbuncles: such as wounds of the thigh, hip, wounds of the forearm and breasts, and of the belly, groin, and similar carbuncles, humors
And sometimes they are formed from other small things like fragments of sponges, resembling cork: which break up the blood when it flows out from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of the vein, or artery: and sometimes they are formed from round things in this form.
As for the care of the breasts of women who are breastfeeding.
Chapter XLVII.
When the breasts of some men swell because of sleep (that is, when they begin to become soiled during sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and they remain with post-apoplectic swelling.
Whoever dislikes that [thing], it is necessary that he cut across the breast [area] with a lunar section, according to this shape from the line, b. to the line, g. Then he should remove the whole fat.
Then he should apply a sponge soaked in medicine to the wound
Then he should bring together two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed
If, however, the breast leans downwards and is softened by its size, as is the case with women: then it is necessary that two similar lunar sections be made in the two upper sides of the breast, each one containing the other at the ends as far as the greater line contains the smaller, according to this shape from the line, b. to the line, g. Then he should remove the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what has been said concerning the sutures and powders, which is necessary for the cure, until it is healed
If, however, he does not wish to make the incision which is necessary, because of the patient’s anxiety or because of the flow of blood: then it is necessary that he apply a sponge soaked in corrosive unguent under the coat, and let it go, until that which remains of the fat has been corroded.
Then care for it until it is healed
As for the perforation of the apostem, which occurs under the nipple
Chapter XLVIII. These apostemas which occur under the nipple are of the kind of hard Stropharia, which contain vesicles, and from which are exuded humors.
These are exuded from the humors which contain the moisture, it is necessary that they be cut with a lunar section, according to this shape from the line b. to the line g. when all that is in the apostema is evacuated from the flesh, then apply a sponge to the surrounding area and let it go until the next day
Then the foot is lifted up, and is cared for with an unguent suitable for it, until it is healed.
If the swelling were from a kind of knot of the Strophulas, then it is to be cut above it, as we said in the section on the Strophulas which are equal
But if a swelling occurs in this way as to discharge pus, then in this case apply cautery to it, as we said before
As for the cutting of the swelling that occurs from the Artery and Vein.
Chapter 49.</start_of_turn>
When the Artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is consolidated, then much swelling immediately occurs from the swelling: and in the same way swelling also occurs in the Vein, as it does in the swelling and the inflation.</start_of_turn>
And the signs by which it is known that the swelling and inflation are from the Artery and Vein are: for when the swelling is from the Artery, it is long, aggregated in the depth of the body: and when the swelling of the hand is made by pressing upon the digits, you feel as if there is a constriction there.</start_of_turn
And that which is from the Vein is rounded in the open part of the body.</start_of_turn>
And the cutting above this swelling is dangerous, and especially when it is under the armpits, and in the groin, and the throat, and in many other parts of the body: and it is a great danger.</start_of_turn
Therefore it is necessary to take care of it with fire, and that from iron also is in the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary to take care of it.</start_of_turn
Because of that which is from the iron is from the swelling of the orifice of the Artery, find in the cutting of the skin in the length.</start_of_turn
Then open the part with hooks, afterwards the Artery: and release the gut from the tunics, until it is severed.
Then insert the hook under it and make the gut penetrate until the other side, and ligate the Artery with two threads in two places, as you were taught in the extraction of two Arteries which are in the abdomen
Then bite the place which is between two ligatures with a sponge, until the blood which is in it comes out, and it is dissolved after the swelling has gone down.
Then give treatment which causes pus to form, until the ligatures fall away: afterwards care for it with suitable unguents until it is healed.
If there should be swelling on account of the cutting of a Vein, then it is necessary to put in your hand what is possible from the swelling with the skin.
Then insert the hook under the place where you held your hand, and make the gut penetrate: and there put in two threads, until you draw it out from the other side.
Then ligate with the gut itself the ligature with good thread: according to what I told you concerning the ligature of the vein, from two parts with two extremities of thread If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert another hook with another thread under the whole swelling at the incision of the needle: first, and ligate your thread in four places.
Then dry the swelling in the middle of it, until when it comes out what is in it: then cut off the excess of the skin, and discharge what is ligated from it.
Then put upon it a little puff which you submerged in wine, and oil.
Then give treatment which is done with poultices and unguents, until it is healed
Of the swelling that arises from the twisting of nerves.
Of the swelling that arises from the twisting of nerves.
Just as swelling arises in arteries and veins, in the same way swelling arises in nerves: that which arises from percussion in the body, or from excessive labor, or in a similar way: and it is most frequent in the armpits, or at the ankle, and in every place where there is a joint movement: and it is a serious swelling. It is similar in color to the rest of the body, and is in various positions without pain: and when it is compressed with pressure, a pain similar to that of drunkenness is felt in it
It is not a deep swelling of the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to all parts, and does not go forward or backward or to the back
Which is why it is in the joints, it does not need to be grasped with iron.
Perhaps also there will be a contraction.
But in that which is in the head, or in the face, find the skin with a spatula.
If it is a small swelling, then hold it with forceps, and cut it off from its root
And if it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and scrape it off: then remove it, and join it together with a suture: and care for it until it heals.</start_of_turn>
Of the excision of the swelling which is in the belly.</start_of_turn>
Of the excision of the swelling which is in the belly.</start_of_turn These occur in many people in the bellies, and in the rest of their bodies, those which are called Fungalia, because of their resemblance to fungi
Whose root is slender, and their head is bulky, and their lips are joined together.
And they are of the small intestines: and they are of the small intestines which grow large upwards
And indeed I saw a man, and in his belly there were two tumours, which were greater than the rest like mushrooms: there was no difference between them, white or dark, root or top: they joined together and moisture ran out of them always.
I cut them off, and I found in the weight of one almost twenty-eight ounces and in the other about six ounces. And the operation in their incision is, as you consider, if the patient is humid, and the colour of the tumours is white, humid, slender root: then cut through with a wide spatula, and there will be in your presence their caeca in the fire.
Much blood is expelled at the cutting of it: take care therefore if you are splashed by blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a sick man weak and timid from the incision with the iron, then take a leaden thread from the middle and string it with it: whose method is as we have said, and let him go in two days.
Then add lead in stricture.
Do not cease to string the lead until it is broken, and it falls down without toil
If however the tumours be large of the root, then in their incision there is something fearful and painful: especially because of that which is in the belly
But indeed it is possible to cut through the middle of them.
Then cauterize it, that it does not return
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound.
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound.
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound.
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound Then care for yourself until you are healed of the wound
For in this case there is fear and dread, as I taught thee in the chapter where I spoke of the posset due to the artery and the vein.
If the swelling of the belly is from the intestine or the bladder: then it is necessary to make the patient spit out whatever he is swallowing, as long as he continues to swallow, and to keep him standing extended
Then signs with encasement all around the belly.
Then command him to lie down between your hands on his back
Then surround with a wide sponge around the belly in the place which you indicated with encasement.
Then extend the middle of the incision upwards with a large hook.
Then bind it firmly around with strong thread, or with silk cord: and let the knot of the ligation be firm.
Then open the middle of the incision which has been extended above the ligation.
If therefore you find that the thing which is captured by the ligation: then extract the encasement and introduce the finger into it, and push the intestine into the belly: and if you find the bladder, then grasp it with the hook, and cut off its excess
But if it is the artery or the vein: then surround it a great deal.
Then return to your work.
And take two needles, and introduce them into the two corners of the wound: and introduce two needles around the circumference which you made around the incision in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tighten the wound in four places on the needles: and if you wish, take out the needles and leave the wound open until the extended flesh has decayed: and it will fall away by itself: or cut it away when it becomes thin and has decayed
Then care for yourself with what is necessary from unguents until you are healed.
If there is swelling of the belly from the flesh or from moisture: then it is necessary to make an incision above the navel, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
And drain blood, or moisture, as you find in it.</start_of_turn
Then care for yourself with what is necessary from unguents until you are healed.</start_of_turn>
About the care of cancer.</start_of_turn Chapter 53.</start_of_turn>
I cannot cure anyone from it: nor do I know of anyone who has ever cured it.</start_of_turn
And the operation in it, when it is located as we have said, is to precede and extract the diseased part from black bile several times.</start_of_turn
Then make a phlebotomy if you find it with a visible swelling.</start_of_turn
Then prepare the patient before the operation, when he is located with the operation.
Then place him on the table which is suitable for him.
Then draw out all the nails from every part with the skin, according to the prescription, until nothing remains of his roots: and let the blood flow freely, and do not cut him too quickly, but rather express the place, and drain the thick blood as much as possible with your hands, or with whatever instruments are available
If, however, there is excessive flow of thick blood from an artery or vein: then cauterize the vein, until the bleeding stops
Then care for him with the rest of the treatment, until he is healed
(Text continues with another section of the translation
(End of translation
We shall speak in detail of the varieties of hydrosis, and how water is gathered: and the signs of every kind, and their treatment by physicians.
And what is cured with iron is not except for a single kind of ascites: and it is not approached with iron in the case of tympanitic species: neither in the case of profound hypostatic species: for that is deadly
When you are treated for this kind of hydrosis which is tympanitic with the physicians, and your treatment does not please them: then consider it
For if the patient is followed by weakness, or with any other illness besides hydrosis: such as if there is also cough, or solution of the intestines, and similar things: then do not give him iron for that would be dangerous
If, however, you see the patient overflowing with spirits, neither young nor old: then the mode of operation in this case is that you raise the patient between your hands, and after expressing his belly push down his intestines with your hand, driving out the water downwards to the lower part of the abdomen
Then take the sponge, thorny, according to this shape.
Then take the sponge, thorny, its shape like that of Spatumile.
Indeed there is something of shortness in it, proceeding gradually, so that it does not pass through to the intestines during the operation, and so it heals the wound itself.
Then consider carefully.
For if there is a discharge of hydrosis from the intestines, then it is necessary to lengthen the incision from the navel to the lower part in a straight line above the pelvis by the measure of three fingers
If indeed the discharge of hydrosis is because of liver disease: then make your incision to the left of the navel by the measure of three fingers
If the discharge is from the spleen: then make the incision on the right side; and it is not necessary to make the incision on the side where you wish to place the sickly person, so that there are no protrusions to the place of weakness
Then pierce with the instrument the whole skin
Then introduce the hand with the sponge between the skin, and sponge, as if you are scraping: and the amount that should be scraped is equal to the amount of a nail, or somewhat less.
Then pierce the sponge until the sponge reaches the hollow: and that is the place of water
Then remove it and introduce it into the hole of the instrument whose form is this.
It is like a tube: made of silver, or of air, or of gold, flexible, thin: which has a small hole at the lower part, and three holes at the sides, two from one side and one from the other: and its extremity is cut, like the incision of a needle, as for an abscess: at its upper part is a collar
When the instrument reaches the water, it immediately sinks over the instrument, thus evacuating half its quantity from the water in an hour.
If you evacuate more from it than is necessary, the patient may die in an hour from the collapse of his vital spirit: or there may occur to him fainting which approaches death.
Evacuate from it according to its quantity and according to what is significant to you concerning the condition of the patient from the strength of his pulse and from his health
Then withdraw the instrument and retain the water.
Because it remains immediately because of the skin which retains the opening above the siphon: as I have said, perform it according to the usual method.
Then repeat the instrument on the other side, if you find the patient tolerates it: and also evacuate from the water the quantity which remains. Do this several times without fear, and take care of yourself from an error: until there remains from the water only a little.
If however you fear for the patient, and you discharge from the water much: then care for him with burying in warm sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and expect above the seat: and care for him with physicians skilled in healing, until he is healed: and cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen, and the liver, after the water is drawn out: as I have said previously
Concerning the care of infants who are born in places where the urine ducts are not pierced.
Chapter 55. When anyone is born from the womb of his mother, and the head of him is not pierced through, or the opening is strict, or is not in its proper place.
It is necessary therefore to assist immediately when a perforation occurs since it is born with Spatumili in a subtle form.
Then put in the wound a small lead weight, and bind it: and keep it for three days, or four.</start_of_turn>
When he wishes to urinate, move him, and mix.
Then reduce it.</start_of_turn>
And if you do not put in lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the place will not allow it to close.</start_of_turn>
He whose wound is strict is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it is enlarged.</start_of_turn>
He in whom the wound is in its wrong place, they cauterize.</start_of_turn
That is because from the matter which is born, the wound is at the end of the hair of the beard: wherefore it cannot mix forward until the beard has risen above it.</start_of_turn> Neither is there any generation, for the sperm cannot reach the matrix according to its straight course: and it is a wound of the subtle form.</start_of_turn
And the manner of the operation in this is that the sick man lies on his back.</start_of_turn>
Then extend the hair of the beard with your left hand, with extension of the thumb: and cut the head of the hair of the beard from its root, with a needle, or with a sharp spatumili: as is the cutting of the tip of a reed, or as you would a nail, so that its middle comes out like the head of the beard: and that the wound be in the middle according as it should be.</start_of_turn
And beware you at your operation from the flow of blood.
Much happens with that.
Counteract it with that which binds the blood, and care for the wound until it is healed.
As for the things which happen in the preparation of the wound and the head of the vein, and corruption, blackening, and adhesion.
Chapter LXVI.
Many things happen with these matters in the flesh, and it is the elevation of the diseased part of the flesh.
And among these there are some which are malignant and some which are not malignant
The malignant ones must be suspended with a fine thread and cut away, until the whole thing is cleansed.
Then place over the wound a soaked bandage in Egyptian unguent And care for the wound afterwards with a soft unguent, until it is healed
If the matter is malignant, of the colour of flesh, then it is necessary to administer in it a cautery after its incision and for its reason
If, however, the matter is in the head of the vein, not circumcised, and is a part of the matter which is inside the preparation, and a part of it which is outside: then it is necessary to stretch out the matter which is inside first, until it is consolidated, and then care for the outside: for if you care for the outside while you are caring for the inside, the preparation will be ruptured.
And also in the testicles, and the blackening of the preparation and corruption
It is necessary therefore that you remove everything which has become blackened, and which is about to corrupt, or which has already corrupted
Then line above the hip beyond that which was struck with the cress of wheat with barley grits and trefoil herbage.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If blood flows, then apply a lunar cautery, according to this form.
A cautery is applied twice in two positions simultaneously, that is, to the flow of blood and to the ulcer when it is ruptured
If the head of the worm has been consumed and the whole thing is destroyed in an hour: then it is necessary to introduce lead shot into the belly of the patient so that the poison may mix with the blood above it
In connection with the application of the bandage with the head of the worm, and this connection does not occur except in that case in which the bandage is sound and not required above it; and when this connection does occur because of the ulcer or fistula: it is necessary to scrape off the skin above it with blunt spatulas until the ligament is severed and the head of the worm is freed from all around
If it is difficult to discern these things, then it is necessary to scrape something from the head of the worm and from the bandage
For the bandage is often perforated because of its slightness and speed
Then separate the bandage from the head of the worm with a fine linen cloth which has been made wet in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
Then treat with balsamic wine, until it is solidified Of the treatment of infants, and the treatment for an error in an accident
Head Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not the solution for the continuity of the wound, like the rest of the wounds: indeed when it comes from our operation, our will, and the purpose of the same is in the children themselves, it is necessary that we mark in this operation a better operation, and the loss of some sensitivity for the purpose of health.
I say, therefore, that the ancients did not speak of circumcision in any of their books: because they did not use it in their laws, and it is not except what we have acquired through experience
Because I have found a greater part of the artifices, and phlebotomists, useful for the modification of the world, by circumcision with a needle, and with scissors: and they make use of glue and ligature with thread, and incision with a nail.
And I myself have proved all these methods, and I have not found a better modification than with scissors, and ligation with thread
Because in the modification with a needle, much skin is lost.
Because the skin of the prepuce has two tunics: therefore sometimes the upper skin is cut, and the lower tunic is threatened: it is therefore necessary to make an incision to cut the other one, and to prevent future pain
And when the modification is made with glue, which is what surgeons do, namely with digits, as they use them, the incision of the extremity of the penis is not secured: for perhaps it enters through its foramen
In the modification, however, with a nail, perhaps the iron will go awry, and will corrupt your operation: and the skin of the child is short of nature, and many are born thus, which does not require circumcision: and I advise you of that.
The use of scissors and ligature with thread proved advantageous: for it was observed that the size of the scissors is in proportion to the length of the incision.
When you grasp the hand in this way, the two acuities are in proportion, and they are cut together in the same time: and there results a compression similar in form, containing the skin all around, except for a part which does not slip at all
The proper way to perform the operation is to make the opening as small as possible, especially if there are people present who are learned in small matters, for you must not do anything except to ligate the thread in the vein itself: and you must dismiss it until another day.
Then make him rejoice and be glad in every way possible for him, from which he receives his understanding.
Then insert your hand into the vein and blow air into the skin, and draw it up, until the head of the vein comes out.
Then close up that which has gathered in that mess
Then ligate the marked place with double thread.
Then ligate the lower part somewhat less tightly than the upper part. Then take hold with your index finger and thumb of the place of the lower ligation and hold it securely, and cut between the two ligatures.
Then lift the skin upwards quickly, and pull out the head of the vein.
Then discharge the blood slowly (for it is better thus) and apply powder above: and above the powder put a bag containing the expanded testicles or decocted in rose water, which has been well shaken with recent olive oil: discharge it upon that until the next day: and take care of the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
The form of the forceps for this procedure is as follows.</start_of_turn>
Two handles extend at an angle, and the handles are joined: do not protrude beyond the thumb: and their length should be equal to the length of two thumbs together.</start_of_turn>
The real danger in dressing lies in the cutting through of the whole skin or a part of it at the incision.</start_of_turn Therefore it is necessary to extend the limb from your hour hand with your thumb before the displacement of the tissue: and make the incision according to the equality.</start_of_turn
If you are unable to hold the limb with your thumb, then grasp it with the index finger and make the incision.</start_of_turn
If, however, after three days, there remains something under the swelling which is still inflated, evacuate it: then discharge the swelling when it has become soft, and cleanse it gently, and make the incision as before: and be careful from the head of the swelling.</start_of_turn
It will not cause him any harm.</start_of_turn
Take care of it as we have said in the treatise on powders: and if it breaks through the skin above the measure, and reaches the upper part, it will not harm him even then.</start_of_turn>
Take care of it as we have said until he is healed.</start_of_turn
On the extraction of the retained kidney from the bladder.
On the extraction of the retained kidney from the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is done by means of stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or native flesh, or like things from which we have spoken in the methods of treatment for dropsy.
And if the kidney is not cured, and the retention of urine is attributed to a stone which is in the neck of the bladder: then it is necessary that it be loosened over its knee
Then the feet of the kidney are bound over its back, and the belly is pulled out from its upper part of the back, and the diseased part is held down as much as possible
It is thought therefore when the neck of the bladder is towards the back for the expulsion of the stone: the kidney is absolutely expelled
And if it does not succeed as we have said: and if something else remains over the diseased part: then it is necessary to perform the extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, which is like a tube of silver, slender and rounded like a feather quill in the thickness of a palm and a half: and there is a small tube in its head
And the method of extracting the kidney itself is as follows: you take a doubled thread and bind it at its end with wool or cotton, a good ligation: and you insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe: and you cut with scissors if anything comes out from the wool, truly insert into the tube with certainty, as with a nail.
Then wash the syringe with oil, or butter, and alum: and make the patient sit on a seat, and support the bladder, and give him a drink of warm oil and water.
Then introduce the needle into the flesh easily, until it reaches the root of the vein.
Then double the thread above the navel Then push the needle inside itself until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that the needle has reached its destination: this is not done according to this order unless the tissue through which the needle passes is flexible
Then draw out the thread slowly with the lancet.
The vein follows the lancet
Then pull out the needle, and cause the vein to run along the urine: and do this again with the needle, and do not stop doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the patient feels relief. Regarding the quality of the catheterization of the bladder with Clepshydra
Chapter 59
It is blunt, that is, closed
And there are three holes in it, two from one side, and one from the other side, like urine
And the part which drives it, where the needle is inserted, should be according to the quantity which you wish to use without adding anything, until when it is drawn out with it something is attracted from the humilities: and when it is driven out, when it is expelled at length: according to what the Clepshydra does, which throws out pitch, that is, Greek fire in the fields of Mars.
When any liquid is poured over the cavity, introduce the extremity of the sponge into the liquid and draw up what drives it upwards, for the liquid is thus drawn into the concavity of the sponge. Then introduce its extremity into the cavity, as we have said in the syringe
Then drive the liquid with that which drives it, and the liquid will immediately follow to the cavity, as the patient will feel Form a soft enema which fills the cavity
Then introduce a strong thread firmly through these holes, as they are being made Then gather the circle, as a ball of wool is gathered: after you have put into it that which you wish of humdities, and oils, and waters.
Then bind it in an instrument: and do with it as you did with the bladder when expressing with your hand, until the liquid reaches the bladder
On the Extraction of the Stone.
On the Extraction of the Stone. We have already spoken concerning the types of stone and their treatment by physicians: and we have mentioned the difference between a stone generated in the bowels and a bladder stone, and the signs of the former: and we have mentioned that the operation for the latter is performed with the hand and incision: and this is a stone generated in the bladder itself: and that which is found in the urine: and I shall speak of this with manifest exposition and brevity.
I say therefore, that a stone generated in the bladder is most frequent among children.
And from its signs it is known that the urine flows from the bladder like water in its turbidity: and there appears in it white sand, and it irritates the painful bladder, and causes it to hang down with much straining Then it is erected, and goes out with the anus in many people.
And the healing of children from this is easy, until the age of fourteen years has passed
And it is difficult in old age.
In youth, however, there is a middle course between these two: and the greater the stone, the easier the cure: and if small, the care of it is less laborious
When we come to the cure, it is necessary in the first place to evacuate the patient with a cathar, which extracts all the stool from his intestines: which indeed often hinders the discovery of the stone at the inquiry Then the patient should be taken with his feet, and struck, and moved downwards: so that the stone descends to the depth of the bladder, or goes out from its high place in parts
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands rest under his buttocks, so that the belly will hang down completely to the lower parts.
Then ask him, and touch him externally.
If you feel a stone in the space, then immediately take hold above it with the section (scissors).
If it does not fall under your touch at all, then you must remove the index finger of the left hand if the patient is young: or the middle finger if he is complete: and introduce it into the belly of the patient, and ask about the stone, until it rests under your finger: and bring it gradually to the neck of the belly
Then press above it with your finger, and push it outwards against the place where the section is to be made: and command the minister to clamp the belly with his hand, and command another minister to stretch the testicles of his right hand upwards: and another hand to move the skin which is under the testicles in the part from the place where the section is to be made
Then introduce the sponge soaked in wine, which has this form.
And find in it what is between the belly and the testicles, and not in the middle, on the left side of the navel: and let the section be above the stone, and your finger in the rectum: and make a transverse section, so that the external section is wide and the internal section is narrow, according to the quantity that is possible for the escape of the stone from that which is not greater
Perhaps the finger that is in the rectum will press the stone at the section and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that from the stone there are angles and edges, because of which its exit is difficult because of that
And from this is soft, like a gland, and round: and it makes easy the egressus of its.
And from this are angles and margins added to the fissure.
And if it does not come out thus, then it is necessary that you bring in over it: or that you bind over it with a grip whose extremity is like the Moon, which binds over the Stone, and does not yield to it: or that you insert under it a subtle instrument, with curved extremities
But if you cannot overcome it with these, then widen the opening nearby
And if anything of blood incites you, cut it off with a saw
And if there are more than one stone, then push in the first one to the bone of the hip
Then cut over it.
Then push out the hand after that: and do the same if there are more than two
And if it is great, then ignorance is not enough to cut through it with a great section
For it happens to a sick man of two things, either that he should die, or that there is an excessive concentration of urine: because the place is not consolidated at all
But manage its expulsion until it comes out: or bring in a fracture of it with forceps until you have extracted it frustratedly
When you have completed your operation, then apply a sponge of wool, aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it up, and place over it a soaked bandage of oil and wine, or oil of roses and cold water: so that the swelling will subside.
Then rest the patient on his side, and do not move the ligaments, until the third day.
When you have finished the operation, embroider the place with water, and pour much.
Then care for the wound with a soft bandage and a basic dressing until it is healed
If, however, in the wound a hard swelling appears, and pus, and similar things: thus also if blood is congealed in the bladder, and is withheld from that by urine: this is recognized from the emission of blood with urine.
Introduce your finger into the wound, and draw out the clot of blood.
For if it remains, it causes corruption of the bladder, and its putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt: and oppose all sorts of things with that which is suitable for the cure, until it is healed.
And it is necessary in the course of the cure of all these things, to bind up two thighs, and to support, for the cause of the physicians who place things upon the place
If the stone is small, and is in the cavity of the bladder, and is fixed in it, and prevents the passage of urine: then care for it with that which I mentioned before until you reach the point of incision
For many are excused from the incision for this cure, because I have proved that to be the case. And it is, that you take a needle of steel, which has this shape, triangular extremities, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take thread, and bind with it under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder
Then introduce the perforating needle into the bladder with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone: and withdraw the perforator slowly from the stone: and make a hole in it, until you make it penetrate from the other side
The urine is indeed immediately effective.
Then lay your hand over what remains of the stone from the outside of the bladder
It itself will break, and go out with the urine, and will heal the sick person
But if this treatment is not prepared for him, because of something that hinders it: then bind a thread under the stone, and a thread above the stone. Then dry over the stone in the very bladder between the two ligatures.
Then draw it out.
Then loosen the ligament, and massage the clotted blood, which is in the wound.
And it is not necessary to bind a thread under the stone, except that it does not go back to the bladder: and the other thread above, except when the thread is drawn out after the stone has gone, the skin returns to its place, and helps the wound: and for this reason it is necessary for you to bind the upper thread, so that it raises the skin upwards, so that it returns to its original position, and helps the wound, as we have said
Of the extraction of a stone from women
Chapter LXIX
Stones are hardly generated in women
If however it happens to one of them that a stone comes about, then the treatment is difficult, and is prohibited because of many things.
Among these things: that a woman is perhaps a virgin. And the second is, that you will not find a woman who will disclose herself to a doctor when she is a virgin, or who is married
Thirdly, for you will not find a woman well learned in this art, especially in performing surgery with her hand.
Fourthly, the distance from the stone to the bone is great: whereupon a deep section is needed, and there lies fear.
If such a case necessitates it, then you must take a female physician, who is well learned: for few are found
Or if you wish to take a surgeon, take a learned and discreet man, and present to him a skilled woman in matters of women, or one who has learned a part of this art: make her present, and especially tell her of the matter concerning the stone Firstly, if she is a girl, let her look at her palm: then she must insert her finger into her palm and seek the stone.
If she finds it, she should grasp it under her finger, and then tell the obstetrician to insert her finger into the lower belly of the patient, and inquire about the stone after she has placed her left hand on the heel and pressed it well If she finds the stone, then she must gradually move it from the opening of the belly to the lower parts with all her skill, until she has brought it down to the root of the pelvis.
Then she will feel the stone in that part: and her hand must not be moved from the stone, holding it under it: and make a small incision at first
Then insert the radium over that incision.
If she feels the stone, then add to the incision a quantity that is proportionate to how much the stone comes out from it.
And know that there are many kinds of stones. Moreover, some are small and some are large, some are soft and some are rough, some are long and some are round, having branches
You know, therefore, the kinds of them, as is signified by this above concerning that which you desire.
If blood has therefore flowed [onto the stone], then add in the place of the wound some powdered alum, and keep it for an hour, until the blood is separated.
If blood flows from an artery which has been cut: then put powder on the place and bind it with threads of moderate size: and do not stop it: and let the stone go, and do not try to extract it.
Perhaps the woman is weak.
Then take care of the wound.
When the pain of the blood has subsided after a few days, and the place has become putrid, then return to your operation until the stone has gone
Of the incision concerning the watery hernia.
Chapter 62.
A watery hernia is not except for the collection of moisture in the white membrane which is under the testicles containing eggs: and it is called a hernia. And when it is in the proper pouch of the testicles which nature has prepared for it in the part of the egg, until it is burst: which is another egg, and is the membrane of the testicles between the white membrane which we mentioned: and it does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of this branch is from the weakening which occurs in the testicles: whereupon it flows to them this matter.
And sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles
And this moisture has many colors. Or it is of a yellow-orange color, or it is reddish-bloodstained, or dark green, black, or white fluid, and this is the best.
For if it is in the white sac which we mentioned, then the swelling is round to the length like the figure of a yes: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from every side
And if it is in the inner sac itself, then the swelling is round with a part like a yes, and because of this the man knows that there is another one.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sac, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore one has cognition of the color of the moisture, then to experience the color of the moisture in the swelling with an introduced square whose form precedes.
According to that therefore which proceeds from the introduction, judge of that which is between them
When therefore we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to expel the patient, to draw blood from him if possible, and to fill his body with liquid
Then it is rested upon its back over a high low thing, and put under it many cushions
Then sit you on its left side, and command the minister, that he sit on its right side, who extends his arm towards one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and towards the part which is between the navel and the genitals
Then take a broad sponge and dry the testicles from the middle to the loin: and make an incision following the straight line which divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white fat encompassing them: and scrape it out and observe, or else cut it out directly. And let your scraping be such as to remove only as much as is necessary.
Then drain the testicles with a wide opening, and extract all the fluid. Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the scrotum upwards, without touching the testicles encompassing them: and make an incision in the scrotum as you deem necessary, either completely or partially, especially its broad side superficially
For if you do not carefully examine it, there will be no security in the incision, for the water will flow out.
If, however, anything exterior to the skin comes out in the course of your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the scrotum, reduce it
Then join together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with sutures.
Then care for it like the rest of the wound, until it heals
If you find anything corrupt from blackness else, then you must ligate the vessels which are the source of blood flow
Then remove the testicle with its suspending ligament, and extract the fluid: afterwards care for it as we have said
If indeed water has gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: dry therefore the other part equally as you did the other
If the blood is equal, let the operation be one, then withdraw the blood.
If the blood is equal, let the operation be one, then withdraw the blood.
Then take two cloths and soak them, and apply the one to the carmine, according to this likeness: and let the extremities be those which are sent forth from the knee, or moist wool: and gather with the stricture at the waist of the arms: and one extremity shall take over one foot until the loin, and the second shall take over to the part of the loin: and the two extremities shall take over over the two lower thighs, and the two extremities shall take over over the two inguinal regions, and gather the stricture throughout the waist of the arms.
And when it is necessary to treat this wound with a cautery in the place of the incision with a knife: and it is that you take a fine cautery knife and cut with it the skin of the testicles: and it is ignited, according to what we have said: until it is seen that there is white fat containing water: then take the cautery, according to this shape
Thus it is like the Greek letters
Then pierce with it that fat, and it is ignited, until all the moisture has gone out.
Then stretch the fat with hooks, and scour with the cautery a little ignited, and cut itself according to what is possible to you, until you have excised all of it
And burn from outside, so that it does not touch the fire.
And you know that this operation is safer and longer from the flow of blood, and better than the operation with a section.
If, however, the operation should cause adversity in the hour of incision, or in the hour of cauterization after the scab has cooled, or in the flow of blood, or anything else: then it is necessary that you should treat the adversity that the operation has caused with the treatment which is appropriate for it.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect such a great operation on account of his horror: then I administer perforation according to what I have narrated above: and thus.
When you are certain that it is necessary for you to do this with regard to the signification which we have mentioned concerning the liquid: then you must make the patient sit on a raised seat
Then perforate the scab in the lower part of it with a wide spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and keep the opening wide open until the whole liquid has been discharged
Then place upon the place of the buttock, and bind it, and let it go so that the remaining liquid may be discharged: then care for it until the wound is healed.
If, however, adversity should exist in the hour when you perforate it: and this is not except for the fact that a white bubble causes adversity in the opening of the wound and hinders the discharge of the liquid: then you must either introduce a needle into the wound, or an instrument with which the watery humors are extracted, whose form has preceded: or to add to the operation of the wound a little of the substance which has been mentioned.
And you know that the liquid returns and gathers after six months, or thereabouts.
When it gathers again, then it must be returned in the same way, and the patient will recover his days.
(The text continues with instructions for the care of a wound.)
Chapter LXIII.
Know that in the upper part of this Rami, there is a terror that proceeds from the bowels and causes harm in many positions.
Therefore it is seen that its dismissal is hindered from there.
And I remember the operation in this respect, and the appearance of the pus afterwards
I say, therefore, that many abscesses happen in the bodies, from which testicles are formed: and this is from the swelling of many wounds Or from excessive and acute swelling, or acridness, which flows down to the testicles
Or from a blow.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not found to cause pain: and it is a serious abscess
And perhaps it is a stone abscess, whose color is dark, and there is no feeling in it
And sometimes it happens from the bursting of arteries, and the swelling of these: as I have mentioned before in this respect: or from the swelling of veins.
Therefore it is known from the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers
And it is not right to touch it directly
But that which happens from the swelling of veins, does not disperse from that by pressing with the fingers And it is possible that over this kind of abscess there should be a cutting, and over the rest of the flesh: and it is to remove the skin of the testicles
Then stretch out the limb upwards, and pull it out with a white bandage: and remove the pus from the bowels, and ligate the vessels: and cut off the abscess once you have freed it from all sides of the limb.
If any solid object is joined with these natural bones, then it is necessary to pull out the object and cut it. If any adhesion exists between some bones, or in that which there is between the viscera: then it is necessary to free the entire adhesion and make an incision.
If, however, there is an outgrowth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut through all of it, and pull out the object, as we have said. When your operation is complete, then place a sponge wetted with oil in the wound, and wine: then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed.
As for the care of the limb, which is with the thread.
Chapter 122.
Uitis is swelling of a limb which is surrounded by swelling, like a bag, with the softening of the testicles: and it makes difficult the movement and exercise, and walking
And in the treatment of this ailment is fear, because of which there is a remembrance of the thing which preceded it
Indeed it is necessary to say that the operation is done in this one according to what the first did I say therefore, that it is necessary to make the infirm person sit on a raised seat
Then make an incision with a sharp knife in a transverse direction across the middle of the bones, until the bones are revealed
Then from every part, as we said before in the extraction of arteries which are in their season.
Then dry them in the middle section straight according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the humours of corrupt faeces.
Then care for the wound along with the care of the other wounds, in which is the desire to generate health, so that the suppuration which nourishes one testicles falls away.
There is nothing bad in this.
If however the veins should happen to bleed in all the wounds, then it is necessary to extract the testicles with the veins: so that they do not lack nourishment by incision, and that they do not become black and swollen, and that they do not suffer damage with the clamp
On the care of the intestines. Chapter 65.
Because the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle.
And this rupture is either from the siph or from the extension of this
And these two kinds happen from various diseases: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a cry, or from an elevation of a heavy thing, and the like
And the sign when it is from the extension of the siph.
Is that which happens gradually in a long time, and does not happen immediately: and is a swelling equal in height to the depth: because the siph compresses the intestine
And its sign when excised from the bowels is that it immediately causes pain and swelling: and it is a diverse after-effect, appearing under the skin nearby: and this is because of the escape of the intestine, and its course to the exterior of the bowels.
And when it goes out with the intestines it is called the intestinal hernia, and strangulation: and when it is with swelling
And when it runs into the intestines it retains the stool there: and this is with great danger to the patient: because it causes pain in the lower abdomen, and especially when it is pushed out.
And in the treatment of this disease with iron there is fear: because of this the case should be guarded against.
And the method of operation is to push out the intestines from the abdomen of the patient, so that they return to their natural cavity
And then it is laid back over its collar between your hands: and raise up its edges.
And then spread out the skin which follows the skin upwards, and dry the whole of the testicles thoroughly
And then fix in two hooks two needles of sectioning, according as it is necessary to open the section with the instrument: and the section should be made according to the amount which is possible, so that it may escape from it all things
And then remove the fat under the skin, and that which is under the testicles, until the white intestine, hard from all parts, is detected: then insert your finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white intestine and the intestines, and between the intestines themselves and the whole with that which is in the back of the testicle.
Then move your right hand to the inside of the skin of the testicles: and with this extend a white patch upwards with your left hand: and elevate one with the white patch to the part of the section: and command the minister to extend the other upwards: and you shall solve the adherence, which is the complete reverse solution.
Seek your fingers, that there be nothing there of the intestines entangled in the white patch or hard
If however you find anything there: then drive it down to the lower belly
Then grasp the needle, in which there is a thick thread, made of ten threads: and introduce it through the back of the white patch, that is, the tunica which follows the section: and cut off the extremities which protrude from the thread, until there remain four threads.
Then make a loop with each over each other in the shape of a cross: and ligate with two threads, of which we have spoken, because it is under the skin of the testicles a ligament which unites them, until it cannot any longer contain any of the things which nourish them: so that it does not happen that after the operation there remains a cold abscess
And put in again a ligament outside the first ligament, long enough to be less than two fingers.
And after these two ligatures draw out from the white patch, which is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the quantity of the magnitude of a finger: and cut off the rest entirely according to the roundness, and take out from it one.
Then dry the lower part of the skin of the testicles of the section from which blood runs, and heal: as we have narrated before.
Then apply soaked wool under the bandage in oil, and put in: and administer the ligament which we have narrated.
And when the white pith has been cauterized, after its incision be watchful of the flow of blood.
Blood flow is prone to occur in this case.
And let go the ligament until it falls away by itself.
If, however, its case is delayed, then it will be bound with warm water: and place above that which we mentioned, until it falls away
Then care for the wound with the rest of the care for wounds, until it heals
Of a Suppurated Limb.
Chapter LXVI.</start_of_turn>
In a Suppurated Limb let no one presume to treat it with iron
And first they say that it is like that which we have narrated in the Ramus which is with the Bone-Splint.
That is, as the bone-splint is applied after the section above that with ease: then dry in the middle, and care afterwards with that which opens it up, until the splints fall away: and care for the wound, as we have mentioned, until it heals
Of the disruption which occurs in the Groins
Chapter LXVII.</start_of_turn
When a Rupture occurs in the Groins, as we have mentioned, and the place is evident, and the intestines do not descend to the testicles for anything: and if they descend, it is little, and returns in every hour: indeed if prolonged for a long time, a fissure is added in the pith, until the intestines descend into the pith
And this occurs from the extension of the pith, which is in the Groins, as we have mentioned
When the swelling has been extended, it is softened, and the place is raised up, and it emits.
Its care is like that with cautery, as it has been said before.
When it is cured with iron, it is done in this way: the patient lies upon his back between your hands.
Then dry the place of the rupture, raise it up and emit it by cutting across its breadth, according to the quantity of three fingers
Then bind up the swelling and those which are under the skin, until the white swelling, which is under the skin following the said, is detected.
Then take the radium and place it upon the place where the swelling has emitted from the swelling, and press it deep into the belly
Then take two points from the edge of the swelling from the swelling, and join them with a suture: then draw out the edge of the swelling
And do not cut through the swelling at all, neither pull out hair or anything else, like I have told you in the treatment of intestinal branches. Then care for the wound.
When you have finished cutting the suture, moisten it, and restore the wound, until it is consolidated
Let the swelling relax, and do not add to the emission of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place: because it is closer to the membrane.
About the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Chapter LXVIII.
The skin of the testicles is softened in many people, because the meats which are between them are softened, and the aspect of it is made worse.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asking for treatment to make the patient lie upon his back, and to cut through the whole skin which has been softened over the natural skin. Then two lips are to be brought together with sutures: and if desired, the excess of softened skin is to be excised with three or four sutures, and to tighten the suture
And then to care for the remaining wounds until they are healed, and the stitches are to be removed
(The text following this point is not included in the request and is not translated.)
Chapter LXIX
You know that castration is forbidden in our law: and because of this it is permitted for me not to remind it in this book: and it is not necessary to remind it, except for two cases.
Of which one is that it is in the science of medicine when it is inquired about: and to know its treatment when it has happened.
And the other is that we are much in need of castration for some animals, because of our enjoyment of them, such as horses, gazelles, and cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is done in two ways. Or by cutting off.
Or by incision, and section
In which way, however, which is done by attrition, the operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water, until the testicles soften and relax, and hang down: then cut off their hands, until they are dissolved and do not appear to the touch
In castratione autem per fissuram et sectionem, oportet ut teneas animal, et premas cutem testiculorum eius cum manu sinistra.
And thus is the better method of castration by attrition: for perhaps attrition will leave something behind from the testicles, which the animal desires in coitus.
Then care for the wound until it has healed.
Of the care of hermaphrodites, two methods exist
(The text continues with further medical instructions.)
A hermaphrodite is born from two mothers
One of them appears because it follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, or between two testicles, a figure like a female vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine comes out from that which is in the skin of the testicles
But in women there is only one kind, which is the female vulva which is placed over the belly like small testicles and extends outwards: of which one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testicles
And the care of the three kinds, two of which are born from two mothers, and the one from a woman, is: because it is necessary to cut away the added flesh until the impression of them is fled.
Then care for the rest of the wounds
But as for the second kind of hermaphroditism from which urine comes from the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any care for it whatsoever.
On the incision of the Tentiginis, and the protruding flesh in the vulvas of women.
On the incision of the Tentiginis, and the protruding flesh in the vulvas of women.
The Tentiginis sometimes adds something beyond its natural size, until it becomes deformed and unsightly: and sometimes it swells in certain women to such an extent that it expands as far as the hips, and persists until coitus.
It is necessary therefore to remove the superfluous flesh of the Tentiginis, either with one cut or two: and do not hesitate in the incision, especially in the depth of the root: lest there should be a flow of blood
Then take care of the healing of the wound, until it is healed
But the flesh which is born in the opening of the womb, until it is expelled: and perhaps it goes out to the exterior like the tail: and because of this some call it caudal fistula.
It is necessary therefore to incisions as we did the Tentiginis, and to take care of it, until it is healed
On the care of the Alratica, which is the vulva of a woman which is not perforated.
On the care of the Alratica, which is the vulva of a woman which is not perforated
The Alratica is, when it is neither perforated nor has a small opening.
It is either natural or accidental
It is accidental from an ailment which preceded it: and sometimes it is formed from the native flesh added, or from fine blood vessels, or from fat: and it occurs either in the depth of the womb, or in the flanks, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps prevents menstruation
Knowledge of the condition is acquired from the aspect of obstetrics, when the opening appears close at hand.
If it is not apparent, then seek with your fingers, or with the aid of an instrument.</start_of_turn>
If the opening is from a thin membrane, and is close to the bones, then grasp firmly, and break it.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary to place over two lips two cushions.</start_of_turn>
Then place your two fingers of both hands together, and the woman should sit with her buttocks spread wide.</start_of_turn
Then stretch out the two lips with force, until the thin membrane is broken and the opening is created.</start_of_turn
Then grasp wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the place: and the woman should abstain from all food until the place has healed.</start_of_turn
If the membrane is thick and tough: then it is necessary to cut it with a knife like the edge of a myrtle leaf.</start_of_turn
If the opening is from natural flesh: then suspend it with hooks, and cut it through: and be with physicians who will cause the flow of blood without causing damage, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus it will be aggregated with albumin or urine.</start_of_turn>
Then administer a wide lead cannula, so that it does not cause the wound to heal too quickly, keep it for a few days: and administer vinegar from dry wine, then care for the rest of the treatment until it heals.</start_of_turn
And when there is birth in the matrix of other meats: it is necessary to do this in this way: while there is no cancerous tumor in the matrix, do not use iron in any way.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red in the veins of women.
Concerning the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor of the red in the veins of women.
Hemorrhoids are indeed the opening of the veins of the rectum, from which blood flows out in large quantities due to excess.
When the hemorrhoids have become large, they cause pain: and as I have already mentioned in the discussion of their kinds, and their signs: here I will tell you what is to be received for their treatment, and what is not
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are in the belly and not visible to the eye: then there is no treatment for them with iron.
Those which are in the belly and over which sense falls are those which are cured.
It is necessary therefore that the woman be put into a cold house
Then stretch out Athehelil with forceps, or with rough cloth, and cut away the roots from them
Then powder over the roots with one of the powders mentioned above, without causing any damage: like acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus, and similar things.
Then press her feet against the wall for an hour.
Then put her down in cold water.
If the bleeding persists: then make her sit in a decoction of rue, and nutmeg seeds, and barley, and similar things.
Then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back
If the bleeding stops with this: good. And if not, make the edges of the wound adhere to each other, and give her milk, without causing any damage
Then take wool and soak it in grease of poppy seeds, or in almond oil, or in fat of asses, that is, beeswax, wine of Ponticus, and make it adhere to the wound.
When the swelling has subsided, then care for the place with unguents until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
However, it is red like a head of garlic, and has a rough appearance.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary therefore that you cut away what appears from it, as I said a little while ago: and care for it until it has healed.</start_of_turn>
Of the perforation of the Exitura which happens in the matrix.</start_of_turn>
The head is seventy-four.</start_of_turn
Many kinds of swellings happen in the matrix, such as cancer, and stone abscess, and ulcer, and tumor, and carbuncle, and herpes, and aestioma, and fistula, and hemorrhoids, and carbuncles, and gangrene.</start_of_turn
And I will say also that I mentioned all these diseases and their signs and their cures in detail: it is necessary to say in this treatise the carbuncle which happens in the matrix, when it is from swellings which join health, and to know how to open it with a knife.</start_of_turn
You must consider this.</start_of_turn
When the pain of the swelling is acute with percussion, flame and fever: and you see it turning red: if it falls over your senses, do not attempt to perforate it: care for it with something that will promote maturation, until the acute pain of the accident has subsided.</start_of_turn
Then it is necessary that you make her sit upon a seat which beats two seats beneath her, and that she recline or is supported upon her back, and that she gather her feet to the lower part of her belly: and that her knees be spread wide, and that she place her arms under her knees, and that she tie each ligament conveniently to that.
Then let the midwife sit to the right, and manage the instrument with which the opening of the birth passage is made.
Whose shape comes in the shape of an egg which is behind
And it is necessary that when you administer this instrument that the liver is placed with the ribs at the depth of the woman's belly: so that it does not go in deeper than the belly, and does not damage the lower part
If however the instrument is greater than the depth of the belly, then you must place sponges upon the covering of the depth of the belly: so that the entrance of the whole instrument into the belly is prohibited: and you must place a bandage which runs in the instrument from the upper side: and that you hold the instrument and that you rotate the minister of the bandage until the depth of the belly is opened.
When therefore the opening appears, and the hand touches it, and it is soft and gentle: then it is necessary that you cut her near her head with a broad spatula.
When therefore the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put on a compress soaked in warm rose-water: or in green oil, in which there is some astringency: and put on the compress, and draw out the section from the depth of the belly
And put externally on the belly, and on the flanks a warm wool blanket soaked in water in which there are bubbles.
Then he cares for two days with the unguent that agrees with it, until it is healed.
When the matrix and the vulnus have been bathed, it is to be plastered with water and honey: then with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled: then return to the unguent.
If the vulnus has been hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to keep it away from its cure with iron, or to care for it in the way we have mentioned in the previous instruction
Concerning the obstetrics of women, how to treat the embryos of the womb, according to the unnatural figure of their emergence.
Chapter 72.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to first learn the natural figure of delivery.
When women are squeezed in childbirth and desire to smell the air, and groan over what is above them during delivery, and hasten the birth of the embryo: then you know that this delivery is natural, and that the head comes out first, and the second with it, or that it is suspended or hanging from the navel When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress the womb, so that the embryo comes down more quickly.
Whoever is beyond this delivery is unnatural and harmful
For when the fetus comes out over its feet, and its body comes out before the head, and the feet and hands together, or one foot alone: or the head and the hand: or the belly: and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and similar things from the unnatural figures.
It is necessary for the Obstetrician to be prudent, discreet in all these matters, and to beware of error and neglect: for I shall demonstrate every figure from these [instruments], and how each is designed, and it will be understood thereby, and I shall stand above it.
When the fetus emerges over its head during its natural expulsion, and the latter is difficult for the woman, and its virtue is impaired: then let her sit down, or let the women hold her: and let steam rise from her moisture with vinegar and decocted henbane, and with oily substances.
Then the Obstetrician inserts his fingers between the [vaginal] lips of the Sponge, and finds the second one, and severs it with his nail, until it runs out from the moisture: and he grasps the woman's belly, until the fetus descends
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to instill the woman with [a solution of] vinegar from henbane, with slippery elm.
Then command her to lie down after instilling, so as to compress: and let her breathe steadily for an hour.
The fetus will immediately come out.
If two hands of the fetus emerge at once, it is necessary to reduce them gradually with ease
If it does not obey in the delivery, then let the woman sit down and elevate her feet above the ground: then press the seat down to the earth: and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the concussion
If the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut through the ease and extract the fetus: and tie up the hand with a cloth, and extract it with evenness: for it will come out itself.
The fetus has emerged from its feet.
When the fetus emerges from its feet, then it is necessary to urge it upwards: afterwards, gradually convert the fetus: finally, equalize it itself.
Then grasp one of its feet and extend it gradually.
When it has emerged as far as the thighs, then command it to lie down, so that it will compress and rest: it will then go out, God willing.
If it does not come out as we have described, then gradually reduce the fetus until you have set it according to its natural shape
For indeed it will go out of itself then
If it is obstructed as we have described: then take from the high slime, and blood clots, and gum dissolved in water: and pierce all through in the belly with a good blow: then join with the woman's urine and the lower part of her belly.
Then make her sit in warm water, until the afterbirth follows naturally.
When the lower parts are softened by the heat, then give her a sieve of myrrh: and support her
When she has held the sieve for an hour, then make her sit on a seat
Then command her to sneeze: and strain her jaw and nose: and compress the lower part of her belly gently
For the fetus will go out immediately.
The fetus has emerged from its knees and hands
When it appears in this form, then it will gradually withdraw its hands inwards.
Then the woman lies upon her shoulder, and her feet hang down below: she lies upon the bed, and she covers her hands.
Then she slowly raises her belly upwards
Then pull out what is under her feet from the shoes, until it is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then grasp her feet and move them up and down
Then slowly press what is above the navel upwards, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts
Then put in your hands, and gently support the fetus: and command the woman to press, until the fetus comes out.
The fetus comes out hanging laterally from the hands
It is completed in the reduction of her hand
But if it is not possible to reduce the hand, then raise up the woman, and make her walk.
If she is unable to walk, then make her lie on the bed: and strike her thighs with a blow which is enough to cause her to groan
Then apply the liniment which you prepared from mucilages.
If she gives birth, then make her sit on a seat
Then watch in the reduction of the hand, and equal the fetus according to its natural figure: and command the woman to breathe steadily, and tell her to press, until it comes out
The fetus comes out on her shoulder, with her hands spread out, and her face is towards the mother's back
The obstetrix must hold the hand of the fetus firmly, then gradually release it, and equalize it with ease.
When it is equal, then place above its belly what we have mentioned from wax and mucus
Then command it to move gradually.
When you have done this, then make it sit on its seat, and command it to incline to the right side.
Then command it to press: and make it exhale with a cough.
The fetus is prepared for birth on the right side.
When it descends to the opening of the womb in this manner with the second [finger], then tear the second [finger] with your thumb, until it is evacuated from the moisture
If it is suspended on the face of the fetus, and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it does not remain and does not die
Then push the fetus inwards, until you have placed it according to what is required: and command the woman to press slightly: for it will go out through the easy birth opening itself.
Birth of twins, or many fetuses.
You know that twins are often born together: and sometimes three or four are born together.
However, this is an unusual thing, and is rarely found.
Five or more is beyond nature, and does not endure: and continues with them, although multiplied, the second one being joined to one: and they are separated by the navel of each of them
And sometimes they come out like a single fetus through the natural birth opening, easily: and sometimes they come out through an unnatural opening, as we have narrated. If some things are difficult at the part, and they reach that which we mentioned from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have said: and let the obstretrix be slight, and let her do what she does with ease and tardiness, and she shall adapt herself to every figure as she is prepared from the ingenuity leading to safety.
When one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten are formed in the womb: and I have seen it verified that a woman has aborted seven, and another fifteen, all of whom were formed.
That which is done by the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore all this pertains to the science of Obstetrics Perhaps therefore it will reach that which is like this: oppose to it what pertains to it
Of the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you care for a dead fetus with that which I said in the discourse from the medicine, and it does not go out, and you must do what you will with your hands, then you must consider it
If a woman is of sound virtue and is not with any of the things from which she is afraid to lose her life during childbirth: then it must be that she rests on her seat, on her back, and let her head be inclined downwards, and her legs be elevated: and the minister shall keep hold of her from two parts, or she shall be bound to the bed, so that her body is not pulled out during the extraction of the fetus
Then moisten the os matrice with oils which are humid with mucilage of high rank, and fennel, and linseed seed. Then let the Obstetrix put his hand into the matrix with ease after having moistened it with these oils and mucilages.
Then he seeks the place where the ribs are joined to the fetus, and the convenient place for it
Consider now therefore, if the fetus is ready to descend upon his head: then fix the ribs to his eyes, or to his neck, or to his mouth, or to his palate, or under his beard, or under his armpits, or in the adjacent parts of the ribs, and under the hypopomus
If, however, the descent is upon his feet, then in the loin, and in the middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he grasp the rib with his right hand: and let his curvature rest in that which is between the left thumb and the little finger: and he introduces it with the hand with ease, and fixes the rib in one of those places which we mentioned until it comes to a halt
Then extend with an equal extension, and do not be extended only in a straight line, but move towards all parts, so as to alleviate its exit: as it is done with a tooth when it is extracted.
And it is necessary between these to soften the extension.
Which if it is retained from this side, then let the Obstetrix grasp any digit with oil, and introduce it from the side, so as to rotate with it what is retained
If therefore the limb of the fetus comes out, then change the nails to another place which is higher: do this until the fetus comes out entirely
If the hand has gone beyond another, and it is not possible to restore it, because of its compression: then it is necessary to cover over the wound.
Then withdraw the hand until it has gone beyond all the way, cut the palm of the hand or at the base of the plant, or at the elbow: and thus it is necessary that you make in the hand the other way around, and in two feet.
If however the head of the fetus is large, or if there is compression for him in the birth, or there is water in his head: then it is necessary that he introduce between the fingers the Spatumile spinosum, and find it with the head, and extract the water: or break it with the instrument which is called Almisdac: whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which follows.
Likewise do as concerning a fetus of great head-size; then it is necessary that you cut through the membrane. Or extract him with the hook, as we have said.
Then draw out the bones with forceps.
When the head has gone out, and is compressed at the rib: then it is found, until the moisture which is in the chest is drained out
When however it does not complicate, neither does it obey the going out: then cut off the head roughly, as much as is possible for you
When however the lower belly is apostematized, or there is water in it: then it is necessary that you perforate it, until the moisture is run out of it.
When however the fetus is above his feet: then the traction of him is easy, and the direction of him towards the maternal bone is gentle
When however it is compressed at the belly, or the chest: then it is necessary that you extract it with the cloth which you have covered over your hand: and find the belly, or the chest, until it is run out of it.
If, however, the other limbs are removed and the head remains: then the Obstetrix inserts his left hand into the head. If the mouth of the uterus is open: then he inserts his hand into the depth of the uterus, and grasps the head, and pulls it towards the os of the uterus: then he inserts into it one or two fingers and pulls them with it.</start_of_turn>
If the os of the uterus is closed, because of a thick clot which has occurred to it: then it is not necessary to work above it, indeed it is necessary at that time to administer an effusion of liquid things, fats: and administer plasters: and sit in water which softens and moistens.</start_of_turn>
If the fetus is above its side: then it is possible to equalize it: then is administered what we said concerning the fetus above.</start_of_turn>
If that is not possible, then it is done hastily, and it is extracted.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that you do not let anything fall out of the second part entirely.</start_of_turn>
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said concerning the clots which occur in the uterus.</start_of_turn
If blood flows: then descends into styptic waters, and administer the rest of the treatment.</start_of_turn
And I myself have seen a woman in whose womb a fetus was dead: then she was impregnated above her with another, afterwards another fetus was also dead.</start_of_turn
It happened to her afterwards a long time, a clot in her navel, which was inflated, until it opened: and it began to emit pus.</start_of_turn
I am called to his care, and I have treated him for a long time: and the wound is not consolidated.
I place above it some strong adhesive plaster: and it has come out of its place.</start_of_turn>
Then some days passed by, and it came out of its place again.</start_of_turn
I am sore there, because there is no bone in it.</start_of_turn>
I think therefore that there were dead bones of a fetus.</start_of_turn>
I asked about the wound, and I extracted many bones, the woman being in better conditions: and I have treated it thus for a long time, and it is now leaving pus a little.</start_of_turn
And I did not consolidate this foreign body, except that there is science in it, and an aid to that which the artificer doctor administers with his hand in treatment.</start_of_turn>
Regarding the forms of the necessary instruments for extracting a fetus.</start_of_turn
Chapter 77.</start_of_turn>
Here below is the form of the Strictor, with which books are equalised, having two rings in two extremities of two sticks.</start_of_turn
But it must be known that this hook should be finer than the strictor: and that it should be made either of ebony or of seasoned wood.</start_of_turn
And the width of every stick is like two fingers: and the margin of each of them is like one finger, and the length of each of them is palm and a half: and in the middle of the two sticks are two additaments of the same kind of wood, which are firm in both, of whose length is half a palm and a little, and the width of each is like two fingers, or less.</start_of_turn
Two additional things are introduced into the matrix of the bone, so that it opens when you rotate two Vertigines.
The form of the Vertigines which opens the matrix.
Another form like that, finer and lighter.
It is made from the wood of the bone, or from ivory, according to the shape of pincers.
Indeed, at its extremity these two things are introduced, as mentioned above: and the length of each of these things from the tip is like a palm, and the breadth of each is like two fingers
When you wish to open the matrix with these, then make her sit on a chair, with her feet hanging over the edge, and open what is between her buttocks
Then introduce these two things together into the matrix: and you hold the lower extremity of the instrument between her thighs
Then open your hand with the instrument, like you do with pincers, equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the matrix, until the Obstetrician wishes to stop
The other form of the Vertigines which they said was like the Impelling Force which drives out the fetus.
The form of the Almidach which counteracts the small head The shape of the neighbour who has one spine.
The form of the neighbor having spines two.
The form of the forceps which has teeth serrated, with which the head of the fetus is held.
The form of the spatula having two extremities to bind the head
The form of two spatulas also of the hands
These instruments are all used, and the more numerous their species, and the more they are prepared by the artificer, the more rapid is the operation and the greater is the benefit to men, on account of their quantity.
It does not behove you to despise any of these instruments, because they are prepared for you
Necessity compels them indeed
About the extraction of the second one
Head seventy-eighth
When the second one is retained at birth, then it is necessary to remove the lower ones, so that it may retain its breath.
Then make a grasp with your thumb on its bone, and grasp its nostrils.
If it comes out through this, it is good
If not: then grasp the head and perforate through the skull: and put in it herbs that will open the bone of the matrix, such as calamine, rue, and alum, chamomile, and saffron, and balsam, and cedar: grasp all of these herbs, or some of them, and immerse them with water, and put them over fire.
Then put a bundle of reeds over the hole of the skull, and the other extremity in the bone of the matrix: and hold it until the vapor has reached the cavity of the matrix
Then make the incision as we have said.
The incision shall proceed easily from that point forward.
If, however, after this treatment, it still fails to proceed: then command the Obstetrician to immerse his hand in the navel-fat or in the thick mucus of the belly Then insert the instrument into the wound and explore with it alongside the second incision
When you have found it, then grasp it and gradually expand it
If, however, it is an appendix that lies deep in the belly: then insert the hand once more, as we have said, until you have reached the second incision. Then slowly withdraw the hand, following the natural direction, so as not to tear the matrix at the point of traction. It is better, however, to move the appendix to the right and left sides: then add some traction as well
The wound itself will now obey and be cured, and will depart from its adherence.
If the matrix is closed, as we have said: care for the wound with closure, and from an ointment jar with herbs.
If it still does not depart after all that we have said: then beware lest you tire yourself out in the process of its extraction
It is true that it must come out at the os of the matrix to the woman's hip
Then bandage the wound with unguent tetrapharmacon
The wound itself will become rotten after a few days, and will then dissolve and depart
Indeed when it has become rotten, it will emit a bad odor from the stomach and head, and this will cause sickness.
It is necessary therefore that suitable fumigations be administered for that.
Some of the ancients are experts in fumigation with naphtha and powdered alum.</start_of_turn>
The mode of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated for the retention of the second [menstrual] flow.</start_of_turn>
Let it be like an outpouring of milk, or from a horn: and the outer end shall be spread over the fire: and the fumigation shall be placed over the berries: let it remain there until the said fumigation has been consumed; and do it again.</start_of_turn
Concerning the care of an unpierced animal.</start_of_turn
Chapter LXXIX.</start_of_turn>
Many boys are born with their navels unpierced, whom I have seen to be nourished by fine oil.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that the midwife pierce that [navel] with her finger: and if not, pierce it with a fine needle: and beware of tears, lest it touch him.</start_of_turn
Then place upon it wool soaked in wine and oil.</start_of_turn
Then care for it with nails until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If indeed it is to be done, then put in the hole a lead cannula for many days, and remove it when the boy wishes to go.</start_of_turn
And it sometimes happens that the navel of an animal is pierced from the consolidation of the wound, or from the afterbirth.</start_of_turn
It is necessary therefore that you dry that consolidation, and then care for it as we said before concerning care and lead.</start_of_turn Concerning the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Concerning the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are of two kinds: Nodulation and Swelling which occur close to any bone, or in the space of one part: and are one fistula, or more.
When the nodule has been thus removed, it is opened, and white watery moisture or subtle pus runs out from it
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating
And there are fistulas when they are penetrating from the space until the bone, and until the marrow of the bone.
And they are penetrating from the space until the hip joint, and until the node of the buttocks
From this, however, it is known that a penetrating fistula until a bone, even if not penetrating, is, as it were, that you insert your finger into the bone: and you insert a needle subtile into the fistula from the air, or from iron: when there is no curvature (of the bone).
When there is curvature in it, then insert into the bone a fine lead needle, or a hair from a horse's tail, until you feel the needle, or the hair in your finger
When you do not feel it penetrate, neither from a wound, nor from evacuation, nor swelling, nor a worm as I have said: then you know that it is not penetrating: do therefore the treatment correctly
And when the fistula is penetrating until the marrow, or until the bladder: then the significance of it is the discharge of urine from it, and the prohibition of this from happening again until it has healed with the physicians.
If it has penetrated as far as the hip joint, or even to the bones of the hip: then its sign is that it proceeds until there, if there is no twist of the organ until the bones: and there is pain surrounding the part, and pus always comes out from it; and no medicine is useful for it, neither is it consolidated with ointment.
In all these penetrating wounds there is no complete cure: the cure for them is toil and perseverance, from the fools of doctors, on whom they are formed.</start_of_turn> But in those which are neither penetrating nor old, hope of healing is expected with support: as I have said before, and as I have proved: that is, let the patient lie between your hands on his back: and lift his legs up to above his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly.</start_of_turn>
Then introduce lead or air, if there is a twist in the fistula, until you know where the tentacle ends.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the patient feels around the limb something, then it is necessary to introduce your finger as a sign into the limb.</start_of_turn
If you feel in your finger the tentacle which you have detected is penetrating, besides that which you feel between your finger and the flesh, or between the flesh and bone: then you know certainly that it is penetrating: no labour is to be done in it, because its cure is not that.</start_of_turn>
They say that in some men the cure is in the flesh itself, and in the medicine which is expected to be of benefit, that is, to make a slight cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been said before, and to introduce the flame into the fistula until it reaches around the limb.</start_of_turn
Then do it again twice or thrice until you know that all the added flesh, which is like the pennae of birds, has become soft.
Then keep it bound with butter until the flesh has gone; then do it with unguents which generate flesh and consolidate it.
If it is healed, that is good.
If not, it will not be healed by any other treatment.
If it comes out, and does not mend until it reaches your thumb which is in the year, and is between the thumb and the great toe, and there is a thick layer of flesh between them, and blood: then make an opening in that which follows the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the opening, and you dry with the thumb which is in the fistula until it comes away from the cutting edge, and the thumb is freed and falls off
Then soften those soft flesh which have become like the pennae of birds, so that nothing remains of them.
If however blood boils between you and the operation, and dissolves between you and the operation as you cut: then it is better to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the cauterizing with fire brings together the good qualities, brings about the softening of the added flesh and the cutting off of blood, and dries out humours.
Then keep it bound with butter or poultices until pus comes out, and the soft flesh becomes pus
Then do it with strong unguents which consolidate and generate flesh: and these are medicines which have stypticity and drying power
When restoration is complete, then healing has occurred: and not through repeated attempts. When, however, the fistula persists to the depth of the rectum, and is prolonged by the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the rectum and inquire about it.
If, however, you feel resistance, and between you and the rectum there is either fat or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation in that place, except according to the measure of trust and hope
For in that case one must employ three measures: either one cauterizes the same [fistula], as we have said: or one severs the vein, until you have obtained a flattening of it, so that it is possible for you to insert instruments, and to heal from the next time
And do not proceed too much with the section, lest you cut through the mucous membrane of the rectum, and thereby cause an excessive discharge of blood without your consent. Then care for it as we have said Perhaps it will heal by itself: or you will lengthen the vein, and dry it up after you have softened it, as we have said, or with the finger, or with an acute instrument.
Then soften the surrounding flesh which is in the section, until it becomes soft as with the mark of a scratch
Then try to restore the whole wound with the section, and the upper orifice where consolidation has taken place: and the fistula will remain open in the inner part of the rectum, and will be easier over the infirmity.
And when you suture the fistula in this way: that is, when you insert your finger into the fistula: and it is on the side of the rectum around the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the rectum: then grasp the tip of the instrument which is like a needle, that is, one that pierces the skin, according to this shape.
And introduce within the loop of the entangled thread from five threads, and surround them.
And introduce the needle with the thread through the hole, until the hole follows the curve of the loop
If there is a perforation on the inner margin of the anus near the base, then withdraw the thread from that hole: so that you can introduce your finger into the anus and withdraw the end of the thread, and bring together both ends: and tighten both of them, and let go of it on one day, or two days: and the more the thread has entered the flesh, tighten it well, until those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the thread have fallen away: then care for the wound until it has healed, and it will be restored.</start_of_turn>
You must not make it penetrate because of the tear, so that you do not damage it.</start_of_turn
Then do as we have said, until it heals.</start_of_turn>
Make a sponge of the kind which is found in the fistula, whose curvature is acute above and blunt below, so that it does not tear that which is not necessary, like urine.</start_of_turn
On the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood runs from the incision of them: and care for the incisions.</start_of_turn
Chapter 8.</start_of_turn>
There are hemorrhoids of two kinds.</start_of_turn
Some are within the anus, like the stones of a carob or of a plum: or as if they were like the seeds of a walnut.</start_of_turn
There are both small and large ones among them: and blood always flows from them, and it is one, and there are many of them.
And they are outside the body, and at their extremities.
But those that are outside the body are mostly small and moist, from which flows clear urine or a little blood slowly: and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the treatment of the one inside the body is to apply pressure to the patient: and to express it out until the anus is evacuated, and to show that the pain has gone away
Therefore, do so also with the hands: or hold them with your finger
And then strike them at the roots of their hairs.
If, however, they do not remain in the wound because of the moisture of the wound and their softness: then cover them with rough cloth, or with a bandage of felt, and pull them out with your fingers
And then strike them, and powder over them after cutting whatever powder you wish, so that they remain in the place of the cautery
Or cauterize them according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery.
And then care for the wound until it heals.
And if the anus does not evacuate, then administer to the patient a cathartic in which there is a slight biting, so that it may be evacuated quickly when the patient expels it.
If, however, they are outside the anus, then the matter is easy: and it is as though you were grasping them with your finger, or grasping them with a forceps, and cutting them off
Then care for them as we have said until they are healed.
He who shuns incision with the knife must now administer the suture according to this manner.
Take the twisted thread and introduce it into the point.
Then draw out the thread to the upper part and make it penetrate with the needle at its root from the opposite side: and pass through two ends of the thread, at the lower part of the needle, and make them lateral: and tighten the thread strongly.
Then knot the thread and draw out the needle.
Do this with all the stitches and let go of one: neither keep it too tight, lest there be excessive bleeding from it.
Then place upon each wound a soaked compress of infused oil in rose water, or butter, and place it upon the wound: and command the patient to rest.
Then let it go until it falls off naturally
When the stitches have fallen out, care for them with unguents and remain attentive until they are healed
(The text continues with instructions on wound care.)
Many times these arise from excessive evacuation of stool, and constriction of nature.
When these things are wanting, and no medicine will avail: then it is necessary to mark with the point of Spatumilis, or with your finger, until they become moist, and remove from the wound the upper layer which hinders adhesion.
Then care for them until they are consolidated as seems necessary
If, however, they do not consolidate: then repeat the process of cleaning with greater force than before, until they bleed much, and are afterwards cared for until they are healed
On the treatment of wounds of the limbs, and not of the limbs: and Athlete’s foot, and Warts.
Then care for it: and if you wish, cauterize it according to what has preceded in its chapter.
As for Athlete’s foot, it is one small, rough, filtered, round elevation above the surface of the body
And it often happens in the hands of children
And its treatment is to extend the Athlete’s foot and cut it: or to tie it with a silk thread: or with hair, until it falls off
And if you wish, cauterize it according to what has been said with fire, or with acute medicine: and thus you will extirpate the inward Athlete’s foot, and not the outward with an instrument which I will tell you of And as for Warts, it is also a small, filtered elevation, large, above the surface of the body, spreading in depth and breadth: and when it appears in cold weather, it feels like the bite of a worm in it, and it occurs throughout the body: and most of them happen in the hands
And its treatment is to take a needle from the beak of an ostrich, or a strong hair: and put it on the Wart, until it contains the circle of the needle from its parts.
Then withdraw your hand with the cannula until you reach the circumference of the maggot: and place it in the depth of the flesh, and extract the maggot from its root. Or if you wish, do this with an air cannula or a metallic one, according to this form
Let the upper part of the cannula reach the underside of the thumb which is drawn tight, so that it alleviates the tension of the thumb itself and its retraction
Or if you wish, burn the maggot according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cautery of Athelius.
As for the forms of the instruments which are administered to the clister in wounds of animals, and the solution of the belly, and the colic.
Chapter 83.
When the clister is made of silver, or gold, or of blown glass, or hammered metal.
And when they are made of these instruments, small and large, according to those in which they are administered
This is done in the care of young children with inflamed lungs, and those which are weak or painful, thus also the clisters of them
A large clister
A small clister
The cannula, that is, the upper part which is tied to the uterus, should be wide according to this measure: and it should have a distinction so that it is tied to the uterus like water, and its lower part which goes into the belly should be closed, soft, flexible, drawn to thinness: and on one of its sides there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole
The breadth of the opening should be as great as the length of the rays, and less so, and the depth in which the medicines are placed is from the belly of the beast: or from parchment of birds, which is according to the shape of the asofrat of the sparrow: whose root is a single palm.
When it is placed in this depth, it is sutured at the head of the wound between two marks of constriction strong enough
And then close with it.
This is the shape of the circle here described, and of the holes. The quality of the stitching with this is: to grasp both, or the belly from the medicine which is warmed according to the degree of the patient's tolerance: and beware that it is neither too hot nor too cold, nor too cold.
Then the patient is laid upon his back, and lifts his legs upwards: and place under this the intestines, that is, the skin over which men or linen rests
Then bind the extremities of the sutures with fat, or with alum, or with barley flour, or like these.
Then introduce the instrument into the abdomen with ease.
Then take hold of the belly with both hands and press it out until it ejects all that is in the suture into the intestines Then remove the suture, and lift the patient's legs to the side If the physician considers him to be leaving, then he shall retain as much as he can.
If he sleeps throughout the night, it is the last resource in his care
If, however, you bathe him in the bowels of the solution of the belly, and he is hastening his departure: then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the rectum, then let the enema be gentle and soft, from enemas which children receive
And this is the form of the gentle enema over which the skin is tight
On the treatment of wounds of the head without fracture of the bone.
Chapter 84.
I have said in the discourse about the treatment of wounds that it agrees with the book, and I shall say here the treatment of them with the hand and with the doctor according to the complement.
I say therefore, that wounds are diversified according to that from which they arise, and according to the place where the wound falls.
The wounds which are made by many things are like the blows of a stone: or the cutting of a sword or knife: or the percussion with a lance, or wood, or arrow: and the like of these from many things.
Wounds, however, which arise from the place of the body, such as a wound which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the genitals: and the like of these from the limbs.
And I am speaking of the treatment of some wounds, so that I may set out the reasoning and rule concerning the rest of the wounds.
And I shall commence with simple head wounds: for the recollection of complex matters will arise at the beginning of the third chapter.
Indeed I say.
When a simple head wound occurs, and there is no fracture of the bone: consider then, if it is from a piece of stone, or like it, and if it has merely broken the skin: and it is a great wound, and the time of a severe infection has passed: then take care of it immediately, and perform a cephalic bleed: do not delay this. And extract from him from the blood according to the quantity of his virtue: if there is nothing that prohibits it, especially if there is little blood issuing from the wound
And let the bleed be from the opposite side of the wound
And let the patient be warned against repletion, and wine, and coarse food.
If anything prohibits the reduction [of the wound], then reduce from food, and do not approach meat, nor drink wine
And apply upon the wound if it happens to him a soft swelling, a bandage soaked in warm oil, or with wine in which there is styptic.
If you are secure from the swelling, then apply upon the wound, if it is joined with its blood, and has not changed its air, the powder which I will tell you of later: and if it has changed its air, then apply upon it some unguent until it is healed
If the wound is great, or is from the incision of a knife, and the like: and the edges of it do not adhere by stitches, then adhere them together with sutures, according to what I shall tell you of in the inner wounds about sutures.
If, however, a vein is found to be protruding, hanging loose, and its retention is not possible, except in a small suspension: then cut it off.
Care for the vein with the physicians, and restore in it solid flesh in the place of the skin, and command the patient to nourish himself with food in which there is hardness, such as heads and cooked wheat, until the pulse returns: and so be similar.
If you find in the flesh putrefaction, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the putrefied part altogether, and throw it away: then care for the remainder
If, however, in his veins there is an artery, or a vein from which blood flows: and it is not severed by the physicians, then inquire concerning the artery.
If, therefore, you find it not severed, cut it off with Spatumili, or ligate it.</start_of_turn>
If necessity compels you when it does not conform to what we have said, then cauterize the vein, until the blood is severed.</start_of_turn>
The manner of the powder of the incarnate.</start_of_turn>
Recipe of olive oil one part, and dragon's blood two parts, and unburnt lime three parts: mix them all together, and grind them: and apply it to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it adheres well to it, and coagulates with the blood.</start_of_turn
Then bind it up again with wool, and send it away, and do not wash it until it has dried, so that it does not become softened.</start_of_turn
The medicine is not erased by it until it is healed.
Then care for the rest with the proper treatment until it is healed.
Of wounds of the head.
Head wound
If indeed a wound happens in the head, then there is no difference between it and a wound of the head when it is simple
If indeed a nerve or artery is cut: in this case if it is a nerve, it is not in vain, except that it must be treated with something which causes clotting, such as sponges, cautery, saffron, and things of that kind
For the nerves are known to go away and be contraacted
You must not put anything cold on the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is the soul of the limbs: and let this be treated with gentle medicine, such as powdered lime with a little sweet water infused with oil or with rose oil, and honey, when it washes away even with sweet water: and the rest of the mineral stones, in this way, and oily unguents.
If, however, a wound is large, then administer a suture: or bind up its lips with wool.
Then care for it until it heals.
If, however, the wound is depth, or it has happened in a sinus in its lower part, in which pus is gathered, then perforate it in a depressed place in that place.
That if blood flows from the wound due to an artery having been cut: then separate it, or dry it up, and bind it: or cauterize it, if need be for that
If, however, fragments of cartilage of the gutturis, or all of them, and the mucous membranes are torn: then gather together the lips of the skin with a suture over the neck of the gutturis, and do not touch the guttur, but rather equalize it, and reduce it over its natural form.
Then bind it tightly with a bandage, and release it in a few days.
Then care for it with unguents in which there is stypticity and drying, until it heals
If, however, a wound has made an imprint in the bone, then uncover it: then if there are fragments of bone in it, remove them all, or whatever can be taken out: and what cannot be prepared, leave it, until the wound has healed, and the bone has separated and its egressio has been expelled.
That if the wound had been recent, then grind over it powdered gypsum which I have mentioned before
If, however, it is seen in the wound a bone, and a fistula has formed: then care for it with that concerning which memory comes to you in its chapter
Head Chapter 86.
If blood flows from the wound when the patient sighs, you know that the wound is deadly
If it is not deep and the blood flows with its own blood: do not put in it powder at first, neither bind it up, lest the blood remain in its depth and be fatal. Put in it a strong dressing and leave it for two days.
If there is no dressing in the wound, put in it a thick wool pad at the opening of the wound, so that it absorbs what flows out from the moisture: and make the patient sleep on the wound so that it heals what is gathered in it
If more than three days or more have passed since the wound and the patient has neither spasm nor bad pulse nor bad breathing, nor any other symptoms, then you know that the wound is healed
Care for it and with attention, and with medicines, until it is healed.
If indeed its healing is excused, and it always opens, then you know that a fistula has been formed.
Care for it from its head chapter.
And if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then care for it as for one that has been sutured, if it is large: or with powder if it is small
If however it has made an imprint in the bone, and has burst from it: then inquire about the wound and proceed to extract the fragment, if they are separated
If they are not separated, then release them, until the bone softens, and the pain will subside naturally.
The treatment of the remaining wounds in the other parts of the body is the judgement of the practitioner in the care of them.
Of wounds of the belly and the intestines, and of their evacuation.
Chapter 87.</start_of_turn>
The rupture which happens inside is great, medium, or small.</start_of_turn>
From the great one, indeed, whenever the intestine or intestines come out.</start_of_turn
For this reason the introduction of the intestines is more difficult, and more painful.</start_of_turn
And the small rupture is also difficult because of another way.</start_of_turn
Therefore, if you do not take proper care in the introduction of the intestines to their place immediately, because it swells, opens, and thickens, it becomes difficult for them to enter.</start_of_turn
Therefore, the medium rupture is better than the great one: because in the medium one the reduction of the intestines is not difficult, as it is in the two previous ones.</start_of_turn
You know that the suture of the intestines is done in four ways.</start_of_turn
Two sutures are common for the suture of the belly, and for the suture of the remaining wounds of the body: and two other sutures are done in a different way for the remaining wounds.</start_of_turn
However, there are other methods which are proper for the suture of the intestines: and I shall tell you of one and of another with their exposition and their declaration.</start_of_turn Therefore I say, when a wound is small and something escapes from the intestine through it, making it difficult to reduce it: then that is due to one of two causes.
Either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said: or because of an inflation in the intestine caused by the cold of the air.
When it is thus, then it is necessary to heat it, so as to absorb the sponge or moisten the bandage in warm water alone
Or boil in water a little barley, and some pepper and salt, and embrace with these the intestine, until the inflation is resolved.
When it makes a sticky liquid: better than plain water for resolving the inflation.
When the inflation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with the warm water in which it has been boiled, or with oil.
For thus it will soothe the entrance of it with a little thing.
If indeed it is excused after this treatment, then find in the disruption a small opening, with the instrument with which hemorrhoids are cut.
The first treatment is better when prepared than a section: and it does not make the wound necessary to cut after the need and the defect of the instrument.
Let one part be solid, acute, and the other part not acute: and the extremity should not be with the smoothness of butter, but rather more blunt: and that is like a chickpea, as in liquid
When the wound is thus enlarged, and the intestine enters, then it is necessary to reduce it according to its natural form in its own place, if possible over that: because that is better
When the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head.
If it is in the upper part of the belly: then place his head and raise his chest higher than his lower parts.
Likewise, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly: then put your intention and your attention always in this, that the part which has the wound should be higher than the other part
And thus it is necessary that you do this in large wounds and in medium wounds.
In small wounds, put this according to what is prepared for you.
Then make sure that there is a reliable presence between your hands, who will hold the whole disruption with his hand: and join his lips together.
Then take from this something that follows the suture something: and this is the common method of stitching one.
And it is necessary that you take needles, or the number of needles according to the quantity of the wound's breadth
Then withdraw from the extremity of the disruption the quantity of a finger of the hand, i.e. the doctor: and fix the needle once you have introduced it into the thread in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of fat which is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from another side, and when you have gathered together two extremities of the skin, and two extremities of fat: and there are four orders
Then string with a double thread around the circumference of the needle several times from two parts simultaneously, until two lips of the wound are gathered together by convergence of a tenth part.
Then let go of the length of the finger also, and fix in place an edge of the skin: afterwards draw back the skin with a thread, as you did with the first needle.
Do not cease to make it until you have completed the ligation of the whole wound
And let there be needles of medium size between the length and the thickness: because the fine needles easily slip through the flesh: and the thick ones are difficult to pass through the skin: for this reason it is necessary that they be of medium size in thickness, and of length.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed at the two closest edges of the skin: so that the flesh is not easily pierced, and that the wound does not open before its consolidation, and that it does not lengthen even with the suture, so that it does not hinder the consolidation of the wound
Then prick the extremity of the needle, so that it does not damage the patient in his sleep: and place over the skin small beads from wool from all sides, which hold the extremities of the needles: and let go of them when you know that the wound has consolidated
And thus this is a kind of suture which is more suitable for small wounds.
For it suffices in the suture of these wounds with one needle, or two, or a few.
The second suture is common, that is, that you bring together four extremities: two of the skin and two of the fat, with a needle in which the thread is equally thick and thin.
Then when you have pierced with the needle the four extremities, reduce the needle from the part where you began, so that the thread which is left is withdrawn from the upper part of the wound: so that there is a suture, as when you string up cloth with a needle, and put between every suture the quantity of the length of the smaller finger
Men know this stitch.
When such a stitch is made, men know that a wound has occurred in the belly which has been caused by a knife, and that there is a rupture of the wound more than half its extent: and that there has escaped from the intestines about two palms from the middle of the intestine, and that there is a rupture in the middle of the belly.
So it was reduced after the intestine had been held outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
It was consolidated in that space for about fifteen days: and I cared for it, and it healed: and it went on living for many years afterwards, living in its accustomed place.
And the physicians judged that it would not heal.</start_of_turn>
And it happened by a miracle that I did not treat it with unguent.</start_of_turn
Because I was in a place where unguent was not to be found, neither did I have any of the physicians.</start_of_turn>
I placed above the wound a cushion of wool twice a day, and I took care of its washing with sweet water until it healed.</start_of_turn>
And two other kinds of stitches I call my own according to the narration of the sermon.</start_of_turn
And it is that you begin with a sharp stitch: and you bring the point from the exterior to the interior part.</start_of_turn
When you have thus penetrated the skin and in the lacteal cavity you have reached the endpoint of the euntem, according to the length and breadth of the whole body: withdraw the extremity of the needle in the side in which you introduced the point, and make the needle penetrate from the inside outwards in the opposite extremity.</start_of_turn
When you have finished penetrating from the exterior to the interior, then penetrate once more in the same extremity from the outside to the inside: and draw out the extremity which is on this side, which is on this side of the palm, and penetrate the thumb from the inside to the outside: and penetrate with the same penetration as you made when you penetrated the extremity of the palm, until it penetrates the whole of it.
Then also begin from this same side and draw out the extremity which is from the palm on the other side, and draw out the thumb from the skin where it penetrated
Then reduce the wound to the skin and draw out the extremity of the palm with this extremity: and draw out the thumb from the skin which is on that side, and make it one with this, and the other: and make this one after the other, until you have closed the wound throughout according to this example.
And the sum of all these sutures is like the sutures of the skin which join the skins: so that you draw out one side from one part of the extremity and draw out the other side from the other part, until you have completed it.
The second kind of suture which Gale has said is like this.
This is the way in which he has said it, namely, that you must do as certain physicians do with certain things, that is to say, unite all the parts to the same extent as is convenient by nature: and applying the extremity of the palm to its other extremity, and the thumb to the other extremity of the palm.
And this is done according to what I have said.
It is necessary to bring the thumb close to the palm from the outside, and to make it penetrate inwards only in this way: and draw out both extremities of the palm.
Then draw out the point again and make the needle pass from the outside inwards through two extremities of the sponge, namely on both sides.
Then draw out both [needles] once more, and make both penetrate from the inside outwards through two extremities of the sponge, namely on both sides opposite to each other.
And this is the better way of stitching, and is the stitching of which the memory remains.
This is as Galen also says
And some have said
The suture is rectified from the inside with two needles
That is, insert into each of the two sponges a single thread: and begin with the needle which is at your side, and make the needle pass through until it reaches the opposite side, according to the course of the suture which is to join together the two layers of skin equally
And you know that when a disruption occurs in the middle of the inside: then the suture of that is more difficult than that of the rest of the inside parts
The judgment of the quality of the medication of wounds is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
When you follow a wound with its own blood, before it changes itself in air: and reduce the gut, and take hold of it, and place it: then place over it the powdered lard.
If the air has already changed the wound: then place over it some unguents, which are those which are present, until they make pus: and the thread will fall out, and consolidate the sponge, and dry it
Then care for this in the same way as the care of the rest of the wounds, until it heals
If however these are not present [the necessary medicines], then place above it immediately, from which it begins to emit pus, a foul moisture: and change it twice a day until it heals.
If however the wound communicates with the principal parts of the body in the lesion, then it is necessary to immerse wool wool in lukewarm water, or in rose water: and place it around the parts which are between the groin and the armpits.
If it feels pain, or swelling, or corruption in its intestines (for this often happens in this), then bathe it with wine vinegar, black pepper, and warm water: especially if corruption has already appeared in the intestine, and an opening has been made through it
You know that that which comes from the great intestine is easier to heal: and that which comes from the small intestine is more difficult to heal
The intestine which is called the jejunum, does not undergo healing from the wound which happens in it in any way: and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and the greatness of their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to its own nature of nerves.
If however the matter which proceeds from the wound is bone, and you follow it up, reduce it according to your reduction of the intestines which you make equal
If however it has passed beyond that space, and has become black, or dark: then you must tie it up with thread above the place which is degenerated from it, so that the blood flow does not happen again.
For in bone there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond that ligament, and place two hanging ends of thread from the lower part of the wound outside of it: that it may alleviate the tension of that, and the extraction of that with regard to the case of the abscess, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remember the wound that occurred in the Intestino.</start_of_turn>
When a disruption occurs in the Intestino, and it is small: then it is possible, in some people, to restore it: because I have seen that which was wounded in the belly with a lance and was on the right side of the stomach, and had been there for a long time: and a fistula was made, and it evacuated through it, and there was swelling.</start_of_turn>
I put forward therefore a cure, until I am relieved in the healing of it: neither should you stop treating it until it is healed, and the place is consolidated.</start_of_turn
When I have seen that the place is consolidated, I fear over the sick person, that something bad might happen to the sick person in his belly: and nothing bad happened to him from that.</start_of_turn
And it remained in better conditions, eating and drinking, and hopeful, and went into a bath, and exercised in his diet.</start_of_turn
And some experimenters say, when in the Intestino there is a wound, and it is small: then it is necessary to tie it up in this manner.</start_of_turn
And take the large-headed ants.</start_of_turn>
Then gather together two lips of the wound, and place an ant on one of those which have an open bone over two lips of the wound.</start_of_turn
When the head is above the body, and the limb is stretched out, cut off the head, for it adheres to it and does not separate.
Then place another pin near the first one, and do not cease until you have made the second pin equal to the quantity of the wound throughout
Then reduce the swelling and the wound.
The head remains attached to the intestines until the intestines are consumed, and healed, and does not cause harm to the patient It is also possible to ligate the intestines with a fine thread: which has been taken from the intestines of animals and is attached to it after it has been introduced into the belly
And it is necessary to grasp the extremity of this thread from the intestines and remove much of it.
Then ligate at the extremity of it the thread which has been introduced.
Then introduce this thread into the belly and ligate it with the intestines.
Then reduce it to disruption And this method of stitching with pins and intestines is not without risk, except according to the degree of confidence and hope
You know that a wound which is great, wide, especially if it is in a large intestine: then there is no skill except careful handling, and no healing at all
Of the care of wounds and fistulas.
Chapter 88
You know that every wound, or swelling when it becomes old and decays, and becomes a ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus constantly, and does not separate: then it is called universally in every part of the body a fistula, and we call it Zuchemen.
And the fistula is indeed according to truth a nodate filtered vessel, firm, white: which having no pain has the convergence of the feather of a bird: and on account of this they call it Risati, that is, feather.
And at certain hours it becomes moist, which emits pus.
And perhaps the moisture is split at certain hours.
And sometimes this moisture is much, and sometimes little: and is great, and is soft
And I have said before in the discourse, thus when I said that all wounds which do not heal, neither are born in this body, are not except for one new cause.
Which one is either because of the scarcity of blood in the body: or because of the malice of its nature: or because it is between itself and the lips of the body is hard tissue which hinders the birth of flesh: or because there is much pus and pus-like material: or because the wound itself is putrid, and the matter which issues from it is of bad quality: or because the treatment is unsuitable for its care: or because corruption is falling in the region which is a kind of pestilence: or by the property of the region, as it happens in Caesarea Augusta: in which there is great difficulty in digesting food and the healing of wounds is delayed by nature: or because in it is one bone, or many bones
And I have shown all these causes and signs and their treatments with physicians in the discourse: and it is fitting here that I tell you the treatment of the fistula and the zuka, which is done by one operation with the hand.
You know therefore that the fistula happens in all the members of the body.
For from these things are the fistulas which reach the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or intestines, or stomach, or bone, or skin, or bones of the wrist, or foot: or from some joints or compound bones: such as the hand and foot: and from these things which go towards the proximity of the main limb and those of like nature
Whatsoever is the cause of these fistulas according to this method, is from difficult to heal ailments, and does not receive treatment, and the care of them is laborious and ignorant.
If anything of these fistulas has not reached the extent that I have mentioned, and if you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to arrive at an understanding of it, then take hold of a knife or an iron, for if the fistula persists according to its nature, inquire about it with the fistula itself.</start_of_turn>
If, however, there is a twist in the fistula, then investigate with a slight weight of lead.</start_of_turn>
For lead, with the gentleness of its body, alleviates the fistula and curves around the twist.</start_of_turn>
If the fistula has many holes, it is not possible for you to describe over them with a single attempt.</start_of_turn
Close up all the holes from their holes.</start_of_turn
For the humidity which closes them up again goes beyond the other holes and runs out from them.</start_of_turn
Then inquire carefully according to what method is possible: whether it is bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a single fistula with many holes, and is above all this with the sum of your strength: with your questioning of the patient, and the finding of pain on compression with your hand on the place, and similar symptoms and signs of the disease.</start_of_turn
When you have stood on all these points truly, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: and know that if the fistula is close and visible, or in a safe place distant from the juncture, or from a nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of those places which I mentioned to you: then dry out the fistula according to what has been said before concerning the narration, and remove what is in it from the filtration, and corrupt flesh, which is born in the hole of it from the flesh, or pus, or like this: and care for it until it is healed.</start_of_turn
If, however, the fistula is of great length and depth, and is in accordance with the rule: then it is necessary that it be sectioned off as deeply as possible.
Then it must be ligated from all its diseased parts
Then administer ligatures of sharp knives: and introduce these until you reach the depth of the fistula as you comprehended it with the iron: do this as many times as necessary, until the acute medicine has eaten away everything that remains in the depth of the fistula from corruption
Then restore the part with bandages that generate healthy flesh, until it is healed.
If, however, it does not heal by this, then cauterize it as we have narrated.
If, therefore, the cause of the fistula is bone, and you suspect this: then inquire about it, and section it off as we have narrated: if it does not prevent you from doing anything from the bone, or nerve, or major limb, as we have said.
If, therefore, it is found that the bone is diseased and blackened: then burn it out, until the corruption is completely removed
Then care for it with that which nourishes it, until it is healed
When, however, it does not heal, and pus comes out of it as before: then you know that you have not reached the whole eradication of the corruption.
Investigate further concerning this, and make a careful examination of it, and its preparation with the utmost ability you possess
Then restore it
If, therefore, it heals, it is good: and if not, then you know that this corruption is in a great depth of the body, which you have not overcome
No creature is exempt from suffering in this life, save only the one who departs from the natural order.
If the bone of the forearm is fractured, and it is possible to do so, draw it out with fine scissors which fit to that.
If there are many bones, then make careful traction of them all, and do not omit anything with your strength
If there is something contrary to this from humors, and there is no fear of incision, or of an error: then cut through those humors and flesh, if they are there, and loosen the bones.
If you are not prepared to extract the bone from its hour, then put over it something which will cause it to putrefy: and depart from it until it has putrefied all the surrounding flesh and humors of the bones
And keep the wound closed so that it does not harden.
And bind the incision which you made in your operation
And put over it, if necessary, a cushion soaked in sulfur burnt with oil: or a cushion soaked in Egyptian unguent, or some other unguents of the like.
For when these humors have putrefied, and have separated from the bones, the discharge of the wound will be less, and the attraction of the bones will be greater.
If there is a large bone, such as the femur or the tibia, and the like of these, which is fractured, it is a great part: then break off that part lastly, until the black spot and the corruption have disappeared
Then restore the wound.
If however that which is in it is corrupted, is a great part, and the corruption has already followed the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to amputate it, and to cut through it entirely until the corruption has ceased: then care for it, until it has healed And I tell you this, that which happened to me in my leg: so that you may take it as an example and aid for your operation.
A youth of about thirty years of age had pain in his leg, because something had become loose within his body, that is, from within, until it reached the knee, and there was great swelling: and there was no external cause for it.
It happened to a young man of about thirty years of age that he had pain in his leg, because something had become loose among his physicians, until it was opened, and there were many materials together with it
And after the treatment was finished, when his knee was bound up, many holes were made in it: from which pus and moisture of the body came out
The doctors treated him for two years, but in this art there was no skill, until I came and saw his leg and the things which were coming out of his holes: for his whole body was pale, and his complexion was yellow
They tried to reach it in one place through a hole, and the attempt reached the bone
Then I examined all the holes: and I found that they went into each other from all parts of the leg. I treated him properly, and I sealed over one of those holes, until I found a piece of bone: and I found it corrupted: for it was rotten, and wrinkled, and had decayed, and had pierced through, until it had reached the marrow
I saw that which was detected by me was prepared from the corrupted bone.
And I deemed that there was no benefit in the bone except for that corruption, which I cut off and sealed
And I will have eradicated it.
Then I shall order the restoration of the wound with the help of solid physicians over a long space of time.
It is not complete
I will attempt to restore it
It is not restored
Then I restored it with the physicians, and it was consolidated quickly, and healed: and there was no need for this repetition of the operation, and the section of it, except because of the weakness of the patient, and his little tolerance, and my fear of death for him, because it happened to him at every hour from the excessive evacuation of bad air.
He is healed therefore with perfect healing: and was made in the place of the hard bone, and a good disposition was made in his body, and his strength returned: and he recovered his strength in his dispositions: and did not make him contradict in walking or writing at all
If however the prominent bone in the body is fractured: then it is necessary to bind it up according to this method: and that is: that you take hold of the ligament and bind the bone at the extremity of the prominent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament of thicker thread than the first ligament.</start_of_turn> Then bind the ligature above the flesh, which is on the bone: and extend its extremity, so that you may draw the flesh downwards: and you will see the flesh above the place where you wish to cut, so that it does not damage the flesh.
Place a stick or board under the lower bone centrally: because when you make that, it does not prevent the cutting of the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the suture be above the corrupted place somewhat, so that there is not a depression of the corruption of the bone: and that it does not appear to the sense, and that it compels towards the suture of itself or something else If the bone is corrupted and is not prominent, and the part is continued with the part: and the corruption is in the middle of it, or in the part itself: then remove the flesh from all the parts whole
Then place a stick below.
Then cut that from the first part where the corruption is, until the suture continues from the other part: and let the suture be according to the length of the corruption somewhat, as we said
If the corruption is at the juncture, cut the corrupted juncture itself, and cut the bone where the other part continues
If indeed the corruption is in the continuation of two junctions, then it is not in it without abrasion
If the corruption is in the palm of the hand, or in the palm of the foot: then things are difficult there.
But it is necessary to inquire about the nature of the corruption as it appears to you.
And scrape it off, and cleanse it as much as you are able, and with whatever skill you can manage: when it does not make you contradict a vein or a nerve.
You know that incisions and sutures are many for this bone, according to the position of the bone, its preparation, its size, its smoothness, its magnitude, its fineness, and its hardness.
Therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument appropriate for each type of operation for that operation.
You know that these operations are significant to you above the kind of instrument that you do not know when you have long studied it.
And the knowledge of the methods of this art is a proof of the knowledge of the methods of treatment: for then you will find for yourself what is suitable for every sickness from the instruments.
The shape of the sutures.
The shape of the other sutures
The shape of the other sutures once more.
The shape of the other sutures yet once more
This shape of suture is made in the middle Let its arc be towards the upper part, its point from the iron: and its handle from the horn, and make it pyramid-shaped in the middle
The shape of the connected sutures.
Let the head of this suture be according to the shape of the head of the star: and its points according to the shape of the needles of the embroidery
And it does not fit, unless it is that they are rough against each other when they are broken, or the bone is wide and large.
Greater form of Rasassa.
Greater form of Rasassa.
Greater form of Rasassa
Greater form of Rasassa in which there is a concavity.
Greater form of the other Rasassa is subtle
Greater form of the other Rasassa is blunt at the extremities
Greater form of the little, subtle Rasassa
Greater form of Rasassa like that in which bones are cut
Greater form of the great Rasassa too
This is like Radio, and the extremity is like a saw: it is shown in many places because of the reason for the bones
Greater form of Rasassa which agrees with the reason for its perforation by bones
Its extremity is triangular, and the extremity is acute
Like that of the Indians
And it should be like that, as for all that we have said of Rasassa, Incision, and Saw
As for the incision of the extremities, and the suture of bones.
Chapter 89.</start_of_turn>
Extremities putrefy, either from an external cause, or an internal one.
When therefore you have treated the cause of the corruption with medical treatment, and it does not heal: and if you do not cut off the corruption in the limb, without which nothing helps: then you must cut off that limb until the corruption has ceased, so that the patient may be saved from death, or from the greater defect of the limb.
And the sign which indicates that this has happened is that the limb is blackened, until it is consumed by fire or putrefies after blackness: until that putrescence occurs up to and including that which follows the limb, and spreads throughout the body.
And thus with its incision, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous creatures: as the scorpion of the sea, and the viper, and the spider, and those of a similar kind.
If therefore the corruption or the blow is at the extremity of the finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave any space for the corruption, but drive it right up to the remainder of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut off the hand from the root of the bone, and do not leave any space for the corruption, until it has seized in the bone of the forearm.
And if it reaches the arm, then cut off the arm at the elbow in its joint But if the corruption has passed beyond this, and you see it surrounding the elbow: then in that is the death of the patient.
And to manage besides this from the cure is the quantity of medicine.
And thus do the same with the foot, when the corruption reaches the toe, then cut it off at one of the joints: and if it has reached the heel, then cut off the whole foot
If however it reaches the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint
And if the corruption has passed above the knee, then it is not in that there is any remedy, except dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
And the way to cut off a limb, or to save it, is as follows: tighten the ligaments in the lower part which you wish to cut: and tighten the ligament above in the place of that which you have cut
And extend the minister of one ligament to the lower parts: and extend the minister of another ligament to the upper parts.
And thou shalt separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh be detached
Then it is cut, or it is returned back
And it is necessary that thou put on all parts of the linen cloth, and that thou avoid the place of health: and thou must add to the infirm wound, and the swelling must be cooled.
If indeed there should flow forth blood within the work, then thou must cauterize the place quickly: or put upon it some powder which will absorb the blood
Then return to thy medication until it be complete.
Then bind up the wounded limb with a ligament which is suitable for it, and care for it until it be healed.
And I say unto thee that this happened to me in my foot, thus did this happen to me
That is, because it happened to me in my foot in the night, with a wound which assimilates the heat of fire: and the corruption of that first happened in my finger, until the whole foot was affected
I did therefore extract the man from his suffering, after I had cut away the corruption of the limb with its disease, which appeared from pain and inflammation: and I cut it at the junction, and it was healed
And after a long time had passed, it happened to him again in the finger of his hand at the index finger. He came to me, and I attempted to cure her with the things which I placed upon her hand after the cleansing of her body: and the superfluity did not cease, but began to proceed into another finger: until the corruption reached the hand itself
He called me to do it: to make an incision in his hand. I did not wish to do it, hoping that from me would come the return of his superfluous [tissue]: and I was also afraid of death itself at the hand of the incision in his hand.
Because the patient was very sick.
When he had despaired of me, he returned to the earth: and he came to me again, because he was in urgent need, and he made an incision in his whole hand: and he was healed.</start_of_turn>
I do not assent to this narrative, except as an aid to this ailment of this kind: and as a meaning to be understood, and according to how it is done.</start_of_turn>
On the treatment of bones, and the quality of blistering with physicians.</start_of_turn>
Chapter 90.</start_of_turn>
When a swelling occurs in some limb by a wound, and the swelling persists until collection of pus has taken place: then the swelling is broken, or pierced, and the pus which is in it is ejected, and that which is left is like a wound: and the skin which is over it is like a thin membrane: and it does not reach its utmost corruption, neither does it affect bone, nor nerve, nor ligament: it is called a sinus and not a fistula, unless its space is prolonged, until corruption affects some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula or swelling.</start_of_turn
Its care is that you cut through the whole skin as it is turned back: and especially when it is thinned out, and made like a membrane: and trust that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.</start_of_turn
If, however, you hope that the skin will adhere, and that this is not the final consequence of the corruption: and if there is hardness in the skin from the flesh: then treat it with blistering: and consider it as a sinus.</start_of_turn
If it is great, and the pus which issues from it is foetid of odor: then clench it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, and alum, equal parts, gathered in a vessel: and boil them over fire until the medicine turns red. Then comes in the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what is necessary: and dissolve it with water and honey, and clench it with vinegar: and string its orifice, and discharge the medicine into it in the quantity of two hours.
Then draw it out with pressure: do this for several days, until the sinus is healed, and the odor is gone.
And when it is clenchied with vinegar and water of ashes, when it is not present this medicine: then take ashes of wood chips, or ashes of the ilex tree: and sprinkle them on water.
Then boil the water, and clench it with these things, until you are confident that the sinus is healed.
If the patient does not tolerate vinegar, or water of ashes, then clench it with water and honey, to which something of ground alum has been added
Or clench it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to heal, and to cleanse: and the wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in it.
When you have done this often, and are confident that the corruption of the sinus has passed away: then clench it with something which makes flesh grow in it
And it is good to take from aloe of Spain: and dissolve it with rose oil and wine: or clench it with some medicine, and anoint with others, of whose properties are written in the treatise on unguents.
If the orifice of the sinus is strict, so that a cannula will not pass through it, then enlarge it with a small iron [instrument]: or place within it a piece of lint soaked in Egyptian unguent, or in basilicon unguent, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then close its lips with sutures: and discharge from it the amount that enters the bladder without adding anything.
And similarly if pus comes from that orifice, it is elevated upwards: then dry it in the hollow place which is in it, so that it comes out from there downwards: for pus when coarsened in the depth of the sinus, hinders the generation of flesh in that place.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus round about downwards as you wish: then attempt to prepare the limb with the preparation which brings out pus easily as you prepare it.
Attempt to discharge all the pus from it entirely: and take solidified medicines which are placed above the sign, suitable for that which you wish
And extend these things over the edge of the wound.
And let the size of the wound be such as to permit communication of the whole sinus.
Then cut with scissors directly at the orifice of the sinus with a larger opening of the sinus at the same time.
Then extend from the soft parts above the wound, according to the size of the hole: and place it over that in a long position from the orifice of the sinus, so as to relieve the discharge of pus from that place: and do not make the wound large, except after a few days when one wishes to do so.
He who is above the orifice of the sinus must move in every hour, so that it may go out what is gathered in it from the pus: and that you may know whether that which comes out of it is much or little: or digested or undigested
And thus again consider the place of the sinus itself, whether in it does the master himself feel pain, or is there no pain in it, and whether there is swelling in it, or is there no swelling in it.
When you have proceeded thus with your treatment in this way, and you have washed the material which issues from the orifice of the sinus, then you will know whether the sinus is adhered, or is approaching adherence: then indeed you must resolve it in the mane, or on the third day. And when you have resolved the ulcer, then exchange the dressing and renew the unguentum. If, however, it issues from the sinus after a long space of time with a slight discharge, then you must not despair of its adherence, for its healing approaches, because there are men who are slow to generate flesh in their ulcers, and there are those who act contrariwise to this.
If, however, it issues from the sinus after many days with undigested pus, then you know that the sinus is not adhered.
If, therefore, the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its condition is prolonged: then add to the medication drying agents, truly making the doctors do so, that there may be moisture in their body and dryness in their sweat: like alum, when added to fat, it makes fat dry.
And from the last thing which is to be done, that you take alum and dissolve it with rosewater, and apply it over the old wound equal in amount to the body of the wound.
Then cover it with that, and use it.
And thus it is done like this, when there is no alum available, honey, when you dissolve it, until it is absorbed, and with it the other things that are in it.
Take myrrh, aloes, and olibanum: mix them all together, and sprinkle that over honey while it is over the fire.
Then smear upon the vessel itself, and bind it upon the Sinus: and smear with the honey which you have boiled, until it is thick: and sprinkle upon it the aforesaid things, and place upon the vessel itself, and bind it.</start_of_turn>
And when it is administered in that vessel, long are the aristolochia and the roots of lilies of heaven, and is lily: and barley of herbs, and centaurea.</start_of_turn>
Use either simple or compound things, mix them together: sprinkle that over honey as I have said, and use that.</start_of_turn>
If, however, the condition of the Sinus is prolonged and does not heal by this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: or that it makes an imprint in the bones, or in the other hard parts, or ligaments: then care for the fistula according to what has been said before.</start_of_turn Of the care of panaritius and nails drawn out, and incision of the finger added, and section.</start_of_turn
Chapter 101.</start_of_turn>
Panaritius is a swelling which arises under the nail of the thumb of the hand, or foot: and perhaps arises in the other fingers.</start_of_turn
When, however, its duration is prolonged, and it is neglected in its treatment, and a swelling arises from the swelling, or it is corrupted, and pus is emitted, until it corrupts the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole thing, and perhaps the corruption extends to the bone, until there is a foul odor: and the extremity of the finger becomes wide, and its color becomes dark.</start_of_turn
When you are treating yourself, as we have said before, and the cure does not take effect: then it is necessary that you cut off with the sword the entire superfluous part which remains from the nail.
Then cauterize the nail afterwards.
The cautery is useful for nails which are inflamed.
If indeed the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the swelling of the nail has become excessive, and it bites itself, and causes pain: then it is necessary to place radium beneath the nail at an angle where it bites the flesh, and push it upwards: and cut away the flesh easily, and place upon it what remains of the flesh from the burning and corrosive medicines until it has disappeared entirely
Then care for it with unguents until it is healed
If however corruption has set in the bone, then it is necessary to cut away that bone and extract it: for it will never heal as long as it remains corrupted in that bone
If you see the corrosion and corruption advancing in the finger: then cut it off at one of its joints, as has been mentioned previously concerning its reminder.
Then care for it until it is healed.
If however there occurs to the nail attrition or percussion: and it brings about pain which is unbearable: then it is necessary to perform a bloodletting in the first instance.
Then dry the nail with sharp Spatumil from above downwards to the end.
And be careful, lest the cutting should reach the flesh which is under the nail, for you will thereby cause the addition of further pain to the already existing pain, and will be the cause of the corruption of the flesh in that place.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain, that is, as you would an Incision with a Spatulum.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain, that is, as you would an Incision with a Spatulum. The care of that which is born in the root of the junction is difficult.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. Abstain from its Incision.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. In that which is born at the end of the fingers, then it is necessary to Incline in the first meat of it by a circular Incision until you reach the bone.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. Then saw the bone with one saw compatible with this.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. Then care for the thing itself until it is healed.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. Consolidation which happens to the fingers because of the wound or by the nature of man himself, that is, because it is born with it, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from burning fire, and similar things.
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. It is necessary to dissect that consolidation, until the fingers return to their natural form
Then care for the place with that which sits down the pain. Then put between them pins, or soak with infused lead in rose water: so that they do not solidify too quickly, and separate between them: or put between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated as it should be
And similarly, if consolidation has occurred in some fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation, according to what is prepared and agrees with the figure of the limb.
Of incisions for wounds.
Chapter XCII
There are veins which are involved, large and full of melancholic superfluities that happen in various parts of the body: and most frequently in the legs, especially in those of travelers and laborers, and those who bear burdens.
It is necessary therefore that you manage the exclusion of the body from black bile somewhat forcefully with an expulsion.
Then let a bloodletting be made from the patient with ease by means of a balsam.
The treatment of these with iron is in two ways
One is that it be cut through, and the black blood be extracted
The other is that the vein be elevated and the whole of it extracted
The cutting of it is done in this way
Embalm the ankle at first with warm water much, until the thick blood is resolved
Then bind the ankle of the sick from the upper part of the thigh down to the lower part of the knee with a strap
Then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three wide sections
Then dry the limb until the quantity of blood that has bled out is equal to what is needed for the treatment, and as much as the patient can tolerate
After the ligature is made: and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the enema and phlebotomy when the veins are full, for this will be harmful to the patient.
The elevation of the limb is done in this way.</start_of_turn>
If there are many hairs on the limb of the patient, shave them off.</start_of_turn>
Then immerse the limb in a bath: or embroider it in the limb with warm water, until it turns red, and swell the veins: or perform a strong exercise, if there is no bath available, until the limb is warmed.</start_of_turn>
Then dry the skin along the course of the vein: or at its end near the knee, or at its end near the heel.</start_of_turn
Then open the skin with hooks, and scrape the vein from all sides, until sensation is restored: and it is known when sensation returns, that the bile has been evacuated from the vein.</start_of_turn
When the blood has gone out of the skin, the surgeon should wipe off the blood as if it were a cord.</start_of_turn
Then place under it radium, until it rises up and comes out of the skin: suspend the blood with a piece of gauze, soft.</start_of_turn
Then dry the other side near that three fingers away.</start_of_turn
Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein, until sensation appears.</start_of_turn
Then raise the limb with the radium as before, and suspend the blood with another piece of gauze, as you did at the beginning.</start_of_turn
Then dry the other side, or several other sides, if necessary.</start_of_turn>
Then elevate it, and pierce the last part near the heel.
Then extract the bone to the part which is above the sole of the foot.
Do this until you have extracted the bone from the higher sections, until all bones have gone out: then pierce the bone
If, however, it does not obey you for extracting and elevating: then insert a sharp needle with a strong thread, and bind the bone, and extract it: or insert under it radium: and move your hand over every part, until it comes out
Take heed, lest you pierce it
For if you pierce it, it becomes difficult to elevate the bone again, and it enters through that wound.
When you have extracted the whole bone: then place over the wound a soaked wool bandage in wine and rose oil, or oil: and care for it, until it is healed
If the vein is contracted, having a twist which has to do with parts, and is not like what we said according to the straight line: then you must find over the bone to every part of the twist of it, and the place of the twist itself
Then suspend the bone with needles, until you have elevated the whole bone: and take heed at your incision on the bone so that you do not pierce the vein, or wound it: for it is difficult to elevate or extract the bone again
Be prudent in this matter.
Make the incision in such a way that the vein heals.
Leave the surrounding area clean
It has no acute extremity like the rest of the incisions, and is not of a fine character, so as not to wound the vein: and it has a large flexibility, gentle: for if it were fine, it would wound the vein by its slightness: and if it were of a large size, like this, it would be useless
On the extraction of the vein of the thigh. On the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, like Alizegi and Arabia, and in dry and warm lands, few in number, for in them no herb or tree grows.</start_of_turn>
It is also perhaps generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.</start_of_turn
And its generation is from the putrefaction which happens under the skin, like that which happens within the bodies of serpents and worms, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.</start_of_turn
And the sign of the commencement of this vein is inflammation in the thigh which is painful.</start_of_turn
Then the place is to be dried.</start_of_turn
Then the vein is to be extracted from the place of its drying, like the root of a plant, or an animal.</start_of_turn
When it appears from this extremity, then it is necessary to cover over the lead with leaden weights whose weight is from a drachma to two drachmas and a node: and let go of the lead weight from the thigh.</start_of_turn
Whenever it comes out from that to the exterior, cover it in lead and tie it down.</start_of_turn
If it persists for a long time, then cut off a part of it, and cover the rest.</start_of_turn
And do not cut through the root before it has come out whole.</start_of_turn
For if you cut through it, it contracts and enters the flesh: and causes inflammation, and gangrene in the place, and a bad ulcer.</start_of_turn
Wherever it is necessary, it should be gently evacuated, and drawn out gradually, until nothing remains within, and that nothing remains in the body: and from this vein, in some men, there comes out that which is equal in length to five palms and ten fingers.
And thus it is with me, because the urine has gone out of twenty palms.
But if it happens to you in the hour of your medication: then insert radium into its cavity, and perforate the cavity with a needle as long as the body, until all that is in it is evacuated: and administer the putrefaction of the place with the physicians for a few days. Then care for the aftercare of the wound.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot, or in the foot itself: and it has many outlets, and comes out of every outlet branch.
Care for it in this way, as we said in the previous discourse, and as we have said before
Of the cutting above the worms generated under the skin, and it is called the bovine disease.
Chapter XCIV.
This disease is called in this land among us the bovine disease: because it often happens to bulls, and is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh
And it goes throughout the body, ascending and descending: and it is seen by the sense when it walks from limb to limb, until it bursts in the place where it bursts through the skin at the location, and comes out
And its generation is from the decay of some humors.
As worms and serpents do, so too do lumbrici and ascarides within.
They are mischievous like serpents and worms.</start_of_turn>
For when it itself enters the body, and rises to the head, and proceeds to a place: then it may well burst open there and go out, and destroy the eye: and such an event happens often.</start_of_turn
When it is thus to be treated and removed, it is not to be omitted from its walking and its sensation.</start_of_turn>
It is necessary therefore to bind that which is above it and that which is below it with a strong ligature.</start_of_turn>
Then dry over it and remove it.</start_of_turn
If it has gone deep into the flesh and you do not find it: then place above the place a burn with fire until it dies.</start_of_turn
And greater than this is the corruption of its matter, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.</start_of_turn> If however you find it to have gone up to the head near the eye: then bind under it over the eyebrow a good strong ligature.</start_of_turn
Then dry over it and remove it.</start_of_turn
And it is necessary that the sick man should take care of the purification of his body, with doctors who will dissolve harmful humors.</start_of_turn
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction.</start_of_turn
About the section above the navel, Nakir.</start_of_turn
Chapter XCV.</start_of_turn>
This ailment is known in our land as Nakir: and it is a pain which happens in some members: and then changes from member to member.
I myself have seen this, as I have told you.
I was called to a woman who was sick in some village
And I found her arm swollen, and I saw a swelling in the groin of her arm
And after an hour had passed, I saw that the swelling had increased in size like a worm, ascending towards her shoulder more quickly than is possible: like silver that is running from one place to another
The pain thus withdrew from that place and settled in the shoulder
And an hour later it had spread throughout the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
And she told me that it had disappeared throughout her whole body, as I saw
I was amazed at the speed of its change from member to member
And I had never seen such an ailment before in my life in the same way as this
However, I have heard of many people who suffer from a pain that changes from member to member: but I have never seen anything like this before.
I do not believe this is possible, except perhaps because of the woman's position in the village: hence it appears that the pain has been transmitted from the lower parts of the body to the upper parts.
It is necessary that this does not appear in delicate people and those with moist bodies, in whom the hidden veins are more easily affected.
When therefore the physician has finished his treatment and the patient still feels pain, if it be apparent to the physician's eye, as we have said, then he should bind above and below the painful part with greater force: and he should dry above the painful part until the swelling has subsided; and he should cauterize the spot.
If, however, he does not see it with his eyes: then he must treat it with an outward dressing, and with that which drives out the swelling, and he must rub it with unguents of foetid herbs and of serapion, and like things.
(The provided text does not include the continuation of the sentence regarding the extraction of arrows, so I cannot provide a translation for it.)
Chapter XCVI.</start_of_turn> Arrows are varied according to their kind and according to the place from which they are drawn from the body.</start_of_turn>
And their variety is such: because some have large spines and some have small; and some are concave and some are convex.</start_of_turn
And some have three angles.</start_of_turn
And some have tongues.</start_of_turn
And some have stars.</start_of_turn
As for those which are according to the limbs in which they are found, there are two ways.</start_of_turn
Or the limbs are from those which are concave in their main parts, such as the brain, and the heart, and the spleen, and the lung, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the bladder, and things like these.</start_of_turn
When therefore it falls into any of these limbs, and it appears to you that there is a sign of death, as I shall tell you afterwards, then it is necessary to draw out that arrow from the limb, for death follows its wound in many arrangements.</start_of_turn
When the signs of illness are not apparent, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the limb, then extract it and care for the wound.
When the signs are absent and the arrow has penetrated the bone, and comes out upon the brain, it is: because from that there arise vomiting, spasms, swelling, redness of the eyes, diarrhea, redness of the tongue, spasm, and mixture of the intellect, and vomiting of bile.
And perhaps blood will issue from the nostrils or ears
And perhaps speech will be severed, and the voice will be destroyed
And there will issue from the wound a white moisture resembling pus
And there will come out from it like the discharge from a wound
If, however, these signs appear, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not come out.
The signs of an arrow that has fallen into the cord are: that it is itself near the left breast: and that it feels as though it is fixed in something hard, not in something soft.
And perhaps the arrow is in motion like the pulse: and blood flows from the wound black.
And follows this coldness of the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting.
You know therefore that death approaches with doubt.
The sign of an arrow that has pierced the lung is the discharge of bloody foam from the wound: and the after-effects which follow the collarbone become swollen and change color of the patient.
And the great and high spirit departs: and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the chest, that is near the flanks: then it is close to the back parts: and it makes a great sigh with pain and aspiration, with a gasp: and it moves all the limbs of the arms.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach: then perhaps it will come out through the wound from some undigested food
And if an arrow falls into the belly, and it lies there: something of stool, or bile, or intestine which has been broken will come out through the wound
There is no hope in the cure of it, neither in the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder, and urine comes out: and something comes out from it to the outside, and the pain is stronger over the sick person: then you know that it is deadly
The rest of the limbs, such as the face, and the neck, and the gut, and the palate, and the attendants, and the scapulae, and the ribs, and the shoulder, and the thigh, and the ankle, and the heel, and similar members: when it does not find the arrow an artery or a nerve: and there is no venomous arrow.
And I tell you that I have heard that there are many such arrows, that you may know about the cure for it
That is, because I take care that the arrow may fall into the tear of his eye, or in the root of his nose
I extracted it for him from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and no wound remained in his eye
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen into the fat of his eye under his lower eyelid: and the arrow was hidden, and I did not find its tip from it, since it was stuck in its wood: and it was a great arrow of the Turks, with lead, in which there were no ears.
The healed man is indeed a Jew, and no evil thing has befallen his eye. And I have drawn out another arrow from the belly of a Christian.
It was an Arab arrow, and this is the one which has ears.
Behind it [the arrow] on the same side between two ribs: and it was submerged in his belly
I have been careful with her [the arrow] until I have extracted it: and the Christian is healed
And I have drawn out another arrow which had fallen into his belly: and we thought that it would surely kill him
When thirty days had passed by and nothing had changed in his condition from before concerning his disposition, behind the arrow: we considered concerning the arrow, and I drew it out: and he was healed, and no evil thing befell him.
And I saw a man whose arrow had fallen in his back, and his wound was closed over the arrow
When seven years had passed by, the arrow was extracted from the root of his hip bone.
And I saw a woman whose arrow had fallen into her belly, and her wound was closed over the arrow, and the arrow remained inside her: and no change occurred in her condition from her natural operations.
And I saw another man whose arrow had fallen on his face: and his wound was closed over, and the arrow remained, without causing him much pain: and similar things happened often
And I drew out an arrow from the king's head, which had fallen in the middle of his nose, and it had inclined towards the right side: and the arrow was completely hidden
I am called therefore to care for him until three days after the case of the arrow.
I find the wound of the arrow strict and swollen upwards
I questioned him concerning the pain with a subtle touch, and he did not feel it: and even I found that he had a puncture wound and pain on his right side
I hope that it is the wound of the arrow which is the cause of the puncture
I plastered the place with a plaster which had an attractive and digestible powder, confident that the wound would dry up, and that I would see a sign of the arrow, that is to say that the tip of the arrow would remain on the surface: and it did not happen in the place of the accident that the arrow had followed the wound to the place.
I remained with the plaster for many days: and it did not happen that there was an accident, and the wound became consolidated in the meantime: and he remained unable to extract the arrow until he felt the arrow enter his nose on a certain day.
And he told me that.
I placed above it an acute medicine which was corrosive for many days: and when I finally touched it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was adhering to the wood
Then I added to the opening of the wound by that acute medicine until we saw the tip of the arrow clearly: and it passed from us after that for about four months
Then when the wound had healed, and it was possible for me to introduce forceps into the wound, and to move it, and it did not obey my order to go out: then I did not cease to touch it, and I devised various methods for it on the surface of the wound, until on a certain day I put on the wound with forceps that were well-made, following their form at the end of the chapter, until I extracted the arrow.
Then I restored the limb.
And the physicians say that the cartilage of the nose is not restored.
I restored it therefore, and the limb was consolidated, and the illness was healed whole: nothing further was required of it.
And I tell you the manner in which I extracted some arrows: in order that you may know the rule and the signification of this which I have not said
For the parts of this art and their distinctions are not comprehended by narration: neither does this book comprehend them, and a prudent craftsman compares them with little to much: and with that which is present, with that which is absent: and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descent of things extraneous to this art when these occur
I say therefore, that arrows do not depart from the limbs in which they are fixed, except according to two ways. Or by drawing out from the place from which they entered.
Or by counter-drawing out a part of the other
And whatever comes out from where it entered, whether it is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place: it is drawn out and comes out.
If it does not obey the coming out from the hour in which it fell: then it is necessary that you wait a few days, until the carrion which is around it has become putrid: and you will alleviate the drawing out of it, and its going out
And in like manner if it is fixed in bone, and does not obey you concerning coming out: then you must also wait a few days: and repeat the drawing out and the motion every day, until it comes out
If it does not obey you concerning coming out after days: then it is necessary that you perforate all around the arrow in the very bone with a fine thread, until the arrow is amplified
Then draw the loop, and draw it out.
If, however, the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and has gone forward into one of the ventricles of the brain, and if any of the accidents which I mentioned appear on the diseased side: then abstain from drawing the arrow, and withdraw the loop, until it is equal to the former state.
For if the arrow continues until the ear, then the life is not prolonged thereby
If the arrow is not fixed in the body of a bone only, but does not penetrate as far as the ear: and if the patient remains sick for some days without any of the accidents having happened to him: then proceed with the drawing of the arrow and its extraction
If, however, it is fixed firmly and does not obey your drawing: then apply pressure around the arrow as I have told you before: then care for the place, until it heals.
If, however, the arrow has gone completely away from the body, and is hidden and covered from the sense: then inquire about the loop with a hook.
If you feel the loop, then draw the loop with some instruments that are suitable for its drawing.
If, however, you are unable to do so because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in the depth: and there is no bone, no nerve, or blood vessel there: then find over the loop until the wound is enlarged, and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears which hold the flesh fixed in the bone from all sides, all by means which you can think of, and if you can think of nothing which can liberate them except the fracture of the ears and their torsion: then leave them alone
When you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, then use the twisting of your hand, with forceps to all parts, until you have made the loop leave: and take away the last little bit slowly, so that the arrow is not broken, and that its drawing and extraction are not difficult.
If it is not possible to complete the procedure within an hour, then defer it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have decayed.
Then repeat the procedure: if it is causing excessive bleeding, stop the procedure until the bleeding has ceased. Then perform what we have said in the chapter on wound management. Guard your virtue from the incision of a vein, nerve, or cord.</start_of_turn>
Perform the procedure in every way that you can to facilitate healing of the arrow: do so with ease, tranquility, or slowly and steadily, as I have said.</start_of_turn>
And it is necessary that you draw out the arrow so that the patient remains in the same position as before the arrow was placed, as it is with the case of the arrow itself.</start_of_turn
For it is more harmful to leave the arrow in than to draw it out.</start_of_turn>
If it is not possible to draw out the arrow, then perform what you can from the figure.</start_of_turn
The arrow which comes out from the opposite side of the body, or which proceeds from that to the exterior: or it makes a swelling at the extremity of the arrow in the sense from the upper part of the skin close to it, and raises up the surrounding: dry therefore above the wound, and make an incision according to the amount that can be grasped with the forceps.</start_of_turn
Then draw out the arrow: it will come out easily by itself.</start_of_turn
If it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand according to the circumference, until you press the arrow into the bone, and expand it: then draw it out.</start_of_turn
And if not: defer the procedure for a few days: then repeat the procedure until it comes out.</start_of_turn
If the bowwood is in it, then push it out with the same.
If the bowwood has broken, and you wish to give it an impulse: then introduce into the instrument a concave instrument, so that its concavity may fill the cavity of the bowwood: then push out the bowwood with the same.
If the bow is concave, then push out the bow with the instrument that enters it.
The bow will straighten itself by that.
If the bow is poisonous, then it is necessary to cut off the whole flesh in which the poison is: if this is possible
Then take care of the bow with the thing that agrees with it.
If the bow has fallen in the chest, or in the belly, or in the groin, or on the side: and it is close to the thing which you touch with your finger, and it is possible to cut above the wound: then cut, and burn from the incision of the vein, or nerve, and take out the bow.
Then drain the wound, if there is blood, and take care of it until it is healed.
This is the form of forceps by which the bow is extracted
The extremities are similar to the beak of a bird, which are made like iron: when they grasp the bow, they do not diminish the bow
And there are many kinds of forceps, great and small, medium and large, according to the quantity of the magnitude of the bow, and the thinness or thickness of the wound, and the constriction of it
The shape of the concave impulse.
The shape of the blunt impulse
This is the extremity of the forearm as in the radius, that its entrance into the sagittal bow may be alleviated by it.
The proximal part of the forearm resembles the wing of a bird: its entrance into the sagittal bow is alleviated by its concavity
(Continuation of the previous translation
(End of translation The veins suitable for phlebotomy, which are found throughout the body, are thirty in number.
Of these, six are in the head: two pulse- veins, which are behind the ears, two Herbae veins, two Arteriae which appear in two temporal regions, two lachrymal veins of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes, a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the tip of the nose
And two Guidegi veins, which are in the neck
And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth
And two veins which are in the lower lip
These are the Algecherich veins.
And two veins which are under the tongue
As for the veins of the arms, there are five in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalica vein, which is from the lateral side of the shoulder: and it is called the armpit vein.
And the Brachialis.
And the Median vein, which is composed of the branches of the basilica and the cephalic veins: and it is called the body vein
Both Basilica and Titillicaris are situated in the domestic side.
The people call it Titillicaris within the house.
The brachial vein is situated above the elbow: it is in that part from which blood is drawn, and that appears above the thumb when the hand is clenched
The little finger: that is the one between the ring finger and the smallest one, and it has two branches.
There are three veins in the leg and foot
One of them is under the thumb nail, near the little toe
The second is the saphenous vein: its place is at the ankle on the domestic side
The third is the great saphenous vein: its place is at the ankle on the outside of the foot
And in the other leg there are three veins like these
As for the drawing of blood from two veins after the Golden Age
Bloodletting from these two veins behind the Golden Age is useful for ancient cataracts, migraine, haemorrhoids, head ulcers and other such ailments.
The quality of the bloodletting is according to what is narrated.
It is to be done by causing the patient to raise his head; and to tear the hair of the head in the place of the two veins with a rough towel
Then the patient should tighten his neck with his hands until two veins appear.
And their place is behind the Golden Age in two depressed parts of the head
Wherefore doth thou question concerning the ease of thy finger, and where thou feel the pulse thereof under thy finger, there shalt thou find signs like a cautery.
Then take hold of the needle with the thumb and index finger, and that which is called Incidens is there.
Then insert it under the nail into the flesh, until the needle reach the bone.
Then lift up your hand with the nail and flesh to the upper part, and cut the nail with the incision made previously.
And let the length of the incision be as much as two fingers joined together, or thereabouts: and let blood flow out as much as you will
Then bind up the wound with threads, and let go of the needle, until it is healed
And thus it is necessary at the beginning of this book to treat the incisions of the ears, and their cauterization.
In the meantime of these two arteries in the temporal region.
Two arteries being in both temples, from which phlebotomy is done, is for an old headache: and for swelling of the jaw, and for retention of urine: and for running of the blood from the acute angles towards the eyes And as for the quality of the phlebotomy of the hand, it is easy as I have told you
Bind up the patient's neck greatly, until two nails appear to be sensible to the touch: and let the pulse of the ears be shown under your finger
Then signs like a cautery will be shown
Then lift up the skin above the nail with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy under the nail, and lift up the nail to the upper part
And incise the vein, as you did in two other veins: and make it run from the blood in accordance with the quantity of your need. Then solve the clotting of the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour.
Then place over the foot and the toes, and tie up from above the constriction strongly: and let it go when it is healed
And now remember the reminder of these things, and their incision, and their extraction in the beginning of the book
About the incision of the front vein after the cephalic phlebotomy.
The cause of the pain of phlebotomy of the front vein is after the cephalic phlebotomy: for the old diseases of the face: and for the headache, and redness: and the ulcer wound.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is, according to what I have said to you
Bind the patient's neck with a cloth, until the vein appears
Then take the instrument which is called Fossorium.
What is its shape like this
Place the protruding point which is on the head of the Fossorium over the vein, and pierce through it with a needle or with something like this: and let the blood run according to the quantity you want
Then solve the perforation of the patient, and tie up the vein, until it is healed
And when it is opened with the wide phlebotomy.
Indeed it does not befit that it should be of acute extremity, like the rest of the phlebotomies, but rather of the wide extremity
And a bloodletting is sometimes done according to the passing of time: because the bone is near: and perhaps in that it is fractured when the bloodletter is slight.
And a bloodletting is sometimes done concerning the two tear ducts.
The bleeding of the two veins which are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, is for the eye from itching and redness: and for the swelling in the eye, and the pains of the face.
And the quality of the bloodletting of these is, as it tightens the sick man's neck with the wit
Then the bloodletting is easy: and you are standing over his head.
And let the bloodletting be done according to the passing of time to a little length, with a small bloodletter, wide a little, for in that place there is no flesh
If the bloodletter is slight at the end, perhaps it is fractured.
Then let him run from the blood as much as is necessary for him
And put on the patient's side the foot of the blanket, and bind up the vein one night, and heal the vein.
Concerning the bleeding of the veins of the nose
The veins of the nose are bled concerning fever, and sneezing, and pains of the face, such as a headache, and redness which happens in the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of the bloodletting of these is, as it tightens the sick man's neck with the wit
Then take his nose with your left hand, and make the bloodletting under the tip of the nose, long: and fix it in the middle of the face between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness.
Since the vulva does not appear to the sense there, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
It is necessary to make an incision with the scalpel immediately and let the blood flow out as required.
Then tie off the vessel at night once.
It will restore itself quickly by itself.
Of the phlebotomy of the veins of the Guidegi.
The phlebotomy of the veins of the Guidegi is useful for constriction of the breath, and the inception of leprosy, and melancholy, and various ailments, and wounds and ulcers, and corrosiveness, that is, herpes of the abdomen
The quality of the phlebotomy of these veins is that it tightens the patient under both armpits with a ligature: and the artist stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on his seat.
Then make the phlebotomy of the vein to the width of the phlebotomy.
Then draw out from the blood the quantity that is appropriate, or according to what you need for this purpose
Then do the same with the other vein
Then tie off the ligature and tighten the two veins with the middle suture: so as not to cause the patient pain
And keep him until morning
He will recover quickly.
Of the phlebotomy of the veins of Algeberich
The veins of Algeberich are useful for phlebotomy because they cause swelling in the mouth, corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers, and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, also those that are in the nose, and in the circumference of the eye
And what is the quality of the bloodletting for this, that you make the patient sit before you: and bind his neck with a cloth.
Then turn his lip outwards, and look at two veins: one is on the right side of the lip, and the other on the left side: and their mark is by the blackening of both.
And this is true: because around their circumference are small veins, black.
Therefore make an incision on both of them at the place where it touches If, however, there is doubt for you, and you do not know which of them is which: then you must resort to the incision of the greater of the two, and their manifestation.
And do the same with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and most frequently runs along with this: and make an incision of the two veins which are in the lower lip.
As for the phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after the cephalic phlebotomy.
Then indeed are the veins which are under the tongue phlebotomized: that is, the cephalic phlebotomy is for the affections which are in the gullet, and the swelling of the tongue, and the pains of the mouth.
And the quality of the mandibular phlebotomy is this, that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun: and lift his tongue, and look under the tongue at the side of his tongue one vein, and at the side of his tongue the other: and the colour of both runs down to black
Therefore make an incision on both of them: and hold, do not touch your last hand in making the phlebotomy
For under those are arteries, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from those arteries.
Of three veins in the cubit.
There are three veins in the cubit that are commonly bled.
They are bled in two ways.
Either by means of a broad lancet or by means of an olive oil compress or by cutting with a knife, as is practiced by Alnesil.
This is his method.
Thus Alnesil is right, as regards the section.
And from these two kinds there are broad and subtle kinds according to the amplitude of the veins and the tension of their form. The form of phlebotomy with the lancet is broad like water
And it is suitable for opening wide veins that are swollen, distended, apparent, large, and containing thick blood.
And this phlebotomy is of smaller breadth and greater fineness of touch
And it is suitable for bleeding small veins which contain thin yellow blood
Of the phlebotomy of the basilica.
The basilica is one of these three veins which is used for phlebotomy. Because it takes blood from the swellings which are under the jaw and the collarbone, from that which follows to the chest, and the abdomen: and it is suitable for the phlebotomist because of the risk of causing damage to the artery from which blood is not taken
If therefore he is careless and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will break that artery and the blood flow will cease.
Wherever it is necessary, do not perform a phlebotomy with a phlebotome that is still sharp: rather, make it blunt like Alnesil.
If the condition does not clearly manifest itself, then it is necessary to examine other parts of the body, or to ask about other symptoms: or to perform a phlebotomy in the place of the Funem brachii vein.</start_of_turn>
For indeed it is evident, and must be made blunt like the phlebotome of Anesil, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
If you wish to perform a phlebotomy on the limb itself, then before you tighten the tourniquet on the limb, touch the area to ascertain the location of the pulse.</start_of_turn>
Then place the sign over the area with the burn, afterwards the arm, and make the vein section concave with the phlebotome like Alnesil, as we have said.</start_of_turn>
Take care that the incision does not reach the artery.</start_of_turn
When you have finished, when you tighten the ligature, the swelling in the place that you marked with the burn, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: you must therefore stop it.</start_of_turn
If blood spurts out at the phlebotomy, like the urine of a child, and is thin and red: then you know that it is from the artery.</start_of_turn
Then you must be quick, and place your finger on the area that you are working on, and then remove your finger.</start_of_turn
If blood continues to spurt (since it is likely to have spurted a great deal), then tighten the limb and let go: and beware lest the patient move: and stay calm about the patient's fear.</start_of_turn
Neither does it move for a few days until it is healed.
If blood does not clot and the swelling increases: and it is not present to you in this moment of your medicine, then cut the artery if necessary.
For its extremities contract and blood clots.
Take off the outer skin of the flesh, and find the bone: take hold of one middle and bind it above the joint with a ligature and strings until another day.
Then if blood clots, that is good
And if not: then take care of it as is remembered from the place of the powdered blood which flows out: and the cutting of blood in these things is not difficult because of the smallness of the wound and the possibility of the ligature from the arm
Of the phlebotomy of the elbow
The veins of the elbow for phlebotomy are considered to be those that draw blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body: because they are composed of the branch of the basilica and the branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
It is necessary for the phlebotomist to be aware of the position of the vein in relation to the phlebotomy, for under it is a nerve.
If therefore the puncture of the phlebotomy adds to the injury of the nerve, and it finds the nerve, it will result in that stupor, and the healing of it will be difficult, and it may not heal at all
And this nerve is perceived by many sensations
If however it is hidden in some people, and is faint, and is not visible: then you must take care that you make the phlebotomy as low as possible, sectioning with Alnesil, and cutting the nerve with your skill
If there is a bone between two nerves, then find the bone in length.
If there is a bone between two nerves, then find the bone along its length.
Phlebotomies of the cephalic bone are useful because they draw blood from the head and supply it to the eyes.
It is necessary to perform incisions on the proper bone only, if necessary, as when performing phlebotomy with olive oil, or with myrtle: for it is safer for all veins than for arteries or nerves. It is appropriate to join together with the phlebotomy, that is to say, to make an opening only as large as necessary, and to seek a softer place: and it does not harm if it is not found at the first blow, as it will return with subsequent phlebotomies Indeed, sometimes a swelling appears in some people when no phlebotomy is performed at the first blow, but it does not harm them in any way
Of the usefulness of phlebotomy, and precautions to be observed in its practice.
The quality of phlebotomy, and the accidents which arise from it, in whose rectification you must think carefully
Firstly, you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the conservation of health, and for the maintenance of well-being, and for the prevention of ailments.
And for the three veins which are in the cubit, namely the cephalic, the cubital, and the basilica.
And for phlebotomy in the beginning of spring over fasting, in summer, and autumn, and in winter after the harvest, when there are signs of repletion
And let the phlebotomy be done on the first or third day after three hours have passed.
Phlebotomy is done in ailments whenever convenience and need dictate, whether at night or day, at any hour, in any time.
It is not to be done on children until they are fourteen years of age.
Neither should it be done to a pregnant woman except from the fourth month until the seventh month.
Nor to old people who have passed their sixty-fifth year
When anyone wishes to undergo phlebotomy for whatever reason: it is necessary beforehand to cleanse the intestines with mild laxatives, if there is much retained stool in the intestines: in order that they do not draw out harmful pus from the intestines to the principal parts during the phlebotomy
Neither should it be done to a patient suffering from acute vomiting, nor to a drunkard or someone suffering from excessive drunkenness until these conditions have subsided from the body
Nor to a patient with dropsy
And care should be taken that phlebotomy is not repeated too soon after a bout of colics, vomiting, flux of the bowels, multiplication of sexual intercourse, laborious work, exercise, joy, fasting, or any other thing that dissolves strength from the body or animal
Then consider in the subtlity of humors before this, if the blood is thick with food and drink, and the physicians: if possible do this for him
Then let a bath be taken, if it does not forbid this: or some exercise be performed, in order to lighten the blood.
And make an incision in the belly, about the third of the day, as we have said: and strive that he may evacuate his belly from all the harmful accidents of animals, such as constriction, and wrath, and fear: and from all the accidental misfortunes of the body, such as toil, and pain, and luxury, and like those.
And let its juices be present with things which customarily accompany human use of aromatic substances, and fragrance, and delight, and like those in quantity as is possible.</start_of_turn>
Then sit the phlebotomist above the elbow, which is higher than the elbow of the phlebotomist: then extract his arm, and rub it with his hand twice, or thrice.</start_of_turn>
Then tighten the ligament with forceps, and bind it twice.</start_of_turn
And let the tightening be moderate, for when the tightening is unequal, or through excess in the tightening, it hinders the course of the blood: or in softening, and even then it hinders the course of the blood.</start_of_turn
Then after the tightening, it is necessary to rub the phlebotomized hand with the palm of the hand towards the inside, until the veins are engorged, and the sensation returns.</start_of_turn>
Then the phlebotomist will withdraw the phlebotome with a little oil, as before.</start_of_turn
Then he places his index finger of his left hand over the vein at the place where he wishes to make the incision, slightly: so that it does not escape the vein, and to prevent bruising.</start_of_turn
For from the veins is as from a flying chord at the phlebotomy: and from these is what is filled with wind: and when you put the phlebotome on it, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist is thrown down, and the phlebotomy is not opened by the vein: and if it is opened, it is tight: because of this it is necessary to strengthen the phlebotomist, and to take care of him in all these things.</start_of_turn>
Then the phlebotomist lays it down.
And if not, then repeat that vein again under that place slightly, or above it with a constriction: if the place does not yield
For if it yields, or the patient grows faint, then let him go on the first or second day: and do not tighten the ligament.
Perhaps then the clot will be drawn out by the drawing-out.
Neither should a poultice be introduced
Then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
For if the opening is small, or blood runs slowly: and take care that it does not go outside the blood quantity that you wish: then repeat the phlebotomy in the same place according to the rule, and add a little to the operation.
And do that with constriction, before the place yields, for the clot is often in many people in the surrounding area at the time of the operation itself
If therefore you see that the clot has already gone, then do not repeat over it altogether, for that will not excuse you before God And put over it something from the fat of oil: because it will soothe the running of the blood.
And it is better in this place than pure oil, and than the rest of the oils.
And do the same with the fat of oil in all your phlebotomies, which you do against the running of the blood: and make that it be like tyriaca alfarach and sage, when it is put on one of them over the place
Blood thickens and resolves when it is gross.
When blood is thick, it thickens and resolves itself
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has gone out of the vein itself, with its complement, or from another vein.
And many times indeed are there apostemata and swellings at the phlebotomy of the basilica.
Put your hand upon it therefore, then if you find softness in the compression of your hand over it, then that swelling is bad.
Therefore put upon it something of what we have said
For perhaps the blood will flow from that artery.
But make a plaster of it with that which has astringency, so that the place may be bound up.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it is healed
And it is necessary that you draw out of every man his blood according to the quantity of his virtue.
And what appears from the color of the stain on the blood.
For blood is black when it is going out, then let it go out until it turns red: and in the same way if you see it thick, let it go out until it thickens: and in the same way if it is sharp, let it go out until the sharpness is gone
He who is full, strong, and in need of bloodletting should take one, so that the phlebotomy may be ample: and he who is bilious should be on the opposite side.
He should draw it out in veins, and the opening should be tight: and it is better that it should be administered in the phlebotomy of the vein, than by puncture
This method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the nerves: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And he who has suffered from syncope during phlebotomy should before phlebotomy give the patient some bread soaked in pomegranate juice: or vinegar, if he is hot: and let him draw from the blood in three or four veins.
And if the complexion is pale, then he should take before phlebotomy bread soaked in honey syrup, or in scented honey syrup with spices, or in scented syrup with a strong odor
If there should be syncope during phlebotomy, and the cause of this is too much blood drawn: then he should take in the drink water with meat, and fragrant syrup under the tongue: and he should mix aromatic things with algae, and fill his chest with these: and he should do the rest of what we said in the chapter on syncope from evacuation
Whoever wants to make his arm well, and to dissolve his blood in the second degree: he must take the one who has phlebotomy because of a great evacuation, and who is bilious, so that he may gradually dissolve the blood according to the quantity of bile in continuous days.
Whoever wants to make his arm well, and to dissolve his blood in the second degree, and who is strong in his body: then let him do this after seven hours, or nine from his first phlebotomy
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day
Whoever wishes to draw blood from the body towards the opposite side of that from which it declines: it is necessary for him to do so on the second or third day
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it allows the sickly hand to immerse itself in warm water until the flesh reddens, and then the vein reappears manifest.
And then it is bound over itself with a slight median constriction
And the phlebotomy is performed according to a cross-section gradually, not latitudinally, neither in length: and let the opening be wide, and let your phlebotomy be such that it is as little as possible over the joint of the hand
And mostly blood flow in warm water is set in the wintertime.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no pulsating vein under it, neither nerve.
Phlebotomy of the right hand of Salvatella is beneficial for the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you bind the hand with the ligature or your hand after you have immersed your hand in the warm water until the vein swells and appears to the touch.
And the phlebotomy is performed by a cross-section
And if you cut the vein completely, it will not cause any damage to it in any way
And be careful not to lose your hand with the phlebotomy.
Under these nerves are exposed the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
Then again, move the hand to the warm water, and let the blood flow out into it.
If you do not move the hand into the warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and will be prohibited from running.
When you have drawn out the quantity of blood necessary, then put on the vein oil and salt: that it may not solidify too quickly.
And in like manner it is necessary to make with every limb strict.
The dressing of a phlebotomy of the left hand is: because it is connected with the spleen: and in like manner do it in a phlebotomy of the right hand, as you did in the second equal to the first.
As for the veins of the phlebotomy, the dressing is for the ailments which are in the lower part of the body, such as the ailments of the belly, and retention of the monthly blood, and weakness of the kidneys, and ulcers of the buttocks and of the ancient thighs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that it lets the sick foot enter the warm water: and makes on it friction above, until the veins become swollen: and ties above the joining of the foot with a bandage
And the veins are located at the heel, appearing under the thumb: and are pulled out from it on the face of the foot of many fingers.
The phlebotomy is therefore better in a wider limb, or at the heel in its gathering: because it is better and safer
If you do the phlebotomy on the face of the foot, then take care from the nerves which are under it over the face of the foot.
And put your phlebotomy as it comes out from across, like the one you wish to make: and be the phlebotomist Nestles
If blood flow is prohibited, then repeat the foot in hot water: and allow the blood to cease its flow in the limb until it is evacuated.
If the vein has slipped from the first position, then repeat the procedure with phlebotomy above the lower part, for the place is safe and not liable to cause harm, as we have said
Similarly with the other foot's saphenous vein equally.
The veins of the sciatic nerve are located at the heel on the outside of the ankle
Its support in phlebotomy is for the pain of the ankle when it is caused by warm blood
Its quality is that it should include a diseased bath and must hurry: and tighten the limb from the ankle up to four fingers above the heel, with a fine thread that does not show except by this.
When it appears, then phlebotomy must be performed as well as possible, or by displacement: and it is better either to cut the vein with a knife, or to ligate it by section
For the place is safer, and it is hidden in many people.
If you do not find it and do not perceive it at all: then phlebotomy should be performed on some branch of it, for it is that which appears in the back of the foot and below the heel: and cause the blood to flow out in the quantity you wish
Then loosen the tightening, and place over the place of phlebotomy the skin, and tighten the place.
It heals quickly.
(The text continues with further instructions on wound care and treatment of various ailments.)
Chapter 105.
The sources of wounds are from bones, air, and blood vessels.
The aetiology of wounds is in two ways
By incision and extraction of blood, or by contamination without incision This contamination which is without incision is in two ways
Or with fire
Or without fire
And the wounds which are made with incision and extraction of blood are in fourteen parts of the body
These are the wounds which are made with incision and extraction of blood: Alnocrati is the most posterior wound of the head; Alkehel is the middle wound of the neck; Alhagdahim are two wounds of the neck from two parts at once; menti is under the mandible in the lower part of the mouth; the two wounds of the lips; Alachosos is over the end of the tail of the scapula; the two wounds of the elbows are in the middle of the two arms; the two wounds of the knees are in the middle of the two thighs; and the two wounds of the ankles are below the two calves
Wounds do not draw out blood from small scattered veins in the flesh, and for this reason does not cause the loss of blood like phlebotomy.
Neither is it necessary to administer wounds with fire, or without fire in any bodily illness which originates from congestion, until the whole body is evacuated.
When necessity compels us to perform a wound for the purpose of treatment, or by custom, we must administer it at the beginning, middle, and end of the month, and at any other time as needed
When blood multiplies within a human being, until it requires extraction through incisions, it accumulates in the head, causing swelling and pain.
It also results in swelling and redness of the face, head, and neck
It also causes itching of the face, forehead, eyebrows, and darkness under the eyes.
And from this blood there results the place of incision for its extraction From this blood laughter multiplies
From this blood there results a taste of blood in the mouth: either the tongue swells and expels blood.
From this blood sleep multiplies
From this blood there results vomiting of blood, redness, and frothing, and similar things occur When we see this in the third part of the month, we order an incision to be made immediately, after two or three days have passed. The ointment of the night is: because it itself contributes to swelling in the head, and what drips to the eyes
