O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, my very dear son, I have completed this book that is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its fullness, and I have made an end of it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is lost in our region and is alienated from all things in every way, the science and craft are perished, and nothing remains of them but the small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the errors and vanities, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the sciences.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I wish to revive it together with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes [this] must be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of members, their forms and connections and separations of them, having knowledge of bones, nerves, joints, and the number of bones, and the movement and resting places, and the location of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that names with the noun are much, and with work is little; similarly in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the matters previously mentioned, should be careful not to err and not to operate on humans; thus I have seen many times more of those who engage themselves in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula from the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who pulled an arrow from an old man, and the arrow was large; it took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another physician who took care of one of our land's dukes, who had his leg broken and with the break had an open wound. And this ignorant physician pulled the fracture above the wound using strong force, and he did not allow any callus to form at the wound, but he let it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and he waited until the leg became completely swollen and the toes came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to help him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another type of sore that becomes swollen, then inflamed due to the malice of its dominion.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	When a sore that is full of melancholic humor is not in the place where it can all be removed, one should not touch it with iron.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one in which there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish sore cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take up your arms in pledge, and approach your patients gently but firmly, and make use of the best way so that by God's grace you may be saved and praised; and leave behind diseases that are fearsome for great health; and lay down your arms from that which causes doubt, and have faith within you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen, in some of his admonitions, said: "Do not take care of evil disease, lest you be called foolish physician."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and anti-fever medicinal cauteries, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of iron cauterizing tools, and of everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of blistering and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are ordered and of the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head down to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help, and the harm, are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about this, and agreed with it; and they did not reveal their answers easily, for I shorten it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, whether it be two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry conditions, some say that cautery is a great help; while others say the opposite: that cautery is of no use for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; and it is said by those who say the opposite that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of a man and his moisture with the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere except those who have tested it and know by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of times; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the people gathered together and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has greater goodness than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not harm any other member unless it touches the one being burned.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by transfer, and bring illnesses of great suffering to the sick person; and unfortunately kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I have found this by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is above the truth of things; therefore I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because I do not wish to reveal the secret concerning fire and its nature, and the quality of work, how it subdues diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; take this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when it is appropriate to perform fire cauterization, and they choose friends.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the harm occurring is due to the help of cauterization; and indeed, if cauterization is for necessary pains except when it cannot wait until a greater evil comes upon the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do; for a disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say it this way, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are nothing but medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines because of its speed in action and the virtue of its work and dominance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it often happens that the sick person comes according to their complexion and the nature of the disease and its power; and superfluities are gathered within him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as in the case of cauterization for pain, and similar things; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but they do not believe that cauterization is useful after other treatments; however, their beliefs are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not as the opinion of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they did not say this lightly because of the quality of gold and the highness of its substance; and they said that the heads of cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, for I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And nevertheless, when you heat instruments of gold, you are not sure when it is hot from the color of the gold, and sometimes it cools down; and if heated too much, it causes fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore, we use iron cauteries which have been prepared according to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter concerning the head from neck to feet, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	for the olive oil poultice
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, and due to numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, cleansing the head four or five times, according to what the virtues and age and the patient's condition can bear; and then make the patient lie down with his head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him lie crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a soft surface; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare," which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while gradually turning it; then lift your hand immediately, if you see a little bone; and if you do not see it, continue to heat the cautery as I have told you until you see the bone; after that, take one pinch of wool and place it in soft cotton within, and put it on the spot, and let it remain for three days; afterwards put a soft cloth soaked in butter on it; and let it remain until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, when an overwound wound remains longer, it drains more; and therefore, help it to heal faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one should let the fire cautery burn part of the bone and then heal what is burned from the bone and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that the cautery should be let burn above and push as hard so that a piece of bone is removed as wide as a walnut, which women put in their vaginas because the fluids come out faster; then the wound should be left open for a long time; after that, it should be healed and cured.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this use I work towards salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the chronic and long-lasting pain comes in the head, the patient should use wormwood and pills called "cochie", and purgatives of the head, oils, and plasters; and if they perform the cautery as we have said before, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below it with a small amount as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as mentioned before, and perform one cauterization known as "vasselz"; it is one place where bellows are put; align your hand so you do not see beyond the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak more about this later; and the cauterizations of the horns should be finer than those used for the midline of the head, and here is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged with various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are done but it brings no benefit; then cauteries are applied according to two ways, namely medicine heat and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine heat is as follows: take a hot iron and remove the bark from it for about two inches, apply one piece to each head, then place the affected area on top of the heated iron in such a way that you can lower the iron onto the skin; when it has been lowered, hold it firmly and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound with linen dipped in butter for two or three days.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointments until it heals; and if you see that this does not work, do as I have written for using medicines which burn or for the tenth treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery of fire is as follows. Heat the cautery according to this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "clos" because the head of it is shaped like a claw or has about one finger's width of curvature and a small appearance; place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand firmly while you heat the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the tip is burned; remove your hand to avoid burning the arteries, which are outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Place cotton in oil and apply it for four days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this inflammation with a cautery called "cultellare," at its tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this inflammation that is not old.
de emigraine	of migraines
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries before mentioned in medicine and iron do not help; then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and press gently along the side of the vein for half a finger's length, remove your hand once, hold steady so as not to cover the artery or reach the bone; watch out for the jawbone which mutes when eating, and avoid nerves having sight of the muted part and spasm coming to the patient, also watch out for bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding greatly fears and especially those who do not know and have not been trained and experienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be found in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is enduring, cauterize it on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery mentioned earlier or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After touching all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and moving slightly away from the root of the ear since you have marked its position; and place 10 hot cauteries around each ear; after healing the wound until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that should be cured by fire is not suitable for those that move due to flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a fire treatment for things that come from scab or nerve spasm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves due to flux from the eyes and purges of the head and gargarismes, it is not worth it, therefore you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another slightly further back from the temple, and the third at the corner of the mouth; put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear a little below the horn, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery for as long as half of its length is burnt; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the type of cautery we have mentioned earlier, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly thicker; after curing the place as I have previously said, let it be healed when it is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one at the base of the head, one where it is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	When paralysis is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one at the base of the head, one where it is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	In this illness, give the patient large yews and round pills with crushed cereal; afterwards, shave the head of the patient completely, and put mustard plaster on the occiput which is written or prepared as a plaster; and this is the way of cauterization: if you do it in this manner as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, it is good; if not, make four fire cauterizations on the head, descending down to the neck, and leave a space of one finger's width between each cauterization. Treat them as you would others, and if you see any abscess, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy. The one that is called "olivare" should be as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the frost of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head of the patient must be cleaned with years and what has been mentioned before; after that, rub the head of the sick person, then make cauterization on the head and one on each horn, and one at the back and two on the spine of the neck. If you need more, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most painful part is burned, then withdraw your hand; after that, treat until it is healthy, and let the cautery called "olivare" be as mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to treat the brain with years (a kind of mineral) and other cures as we have said in the division when the patient is strong and able to bear taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew a treatment to dissolve the brain often with good foods; afterwards, place the head in a mill and do one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the navel, and one on each horn; and if the patient is outside (meaning dead) and able to endure it, do cauteries as I have said for the person who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is suffocated (or drowned), make a fine cautery thus:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the superfluidities or corrupt moisture (phlegm) flow excessively and are thick, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who suffer from paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluidities decline towards melancholy and the body of the sick person is moistened, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the king (the patient), make a linen bandage well made, such as a circle, put it on his head; cross the sick person, and hold him tightly from all sides; presently iron the linen, using old cheese rennet; heat the cloth gently so that the sick person can bear it; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you wish to perform cautery in multiple places, do this way: This manner of cauterization aggravates the brain considerably; then place cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first with the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, instruct the patient to lean back and perform cauterization on his head, and make two cauteries on the temples where the discharge is coming from both eyes or one; and burn all veins and arteries beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple. Be careful of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with your power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how to perform it; and sometimes they make cautery or hot iron beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	The heart of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the eyes are old and accustomed and they are above the veins, or in the hollow of the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is clear that it is due to superfluous cold phlegmatic fluids, then do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work: one cautery on the forehead, two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or hot iron beneath the two bones; and if it is necessary, cauterize skillfully above the brow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The heart weeps within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give a sick person three hot poultices; after these, roast the head, and make a cautery or olive oil cautery, and make two cauteries called "clavilis" above the shoulders, a little below the hairline; and beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then use the cautionary called "olivare". Here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to perform two cauteries on the two sorcerers as long as they are like sorcerers; and do not leave your hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the oils are converted into a thorn and prick oil; and in such cases cautery is performed according to two methods: namely by fire or by hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	The patient should be instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient on a clean surface; after that, draw a figure of the hairs like the leaves of myrtle, with the beginning of the sign cut away from the hairs; then place cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil on top of the oil, then heat the iron cautery in this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have drawn many times so that the hair is burned in that place; and the signs of health for the work are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the tip of the oil; then leave your hand, and let it rest for 3 days, then soak the cotton in butter until the burn is removed; afterwards heal with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after that, hairs may come up, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on the same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs are curled, cauterize them until the paper is raised to its natural level, and they are straight, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one .З., grind them together well; and do it quickly, so as not to cool, then spread the mixture over the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put the hairs on top of the parchment; and if the patient can only withstand one drop of oil, you should work with one, and if in both cases; and place cotton dipped in egg white beneath the oil; and the head of the patient should be healthy and your hand mostraring over the medicine, and press one finger and move it all the time when the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the swelling has passed, lift up the affected area, and observe if the bone is raised as it was lifted by the application of heat or incision; and if this is the case, it is good. If not, apply more medicine to the area where no medicine has worked, until your treatments are even and your eyes sharpened; then place a soft cotton wool soaked in butter on top until the burning subsides, afterwards apply the ointment called "dyafenis" and another one until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	If you need to be careful with your treatments because the medicine is causing irritation in the eyes. And if the bone becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, start applying the medicine again on that affected area which has been properly cleaned, as you did before; afterwards heal until it is healed; this is the shape of a mirte leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of men are different in size and according to this, your treatments should be adapted; and do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as mentioned in the classification of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head on a clean surface, and have the assistant hold his head between their hands so that it does not move or tilt to one side; then place a moist cotton ball in egg oil or fresh linen on the cautery site; then heat the cautery until it is hot but not red-hot, shaped like the tip of a feather, pointed at the end, and as long as necessary for your work; however, the shape does not matter too much, what matters is that it is pointed. If you wish, it can be straight from one end to the other or in the shape of a tent; but whatever the shape, the tip is most important for your task.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open and draining pus, drain it, and dry it; if it is closed, open it, and drain foreign matter; then place the heated cautery on top of it carefully, making sure your hand does not slip; place the cautery in the fat of the oil and let it corrode.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you start with the cautery up to the bone, it would be best. If not, begin the cautery again once, and another time if necessary, and let it rest for 3 days; afterwards put soft cotton in butter on it, and let the ointment drying ointment dry until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put on a corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mention. Understand it as a fistula, and make an incision on its side; afterwards put in the opening one subtle cannula of which this form is made:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it in the amount of one cubit; hold your hand or cannula firmly, and do not let the patient move, so that the melted lead does not spill onto his eye; and you must put oil on the patient's cotton soaked in egg white or vinegar: the lead will heal the fistula, and the wound will be cured by marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, it's good. If not, you should administer warm poultices and bring the fistula back to the body heat, according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there appear cavities in lips called "hairs", and the same happens in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then scald a small, sharp-edged cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it quickly into those hollows until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with turpentine until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	For the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it becomes pustular and grows and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then you must have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after opening or draining the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at its base and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed, that's good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are moistened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards, heat up the cautery as will be described below, put a cane on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery deeply into the tooth, hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; afterwards, remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, fill the mouth of the patient with salt water and tie it up for an hour and rinse vigorously.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the moving teeth are confirmed, and the gums softened are held back, and the moistures are dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold or wetness, and there is coldness or fever, and medicines do not work, then it will be necessary to use a cautery according to two methods: a cautery of butter and a cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	A cautery of butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or horn spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent (a small sheet), and moisten it in boiled butter, and put it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes cooled; and do so often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and wool becoming cold in cold butter, put it back on the tooth and put hot iron near the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cautery together with fire is as follows: you take an iron or horn cane, and it should be thick so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, its shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow away the smoke; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery for the head that you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofula (a skin disease)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of fever and cold humors that do not respond to medicine, then heat the cautery with the hair as described below, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then cover it with soft cotton soaked in butter until the sore is healed; afterwards cure the area with ointments and salves until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture conquers over the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; after that, perform cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go near the throat, but only a little. After that, perform .i. another cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the form as we have said before; and heal the place as we have said before until it becomes healthy.
de la toust	When the moisture conquers over the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines. After that, perform cautery at the base of the tongue, but be careful not to go too close to the throat, only a little. Then, perform one other cautery at the jointure of the neck and the head of the spine, using the shape as we have described before. And heal the place as we have said before until it becomes healthy.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When the illness of throat is due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the illness is old, then two cauteries should be performed on the forceps in visible places; and one other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the form as we have said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, perform fire cautery by pricking with all the cautery known as "poins" of which the shape is described earlier in the ear disease; and let the points be no larger than 30 or around that size. After curing the area as mentioned before, let the cauteries be three fingers' width according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, since you make four together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After holding the patient on his back and on his side; after heating the iron that is inside the hollow of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the heated cautery in the shape described by these two nerves (nerve roots) here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the iron up to the ribs, and bring forth four figures with the cautery made of three nerve roots; because the figure of cauterization consists of several cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerve roots:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is dislocated above this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery, crush it with oil; afterwards make the patient rest and do not move the limbs for long periods until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	If it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said one should make incisions with cauterizations of the root of Acorus calamus (Aristologe), and in this manner: take a long root of Aristologe, as large and as long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, immerse it in fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and neck, and two small cauteries a little below where the beard is; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning back slightly; one cautery on the side of the pain, and one more on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the pain away from the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather make an opening as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And an ancient said that one uses a cautery resembling a razor and heats it up between the ribs until it comes to the abscess; but if pain arises, as we have said in the liver abscess, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the sickness of the mice that we have spoken about in the divisions of cures and it does not help, then apply three ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of the ways is that you make four cauteries, or six, in lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver's cautery as we have said before; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient be conscious on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the curl that is near the mouse, where the pain comes from toward the left, and let the elevations that you raise the curl according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After heating the two nerves until they are pierced on the other side, pull out the cautery and thus there will be four [piercings]. And if you see, cauterize all the cauteries at three [piercings]. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth knowing that the other treatments mentioned before should be done first.
de ydropisie	After applying the cautery to the nerves, wait until they are inflamed and then pierce them through on the opposite side. Once pierced, pull out the cautery and there will be four holes in total. If you see, cauterize all the cauteries at three holes. After healing when it has discharged pus for a long time, this is worth knowing that the other treatments mentioned earlier should be done first.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautere does not help a hydropic patient, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not improve, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one near the bladder; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the nerves.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions (healing and relief of pain) will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is like the claw that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it was explained earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in those who are edematous, and filled with a watery citrus-like substance, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and little finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply, lest the watery citrus-like substance be driven forcefully, and let the cautery be shaped as follows:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauteries on each leg with the tip of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a while to heal, until the water heals; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the swelling of the belly comes from cold and moisture, and the digestive and retentive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are hindered, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken before about the stomach cautery, and the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the belly, one subtle cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial where there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are deep-seated, single or multiple, and are old, filled with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, it does not help, if you make cauteries: 3 on the spine of the back, which is completely turned outwards below the sacrum, triangularly, and 1 under the buttock. 2 times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you suspect that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and the face swells, then make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and one more on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cautery nail; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After treating the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnositis called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery to althelul (possibly an herb), heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it all around the althelul, covering it; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, causing it to close; do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, heal with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on alchatim (possibly a lesion), it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot bear any incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	1. Quant a any coming fistula, and it is swollen and filled with pus and corrupt matter, you must probe its entire extent subtly, and be sure to know the entire extent of it completely.
de la maladie des reins	This text appears to be discussing a medical treatment for a kidney-related issue based on the context of "la vesie" (bladder) mentioned earlier in the text. The translation provided above translates the given sentence as follows:
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes with large swelling and does not improve in women, then you must perform cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the clavicle-shaped cautery as mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be four cauteries in a line, and it will provide more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and soft due to coldness or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a fire cautery on the part outside the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cauterization should be as long as the knuckle; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and the cauterizations should be pointed in shape according to the aforementioned form.
de la marris	of the marriage (or wife)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the matrix (uterus) is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers (ovum) are corrupted and their term delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform four cauteries around the womb, as described in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauterization be with a needle, as described.
de la hainche	When the loins (lower back) are swollen and painful: then it is necessary to make four incisions, one above the other, on both sides of the lower back, from the waist to the buttocks; and the wound must be washed with warm water and vinegar.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the swollen loins (lower back) descend to the abdomen and move out of their place due to this, and the signs are that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found in the region of the hernia, then you must cauterize the patient on the lower back at one cautery, similar to a circle, and mark the location around the hernia so that the hernia is within the circle; and let the cauterization be like the one used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make four large olive oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; heal it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hernia of the groin, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: therefore, you must purge the patient with pills made from foul herbs or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After performing the fire cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two ways: namely with burning substances, and the cautery of fire. The cautery of fire is according to many ways, of which one is as follows: you cauterize on top of the bone of the thigh four triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and large incision, and have space between each cautery the size of a die, and make the cauteries oval; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the thigh bone, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but make it so that the circles enclose the entire thigh, and all the fat surrounding it is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the method for sciatica when the pain remains in the thigh and does not reach down to the calf nor the leg. If it reaches the calf and the leg, two cauteries are made where the patient says that the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle 4 fingers wide, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be a surgical cautery, and burn all the fat surrounding it; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the toes or close to the heel, cauterize there where they feel the pain at 2 inches or 4 in the cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a cutlery or circular cautery, but take good care in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who made a cautery on the foot at the ankle, and they let it be too long, so that the leg was swollen entirely, and also the feet, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted. After a stomach solution from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, as follows. // The wise ones will say in the cautery of the spine, this is the method, make one iron rod that is as thick as a nail of the thumb or a little less, and it should be between the vertebrae or one between the vertebrae up to the space the size of a nut of walnut, and the spaces between the vertebrae should be two fingers wide, and they should be like nuts, and it should have one handle of iron well made; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scalded until it is all red and blisters, and then place it on top of the sick person's haunch bone, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one hot iron, leave it for three days; then make a plaster of butter, keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its gaze, and few do so; yet it is a good cautery, which can withstand it, and in places where it adheres.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from falling or striking or excessive bleeding, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these similar symptoms are worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	Then, after the patient has been bled of foul pills or similar substances, three lines should be signed on the back where the pain is located, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be made according to the cauterization known as "poins"; and if you see, make 4 cauterizations or 3 according to the medium-sized cauterization in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; you will find it in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to heal it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	The porcupine quill cautery should be applied to each part of the spine, increasing it as required. And if you see, apply the fire cautery around the spine, pointing .2 or .3 inches, and let the tips be close together. After healing the place until it is healthy according to what we have said, ensure that you do not administer a cautery that is diseased with nerve spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that affects every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery as follows: make the patient sit down near the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary to prick on the face of the foot, you should cauterize with a point. And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, you should cauterize above each knee 4 or 4 from each side, all olive-shaped; and if more is needed, do more, but hold your hand not too far away so that the tip of the coal is burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, you should administer the cautery as we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, you should prick around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, you should prick on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, you should cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and think about medicines. For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the siphon
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture happens in the bladder, and the bowels descend into the cavity and this is new, if you wish to treat it, then it must not eat that day; and let him use things which relax the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his anus as long as the bowels are repaired, and reinsert them with your fingers, and sign over the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form given here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Keep them white and have him pass stools. Then reinsert the bowels to their place; and let the assistants hold his hand so they do not return; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and another on the leg which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not slip while you perform the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that by this the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that if you do not reach the bone in the cautery, your work is of no value. The cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and those for grown men should also correspond to their size; after 3 days, cure the wound from the cautery with butter until the blister is removed; afterwards, use other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary that his bandages be left long, so that the boils do not protrude when he gets up to go to the chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wishes to rise, give him a bandage made well and let it be for another 40 days; have him rest, so that he does not work too much or overeat and drink excessively, or talk too loudly; and if he follows these instructions, he will be completely healed. And I shall say more about the cure of amputation in its chapter afterwards.
de la routure dou ventre	of abdominal rupture
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When round objects appear in other wombs and are recognized as not growing anymore, then make .j. fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the navel; afterwards, cure it according to what has been said; and no old saying says that it should be cauterized at 4 angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	Firstly, mark the place where it is to be done and make a line above the round object, and another below, and hold your hand all around the fire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more easily moved.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any member, either due to falling or injury, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the medicine cures do not work; then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain. If the patient is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, repeat another cautery on top of it, because it is customary that the member should change with the cauteries; therefore, you should perform the cauteries as many times as the patient is healed.
de meselerie	In mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The medicines are sometimes helped by cauterization with great assistance, and the same applies to diseases that come from putrefaction of fleume (fever) and melancholy. If you see the patient being cauterized at the beginning, take care and ensure that it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not doubt that the corruption will affect the entire patient; then you should apply five cauteries on the head: one on the forehead towards the end of the hair, two on both horns, and one behind the neck; and leave your hand enough so that the cautery reaches the bone, and enough that the bark comes out from it, allowing the vapors of gross humors to escape; then cauterize the wound according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; it clearly perishes, you should cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned earlier, namely one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the hip and one smaller one, two on the shoulders, two on the hips, two on the shins, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of the nerves that are above the last rib, do not burn them; sometimes a person cauterizes a bone in the fist, and one in the stomach bone, and another in the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Know that the more you do cauterizing, the more help it provides, and it benefits him; know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cauterization as much as the healthy one does, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it heals.
de enfleure	inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When a swelling arises in any member and is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then the cautery is applied on the limb according to its size and smallness; and the cautery may be shallow or deep into the flesh; then cure it with poultices until it is healed. And sometimes a cautery is made and in the hand, foot, back, at the nerve's exit that makes the limb immobile, thus removing the swelling; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	When a tumor appears on any member and it is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then the cautery is made on the limb according to its size; and the cautery may be superficial or deep into the flesh; then cure it with poultices until it heals. And sometimes a cautery is performed in the hand, foot, back, at the nerve's exit that makes the limb immobile, thus removing the tumor; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" grows, and the medicine does not work on it, then cauterize with a deep cautery until the blister disappears and its color changes; then treat with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and banana leaves, along with cow blood and almond blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together and bind with cloth, and apply to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of scrofula by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When scrofula appears at the beginning and you want to stop it, if you cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a small circle all around the scrofula. And yet the wise ones say that one should cauterize in the middle of the scrofula; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it becomes ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once; and a more correct thing is for it to be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule", as we have said in our discussion of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	the swelling that cannot grow or spread
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which delays healing or because of its excessive growth or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries while pricking; afterwards leave it. For it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced completely by the cautery, then heat the cautery according to this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and make the cautery so that the patient feels it move out from their body in this way so that the course of the ulcer is evened out. Afterwards cure it until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure for fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another type of disease is called "corrodens", which is nothing but a corrosion of a limb, because it eats away at the limbs just as fire dries out wood. If you see this disease in a place where cauterization with fire can be used, then heat the cauterizers, both large and small, according to what is appropriate for the location or the sickness; after cauterizing all around until all the corruption is reached and nothing remains of it, remove everything that is corrupted. And then leave it for three days, and apply soft cauterized powder with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure by burning ointments generates healthy tissue. If after three days you see that healthy tissue does not grow, that is good; if not, start cauterizing again on the parts that remain of the corrupted limb. This corrosion was sometimes cured with hot medicines instead of fire cauterization, but nonetheless fire cauterization is of greater help. I have already explained the cure for the disease caused by hot medicines in another section; take as much of it as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	the worms that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often times, a disease called "clos" arises in the feet according to our intention, which is a large swelling that hurts the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is according to two manners. This is to say, cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water. Cauterization by fire is that you heat one cautery, as a quill of a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron to the extent that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has fine margins; afterwards, place it entirely hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail; and leave it in this manner for four days until it begins to emit pus; then make a plaster of malicious herbs ground with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from their roots. Then heal the place with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if it is converted on the outside of the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you should bring a hot water cauterization; and this is done in this manner: take a goat hair string or iron, or a quill of a goose feather, and place it on the nail and hold it, that is to say, to burn the warts; and place the string so that it encompasses entirely, then put a small amount of hot water in it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the string comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep through to the root; and allow the patient a little bite of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will uproot all its roots. Do this again, until you burn all those on the body, then heal them with ointments that soften the skin.
li cure dou trembler	the one who cures trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles due to cold or fever of quartain, or from another [cause], it is necessary that you apply 4 or 5 cauteries along the spine of the back, 1 between each spine; and 1 cautery on the shank, and 1 on the stomach with an olive-leaf cautery; this will make him stop trembling, and hasten his recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of rotten boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes the body emits boils that are full of corrupt matter, if they appear at the beginning it is necessary to apply a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mirte stick or a long aristologue root, or an cautery lenticulaire. And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow beyond that, but the superfluous matter is decomposed from which they come, and they are healed; however it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great outflows of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very bad thing to let it flow.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And even if it happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tight so that the blood is stopped under your finger, and no more juice flows out; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large ones until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a leap happens when you place your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take immediately one other cautery that are by fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other until the vein is completely drained; and watch that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the vein dries up from the artery, it cannot be well stopped if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strongly tied string, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings a tightening of the ligature with cloth or puts something hot on it, or similar things, will not benefit if there is no profit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone who has no mirror or medicine present, you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said and stretch it out until it is tightened over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but the cold moist should often be applied to make it very cold so that the blood congeals and thickens and remains; and make inquiries ahead about the person who needs cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	In the first chapter we have told you about all diseases in which fire cautery or burning medicine is needed, and we have explained their uses, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have put that chapter up to the thighs and will proceed in this chapter by the same path for those things that are easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	I advise you not to be foolish. For there are many ways that people come in for treatment. Some of them arrive with such illness that they die quickly due to the craziness that comes from their disease, and from the great severity of its malice; and of these one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these [people], he gives you his advice, and says: "Wait, I am cured"; and the sick person is stubborn. It is not appropriate that you agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not open easily but wisely of those about which you are certain, and from which you can take and lose; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your sick, so that health is converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire with the holy inspiration of his hand, come.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Furthermore, I have divided this chapter into sections by chapters, according to what is before or in the chapter of cauteries, which I have described for you from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes to children during childbirth and when the head of the child is forced too hard; sometimes it happens because of reasons we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and all those I have seen hurried towards death; therefore, it seems to me that I should waste less effort on such treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support itself; and the moisture collected under the skull between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you observe the edges where the abscess is located at each part, and when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the abscess, according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely. After that, hold down the incisions with linen and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then open it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and keep the head stretched out gradually, and give the patient dry meat from a sheep's throat as much as necessary until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look where the abscess is largest, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, incise where the abscess is open, and drain the pus, and do as you can; but avoid covering the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies a natural death from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of scrofula
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a certain disease called "cataract" affects the eyes or becomes worse, and medicine treatment is of no help, then the last resort is the cautery by cutting into the 2 arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then, when you see them, have the patient bend his head backwards; afterwards wipe the skin of a rough cloth on the area where the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with one rough cloth; look for the artery openings, which are behind each ear, and place the pointed spatula (spatumile) on them; sign the edges, then cut one and the other with the sharp spatula as deep as to the bone, but not too close to the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula underneath the artery and cut through it (the artery).
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when a vein is cut, it jumps out continuously towards the top.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open on its own, then it is necessary to measure a distance of three fingers, then press and cut up to the bone; and it requires seven cubits (cubitus) or perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without spitting out pus, then the cauterization performed does not reach it. Then hold the wound closed and bind it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and a feeble and aged headache, and it is treated by means of medicine cures but does not improve; then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient leans backwards over his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by beating, and is not easily retracted except in some cold-natured people; and if it has been retracted, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and moisten the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of the following shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then cut the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up towards the tweezers and separate the cloths that are underneath each part; and if the artery is small, turn it to the point of the tweezers, then press that part according to the size of the two cheeks. For if it is not pressed, it will not open at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the 5th finger joint, up to the 3rd joint; and if the arteries are large, you must tie it with a thick double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is closed, and there is bleeding; then cut off the excess between the 2 tendons at that hour itself, and if you see, cauterize the cauterizer scalpel up to the bone as much as the joints are cut; and this is the mutilation work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries is aid for finishing the sores: because it is of greater help to sores.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the place with old cotton and put on tight bandages; and when you loosen them, cure it with dry medicines that make pus, and bandages, until it is healed; and if there is no incision of the artery as much as you work, hurry to cover it with cauterization, or use vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the wound does not become infected; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until it freezes, and scrape the place with cold water until it stops, and strained as necessary; and the mutilated and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery with two parts, but they should be well thickened to keep longer its heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instrument (strumens) is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the two blades, one thick of space, and when you have marked with incision on both sides, and you place the heated iron for as long as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be kept apart because they are not welded from this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow out of the veins that are on top of the face near the head, and no medicine helps in treating it, you see the patient's face turning pale with shivering, as if with fever; and when they are tender and moist so that the eyelashes fall off, the eyelids are scalded by the tears, then this kind of treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "contused cure" in ancient times, which means you make incisions on both sides of the patient's forehead equally according to the length of the forehead, and one of the incisions should be as deep as two fingers downward along the forehead, and the others should be .iij. inches apart above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides above the eyelids; also keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws, and each wound should be the size of three fingers joined together;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of bandages to absorb the blood, then insert the sharp stick (spatula) from this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is across the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the fat that is between the two cuts right to the bone, then do another thing from the mid-incision up to the other second one, and then pull out this spathule.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first incision. It is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting side towards the fat, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mid-incision. Cut all the vessels that run from the eye to the hair as long as the incision is continuous until it opens the fat, and then do another thing in the mid-incision up to the other end; and then equalize the blood and express the fat for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton cloth in each incision, and put damp linen cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and asafetida on top, and ensure that no pus comes out; on the third day remove the stitches, and apply a large plaster of strong ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Whenever a sharp catarrh commonly comes, you see the thin and small hairs, dimming the vision, and burned paper; and the hair follicles itch, and where the head is painful with severe pain, and the patient coughs; then know from these symptoms that those substances and the catarrh do not come from anywhere other than many veins, and the cure for this is to open them.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you should command the patient to recline his head, then make a large incision at the back of the head, and another one wide. [i.e., two incisions]. Start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move while eating; when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, then squeeze between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton in it, and bind it with linen thread; then cover it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to cause an abscess to form; when the bone is removed, you must rub the bone until char flesh begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote growth of flesh.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; administer it in these wounds to alleviate pain everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar such as iron; seeds like peas, beans, lentils; liquid substances like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When a stone or anything falls into the ear that does not fit snugly or grow in the ear, and it does not adhere to the ear, put the ear towards the sun. If you see the stone, distill a little purple oil or camphor oil, then administer extraction; and make the patient cough with congee, and block the nostrils when the coughing occurs, and place pieces of fabric or wool around the ear; and hold it upwards. Many times farting occurs through this cure; and if it does not occur, administer extraction with fine tweezers as shown in the following form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a thin wire of small twisting; and if it doesn't jump out by that means, make a thread of wax and push the head of the thread or ear canal firmly, and stop up what is around the thread with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the thread; then pull forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take glue from where you can get it, put any tool suitable for this purpose on it, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or something similar and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't jump out by any of the things we have said, hurry to incise the ear before an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of incision is that you first cleanse the patient's head, then draw blood according to the strength of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as far as your power allows, and suck the pus quickly into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that swells and it cannot be extracted, introduce one thin and subtle spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision in that grain. But do not do so if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then strain it with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the ear that drips water, the patient should first use warm mustard poultice and stuff the ear with old cotton. The patient should lie on their side over the affected ear. If it jumps out due to this, that's good. If not, take several small and light pieces of stone according to the size of your finger, heat them slightly in fire; then have the patient put one end of a thin stick in the ear and hold another piece of wood over the stone in the ear; continue striking stone against stone until the water jumps out completely, and it should jump out fully; and if you observe, take a piece of thread, push one end into the ear, and the other end hold near fire until the thread closest to the ear is burnt; then repeat this process with more threads until the water has jumped out completely, as we have said in the above passage.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it has a small body like fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it has a large body that can be felt, use the extraction method with tweezers; it is easier to remove lighter objects from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if none appear, take a reed of this shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make it narrow within and wide without. And push the most subtle tip into the ear according to the degree of suffering of the patient, then suck out completely the reed; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, stop up the reed with cotton as I said in the previous section; and if they do not swell out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this apparatus as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or tin narrow within and wide above to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation, one instrument made of tin is required; and if you see, take a grater and wrap it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the reed, and the reed should be in the ear; then push the grater with all the cotton inside, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or boils out of the ear; and let the patient smell it within, and the distillation should be one pot heated by fire in this way that it is distilled in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicines will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some imperfection in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppage of a wound or pus coming from within the ear, and this stoppage comes completely into the ear at times when it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a drop or two of pus protruding, and it can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if it comes completely into the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to cure in various conditions, and in such cases, you must place the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, open the affected area with this spatula-like tool that is shaped as shown below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be cauterized and incised all around, both in front and behind, so that it does not touch the ear; if the swelling is of new flesh or cartilage of the ear, hold it with subtle forceps and strike gently until the flesh is completely burned out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If the swelling is deep in the ear, take a subtle razor and scald slightly with fire, then place it against the cartilage of the ear. If you feel the swelling, causing pain to the patient's hearing, pierce gently, ensuring not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put a linen patch according to the size of the wound in the ear and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound heals; take a linen patch and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powder of vitriol over it; if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary to remove the linen patch and apply another moistened linen patch made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling subsides; then heal it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are either to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from the hairs when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and then crush them with a spatula of their roots; then put vitriol powder on the place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And without removing [the affected part], if you cauterize with the subtle cautery of lenticles, and after incision is necessary to be cauterized; and many times they heal, since nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times hail-like things come on paper with a condition resembling hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine," which is a collection of thick moisture on the upper and lower layers of the paper; the procedure is as follows: take care to ensure that the hail does not move from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know; then make an opening, followed by scraping off each part gently, then grasp with pincers and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient; if the tear is large, assemble it with a stitch and heal until it is healed; but if it is small, do not apply force because the liniments restore it soon and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and place the stone in tweezers, press it from both sides; and if the paper is pushed back by the incision, it does not matter; and when the stone is pressed, apply oil of brine to the affected area, and treat the wound of those who are injured until the patient recovers.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is rendered in cloth from the abovementioned papers, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it causes great discomfort to their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears quickly flow into their eyes; and for this reason, they lie down on their faces immediately and sleep, and their papers are moistened beneath their eyelids covered with exinach which opens in oil. And when you press the affected area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient places their head on your lap; and then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size required for each part, then place it over [them]; and press with your hands from both sides so that the parts are assembled within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist area with a sharp spatula, and it should not be larger than the wound made during vein opening; and cut through the skin completely to expose the incised area; and in various positions the incised area comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and spread it apart until it is scattered; and ensure that you do not widen the incision or bring the spatula to the oil, do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the incised area does not open at the beginning of the incision, raise it slightly; then spread it as we have said, then wet cloths with oil and water, and place them on the wound, and hold bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains, then heal it until it is clean. And if an abscess heats up at its place, then treat with plasters soothing it until it is clean.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper grows hairs other than its nature, and is nurtured, it harms the eyes, and brings about manners of diseases such as the accustomed tears and swelling of papers and albugine, to the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague according to that which is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head on your sound side, then turn the paper with the oil on your left hand; if it is converted (turned), that's good; if not, push an awl through one filament (hair strand) of it; and cut the hair adjacent to the hair strands, and draw one filament above the entire paper, then scrape it flat; then make a hole in the part underneath the paper, beneath the hair, all the way from the large fold to the small; then extract one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure like the thorn of blackberry, and note that the figure should be according to the quantity that you see will raise the paper which has been designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you need to apply a large amount of paper according to the softness of the paper; then make a hole along the entire span of the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large fold to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion into one of the angles of the key, then peel it all; then sew the two lips together with a needle and thread of fine wool, and squeeze out the blood, and tie up the excess hairs above the two scissors with any adhesive substance, if you wish to do this; and if not, do not care about it, then leave the suture and the hairs until 2 or 4 days; then treat the wound without suture with drying and constricting substances, as the paper will heal at the edge of the wound and its assembly, but the suture is rotten (as they say in the old), and this is a risky procedure.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if you use another method: it is that you mark the paper with a figure like the thorn of blackberry, as we have said, with four openings according to the shape shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then bind (or tie) equally the parts which are above the small ones, according to the form shown here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers, and the parts are not equal, take a needle with one thread, and stick it into the figure; and insert another thread of the large one through the great incision, and the second thread through the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then move your hand equally, and move all the skin so that you have signed it, as we have said, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with ointment and similar soothing balms.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes the hair of the papyrus is converted, which requires you to use what we have said about incision; however, stitching in one and the other is more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for canines is as follows: You should fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, then make two canines by art, and two subtle threads of the same length as the paper and the width of a needle hole; take the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then put one on top of the other subtly over what is above the paper of oil, and bind the two canines from the two parts; leave it in this state for some days, and the skin that is bound will die and rot away, until it falls off.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, if you have to force it, then treat it until it heals completely; and when the wound is closed, and no more hairs can be felt, and this is the form of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The workings are as follows: You take a fine needle and insert one thin thread of silk; then assemble the heads and place them together subtly, and make sure that the length of the threads is about one palm (5 inches); then tie another fine silk thread briefly to the end of the canine; then place the patient's head in your hand and ensure that the work is done in the sun, as this is a subtle and delicate procedure; then insert the needle into the entire sheath next to the natural hair root and pierce the paper immediately so that it pulls up the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the end of the canine, and put that hair in the canine, if there is one or more; then pull your hand until the hairs come out completely with the natural hair in the paper.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the shot (arrow or other projectile) is expelled but the hairs do not come out with it, you shall draw the shot beneath to its full length that you have ordered, until the shot comes forth through the wound and you see it by the sight of the eye; then, you shall draw out the shot and the string, close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair regrows in its place and flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a goat's beard with it, and let it be grown along with that which you leave, until it is distanced and then cut it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purulence of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "aleacrati" or purulence comes in the eye, it happens in two ways: natural and unnatural. It occurs suddenly due to injury, wound, cut, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of work in it is that you cut the joint, separate the sides of it, put thread soaked in flax within it and bind it until it heals; and do not use drying and constricting agents in its treatment. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but for this kind of work, use softening items, such as fenugreek; boil flaxseed and linseed oil, strain it and wrap a linen cloth around it, and treat with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the key to your treatment is to ensure that the joint does not heal in its former shape; and this work that we have mentioned has no effect on this illness unless it corrects its shape so that it does not return to its former state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat from the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is below, which is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; the method of treatment in it is that you take a needle with double thread and stick it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right one, so that the threads come out in two joints of the flesh; then place the flesh over the whole needle, and the handle at a distance of one spatumile.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the stone returns according to what is required, that's good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the wound, and turn the stone, and make two wounds where the stone lies within the flesh; and let the joints of the two wounds be at the angles of the incision you made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter with no "I" Greek; then remove that flesh, according to the thickness it protrudes below the stone, and join the two detached parts with linen thread; then treat as we have said for the medicines softening and ointments until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a deep incision under the hair of the paper, as mentioned before; then separate between the two layers of linen, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare any tool with all possible means to return the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and tools in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Sudden blow of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is glued with white oil and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it with pincers, until you reach that which is at the root of the splinter, which should not be too sharp nor too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp a splinter piercing the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape away the assembled mass, should be gentle, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and this entire assembly is healed, and at times it becomes infected with foul oil and produces pus and colic; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil damp wool in abundance of egg; and after the third day use warm colic and healing ointments until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is of two types: one is nervous and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot move; and both types begin towards the large root and grow little by little until they cover the entire nail bed and light and the movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take paper with your hand, then grasp the nail with tweezers of small double curvature and hold it above; then take a needle, put a horse hair or cow or bull hair and a strong thread on it; double the tip of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and poke it all through, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, and shave off all the hair from the side of the nail that was under the cuticle and the silk to the hair up to the root, then crush the rest in the root of the big toe to a very subtle paste with small forceps, and leave the natural flesh or root, so that the corpuscles do not flow out as is customary; and sometimes the nail grows only at the onychium (the upper part of the nail) and along the sides, as we have said; then shave off all the substance of it in this way:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and tear it apart, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little oil of sebum (oily matter secreted by skin glands) and collyrium (medicine used for eye problems), and leave it until the next day; then cure it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the unguent can't enter, this resemblance of a nail is often cured with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly and sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently press the nail above, and if you see that it does not soften and reason does not apply to it, distill from your mouth into the colyrium oil made of litargirio and red collyrium powder and sulfur, and let the oil rest until the next day; then repeat the work according to this same process until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes in the oil, as with an abscess, then let it drain, and cure the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the armpit harms in oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and cut a part of it but not all, so that no tears come from it; then distill in the oil colyrium red which is made with litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises above the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Sometimes red flesh grows in the eyes of some men, covering the eyelid and pressing against the paper and turning towards the outside, looking like a rosebud; and the treatment for this is that the patient places his head in your lap, then you open the eyes, and take off all the red flesh as far as the appropriate incisions according to what follows in this chapter, holding it with force; then cut the first piece of red flesh, and continue cutting until finished, making sure not to harm the oil at the work; and make the incision with a spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail and with the small instruments of which one removes the seed, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, apply oil of turpentine or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, put cotton soaked with egg white on top to ensure that it is hot; if anything remains, and the wound becomes inflamed, and you doubt about the heat of the incision, leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling medicines; then return to your work until it is healed, and do this with every char that is treated in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each oil with a natural remedy; and for an accidental treatment, in work with iron; do not put your hand in any of these treatments until you see that this member is strong enough for that work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	When the veins are red and covered with oil, they appear to perform their work and weaken the oil for all days. Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine if the oil, in which the vein is located, is indeed the problem, and not another disease; then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place his head on your healthy surface, then suspend those veins completely according to your wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two incisions by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully apply force to those veins subtly, and squeeze the blood out hour after hour, until you see the veins move away from the oil; also ensure that the oil is not pricked by the tips of the lancets, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so as to not spoil the veins; and when you have completed this, if it distills green and red collyrium for correcting those that remain affected by the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot catch [or bind] all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of healing, then resume according to this manner which is beforehand until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula (small tube) of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire (a cyst or abscess) is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I said before, and it is not healed, there is a device within it that you should cut open on the abscess where it must break, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if [the area] is ready with all the instruments as mentioned here; it is called "sharp head", and make a hollow [cavity] of about 1 inch deep, pointed like a chisel as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Then turn the bone corruption between your hands and press with your hand slightly to ensure that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal poultice.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joint is swollen and pus forms, and the back of the bone is swollen and remains so for 40 days without improving or abscessing, and it appears healthy; if not, there is no other means except to bring the fistula to the surface of the neck as shown in this form: you should expose the bone a second time with an iron, and with medicines that burn, and when exposed, take one awl according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at four angles, and the shaft be slender up to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone of the ulna (a forearm bone), and move your hand away from the oil or marrow. Then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on their elbow; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh hardens and strengthens the joint, the matter goes to the elbow; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	The translation of this line is: "of the oil's discharge" or "from the discharge of the oil".
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is no need to disturb the nose or reduce it, you must hold the patient; then clean the eye, then apply poultices or hot oil to help heal, then place the oil (a mixture of aconite, aloe, incense, and sarcolocca) on a linen thread and tie the eye, then apply ointment on bands and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eye; then tighten with a strong bandage and repeat the poultices to help heal without hurting; then remove the poultices and leave the tied eye for a day and night, and if the thread wears out, you must tie it tightly again; then remove the thread after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not; repeat the ointment, cloths, thread, and poultices until the eye is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The dislocation of a torn membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in a torn membrane, they open up and fart like paper, similar to grains of resin and are visible; then you must cover it. The procedure is such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area until it reaches above, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the edge of the tear; pierce it, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then tie the end of the double thread and wrap a part of the membrane around it, tightening it, then remove the awl and apply oiled linen cloth moistened with egg; leave it until the threads grow with the membrane, then cure the area with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the membrane on both sides in a circular bandage of fabric until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear large, pierce it with a fine spatula coming from oil and remove the moisture and pus, then enter immediately; then pull out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bone of the oil (can mean "from a bone soaked in oil")
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not found in any bone other than the one assembled in oil, resembling an abscess draining, but it is not an abscess; and the method of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a chair equipped and upright. Then take his head between your hands with two parts, and move him until you see the bone come up to your eyes. Then pierce it, and do not drain and open the lumen, and let the patient see things as he usually does; and if it does not drain below, know that it is an abscess, and if the emergence of the bone is not prepared as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands. Then take the fine spatula and put it under the horny membrane .i. piece along the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny membrane and the corona, until the bone comes out; and when it is issued, let it distill into hot oil mixed with honey or fenugreek boiled in honey, then cure it with another treatment until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	diseases of the oil (can mean "diseases that occur from bones soaked in oil")
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	1. We have the appearance of the eyes in division, and what is necessary for piercing; do this according to health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to sunlight, and press the holy oil strongly onto him and hold it tight; then put paper soaked with the oil on your left hand if the eye is on the left side, or on your right hand if the eye is on the right side; then take in your right hand (if the eye is on the left side) the instrument called "almagda", or take it in your left hand (if the eye is on the right side); then place the tip of the instrument under the crown through the thickness of a finger into that part of the oil at the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument named "almagda" vigorously and hold your hand steady until it pierces the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the full measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the perforated fabric, and then put the instrument until it reaches the place where the eye is, then press it along another path. If the eye comes out now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest and if the eye returns to its second path, place force with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not rise again, gently rotate almagda around your hand little by little; then put a small amount of gemstone oil inside. Then pour in oiled cloth or damp linen soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind it with holy oil. We, and those who are of our time, place on top a mixture ground with abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce only the conjunction (suture), and do not go too deep, but make .i. (one) thin incision, then apply the ointment, as we have said; and for the completion of the work arrange the patient to lie on his back in .j. (two) dark rooms; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then unbind him in the same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then rebind him for up to seven days; and you should not perform this, except during the cure or after the incision, but you should alleviate it, because the pain increases rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If abscesses come up, you must unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct the one who soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, then uncover the eye and put on it .i. (one) linen cloth to cover for any day, and be there in the dark room. Then slowly leave the house, bit by bit, and return to his cases; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iram, who told us that in his land they pierce almond ointment, so that the pain subsides, but I never saw anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of ancient times; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are from a rain properly speaking:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And be the heads of these from the same subtlety, and the rear parts in four angles pointed.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	At times, diverse charities that resemble scorpions in their base are born; and if there are such [charities], or if a char is swollen of a dark color, and if a char is soft with a good color. In those cases of the soft char, but not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and spit the urine on these charities, and pull them out; then catch what you can hold with the sharp subtle spatula until you know that this char is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be caught, open it with all sorts of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if the abscess is swollen, or an arrow, seek aid as necessary; and if these are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the wound is sealed and all charities are removed, then spit bile or hot vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the abscess does not open and moisture goes up to the mouth, know that it is healthy; if moisture does not drain as necessary, know that there is pus in the bone above, so instruments do not come for cutting: then you should insert a thick thread of linen, coated with oil or wax, between each stitch about one finger's width, and have the patient hold the threads inside his mouth as far as he can, and pull until the pus comes out through the nose; children in school often do this, and it is easy for someone who wants to do it. Hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other's position while we are inserting the thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted the pus, then pull out the thread, drain the pus, soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the abscess as before; do this for four days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all of the remaining pus; then place a plank of wood near the abscess for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need for drying medications, use them. This is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as oil and medicines are distilled through the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it shall be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the tool be plain for purging the head; and have one handle on the head for holding when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the chest on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease named "telul" arises on the neck of the head and grows large over time until it is visible; therefore, it is necessary to treat it from the beginning, remove all pus, and then apply fire cautery or burning medicine to it; if it is not treated promptly when it first appears, and it becomes hard, dark, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an aggravated abscess, for when it is touched even once, the patient experiences great harm; and if the abscess is soft in texture but does not have a foul color, you can cover it entirely, let the patient relax without fear, and treat the surrounding area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nails are cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If inflammation of continuation comes in one of these cartilages, it helps little, except in some men. Therefore, when this occurs in any case, you should examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together to a stitch, then heal it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from one side and the other, you must cauterize all the parts of them where there is pain, then bring the two lips together to a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and place the powders on a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster adhering, and let it stay until it heals by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have mentioned before.
des apostemes des levres	for abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When abscesses occur within the lips that are hard and grain-like, either small or large, then you must turn the lips and cut through each side with scissors and take it out with tweezers in each part; afterwards apply vitriol powder to the incision until the wound is cauterized; and then apply alum to heal the wound of dry things until it becomes healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the jaws
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often flesh grows adjacent to the jaws that the ancients call "albulus"; it must be held with tongs and cut at its root, leaving the vein or blood to flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders on the place; and if the flesh returns after incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it: it does not return again after cauterization; and these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, teeth or gums assemble together at the jaw, inside the mouth between the gums; these are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and citron colored and sharp, until corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is foul-smelling; then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and peel back the teeth or the roughness that appears, as long as nothing remains; and in this way do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellow and other stains, until they are removed; and if one removes what is at the root first, it is good; if not, then begin again the second day and the third, as long as you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to the work that shows, because the cleaner who cleans the teeth has other forms than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating the tooth from its pain, it is necessary that you pull slowly as much as you can, for this should not be done hastily; for this is a very high substance until there is no excuse to scrape.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull, it is necessary that you are certain about which tooth needs pulling. Many times, the pain deceives the patient and thinks that it is a healthy tooth, and pulls the good one; but the pain does not depart at all until the bad one is removed, as we have seen in the past; and when you are absolutely sure of which tooth needs pulling, then you should scrape around the tooth everywhere. Use strong spatumile to protect the gums from all sides; then move it to your hands or subtle tenailles at the very tip and tip, until they are completely loosened, then tighten the tenailles firmly; and let the patient's head be in your lap and hold him so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After straightening the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out by itself, take one of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, it is necessary to fill it with bandages where the perforation is; and hold it delicately with pliers so that it does not break when pulled; and it must be operated very carefully around the gumline to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take good care not to break it, and if a part remains in the patient due to the root causing greater pain than the first. And take care not to do as foolish lords often do, who by their haste and recklessness sometimes break the cart, and never bring what we have described; but sometimes they cause great disease through the roots that remain or through the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil, and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which initially silence the teeth, should be long points and thick handles, so that they do not twist when you pull the tooth; and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members which do not yield when drawn, and let them be made of hard iron and sharp-edged to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains when pulled, then you must place cotton wool soaked in butter on it for 1 or 2 days until the tooth loosens, then insert the tongs called "algefri", which look like a surgical probe; and inside them make holes as with a chisel and this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must cut open the skin all around the root, and put the instrument called "althali," which is known as a pincers, there; this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through these tongs, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, and here are the shapes that follow:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument with two prongs, here is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are in front of the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large pincers, whose shape is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this tool should not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and likewise other instruments which are not counted; and the wise masters skillfully find their own tool according to what their work and the sickness show, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or another bone that it could have healed, then search for the instruments that are needed, which I told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can hold and remove; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is pus in the bone, which is small, grind all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not as natural according to the body, and the shape is ugly, even in virgin women, then you must know that if the tooth has not erupted after the tooth, and it is not in the correct place, and it cannot be straightened or filed: then file it; and if it is near the tooth, take this instrument with the following form, and resembling a small beak, made of sharp metal at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping file should be used with much care for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a small file like this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file used to make needles; and with a light touch file the tooth little by little, so that it does not move too much when it emerges; then smooth the end in any way with any smoother, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and it bites the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth fall out either by being knocked out or falling off, and the patient cannot press them back in place so they do not fall again, and you treat them with medicines that restrain, it does not work; instead, you must tie them up with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold threads never do. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth. And if you see that the teeth are moving, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the pliers between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more of them, as long as you can see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then cover again up to the part where you started, and hold your hand delicately and carefully, so that they do not move. Make sure your knot is at the root of the tooth so that it does not escape. Then take the pliers with the thread and assemble them, and place them back in their original position, making sure they do not bite the tongue; then leave them like this as tight as possible for as long as they can stay in place, and if they slip or the thread breaks, tie them up again with another thread. If they remain in place and serve for a period of time, it is the form of the teeth and the method of the alignment of the two healthy and two loose teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the teeth fall out and are put back in their place, freshly, as we have said; and do not let anyone interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a tooth of bone from a cow or other animal is made and placed where the missing tooth was, and it is tied in as described above, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes, this ligament under the tongue occurs naturally or by accident due to a wound. The procedures are such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament with a broad bandage, until the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is due to sudden injury, press the incisors and cover that area with a broad bandage; ensure that the wound is not too deep, as there is an artery beneath it. Once done, lift up the swelling with warm rose water or cold water. Then put a linen tent over the tongue. Make him bite it every night to prevent healing. If bleeding occurs, apply vitriol powder. If the bleeding continues, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other medicine until he is cured.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it of a thin color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is spreading towards blanchor, and there is moisture, apply the incisors, and free it with a slender spatula from both sides. And if bleeding continues at your work, apply vitriol powder until it stops. Then return to your work until you remove all pus. Then lift up the swelling with warm rose water or cold water and treat it with other medicines until it is cured.
des apostemes de la gorge	From the abscess of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes come within the throat boils called "godath", which are properly called the two almonds. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and light color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the base is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will cut it open or it will burst by itself; and if it is of white color again, and the base is thin, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check if the abscess is calm and appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open the mouth and take the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue under all the instrument, as follows; it is of silver or subtle iron like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue to all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the hook and poke it into the almond, and pull it up more than you can; and pull anything from the cloth with it, then strike it on the instrument, as follows, which resembles a forceps; and even though the head is curved, one side to the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron with pliers, of which form follows:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron with pliers, of which form follows:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, namely one of small size; and I had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the narrowed passage, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if she had lasted for a day or two. The abscess was so high up that it had been placed two fingers deep into the throat. I hastily cut through it, and pulled out a large piece of pus; then I closed the other opening in the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after cutting through the abscess again, I took part of it, and no more pus came out than a small amount of blood; and thus the passage in the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink hot water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the space that I had vacated, becoming very large; then I tricked it and cauterized it inside her throat: in this way the growth ceased; and I left those parts alone, and only God knew what happened to them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the eye swells and becomes long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye". When it is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are soothed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and if it is large and rounded and not long; and it is bloody or of dark color or black, then you must make an incision in it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as described, according to the shape and size, you should have the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument mentioned earlier in this treatise; then insert the probe into the eye, pull it out, and cut it in .i. or 2 places as I said in the incision of the 2 almonds. And do not make an incision beyond the natural limit; for if you do, it causes pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what was said in the incision of the 2 almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears the cutting, then you should use an instrument for cauterization to lessen fear. The manner of cauterization is sharp heat. It is that the patient places their head on your lap, and then presses the tongue with the instrument mentioned in this chapter on cauterization, and press it with hot coals, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has the following form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have a hair or oil pot where one puts the medicine, like the scoop of a spoon, and place the instrument on top of all the medicine over the eye; and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine without it descending to the throat or the nose; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see the pus and the inflammation of the medicine are soothed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the sheath over the wound, until the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, restart it, and after the cauterization drain the pus around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and wash it with cold water and heal it with gargarisms until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective by fumigation than by cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and wormwood, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and place it on a fire to boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot have one opening covered with fine cloth in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And be it of silver or tin, and let one of the eyes be pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube while the eye is being mortified; afterwards repeat often, as long as the eye dries out, and ensure that you do not start this at the beginning of the abscess's heating up, for many things may happen then; and do not use this unless it is during the declination of the abscess's heating. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an eggshell crack inside the patient's mouth so that the patient does not have too much heat in the mouth; for the eggshell crack does not let the vapor weigh down the mouth, and it is good medicine along with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times an arrow or bone lodges in the throat or somewhere else; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you see the thing move; and if it does not open and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will loosen the thing through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will draw it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take one instrument made of wood in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, that nothing harms it or push the bone inside; it is better if the patient pushes the instrument, because he can move it or the thing is air; if he pushes down, or pulls it all the way out, the instrument should be pulled out equally until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the saliva from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Sometimes medicine is the saliva, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the saliva, take a small pair of scissors or fine pliers that are suitable for this purpose. If it is not suitable, take a thread and insert it into the mouth of the patient, then insert the end of the thread into a heated iron and do this repeatedly. Dye the patient with cold water throughout the day. Then take a full ounce of cold water, open his mouth, pour it in so that he can swallow it, and move it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the saliva feels the cold water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we have said, subdue the patient with asafetida, at the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will persist. The method of the fumigation is that you take one pot or it has charcoal inside, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in it; then pour your fumigation, and make the patient hold the tip of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes only up to the nostrils; and the nostrils will now persist, and if it does not fall, resume the fumigation many times; let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and drink no water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument for treating the nostrils is like curved tweezers to enter the throat; and resemble the beak of a syringe, and it should have abrasive limestone so that what it takes, it cannot release; here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many abscesses resemble each other, according to what follows later in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in .ij. ways that one of them resembles itself and is due to moisture. And the second way is for the joints where they are in the body. because abscesses on the head are different than those on the foundation, and abscesses on the shoulder joint are different from those coming at jointures, and each one should have its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if abscesses should not be perforated until the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if there are such that it must be perforated when they become hard, and do not die according to their completion, as boils coming at jointures. Because boils coming at jointures, if left until they are covered over, there may be corruption of the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in the limb. Or if the abscess is from the main member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, this will harm the main member; or if it is from the foundation, if you perforate too soon when it is not yet ripe; and you should not perforate a hard abscess without digestion completed, except for one that is from the foundation, which could burst open, and become long inside, and a fistula forms; and it may not heal within a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the subsiding of the fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the loosening and shrinking of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the perforation sit on a lower place nearer to the abscess, and where it has opened; and the perforation should be along the body length, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, in joints, nerves, arteries, and in all equal places where there is no hair growth.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	1. When it strikes (affects), do so according to that member. And when an abscess is in the charred flesh, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will be filled with much pus; and possibly harden the lips and deepen the wound. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires. 2. It is necessary that you bring small perforations, small wounds; and large perforations, large wounds, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the wound, and bandage; when it has become as thin as cloth, and is swollen, it is necessary to do as with babies: and for those that are cut into four angles, and for those whose wound is coped like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from wounds; and for such wounds where a round incision is made, and other similar cuts and bandages.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no head (no pus), like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing out of place; do this many times gradually, until the pus comes out entirely. This should be done carefully, especially if the patient is weak, or a woman bearing a child, or small children, or old men who are decrepit. The pus sometimes jumps out with the discharge, possibly killing the patient, and you must avoid this danger. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a large opening, bring linen or old cotton threads; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, it is necessary that you stuff in each a thread so that they meet; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and shaved it around, it is necessary to fill with old cotton or wool of linen without moisture, and bind until the third day; then remove it, and heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and salt, and wet one cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.  And if the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the limb or abscess is very nerve-racked, you must put hot tents and damp cloths over it; and if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, you must put damp cloths over it with cold water and oil, or cold water and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then lance the abscess and drain it, and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This must be known universally in wound treatments: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	1. For the small abscesses that come in the head, there are ways known to us, such as those enclosed in linen, just like a gourd's knot and it has many resemblances. Some of them have fat with moisture, as pulses; and there are some hard and rocky ones at the base, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not oppose. And the operations of the neck are such that you should test everything. For what is called "entromissoire" determines the shape that follows, what it contains. If it contains moisture, they should be done above the long way. And when the moisture is emptied, scrape skin without leaving any remaining, as it returns again if something is left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; otherwise, water and oil, and use it on the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain overnight will recover. And on the second day, repeat the cotton as before, on the third day, as long as you know that it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. If the abscess is full of fat, press according to this form, along the length; and pour your eyes, and scrape from all sides, and apply your entire care for draining it where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do what I told you earlier. And similarly do with the hard abscess, and treat and cure as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting on the hard and moist abscess is lighter, for they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and among them was one abscess that I pressed or head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a quartz stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if you had cut any of it, you would have made a wound as deep as a quartz. In other abscesses coming from the heads, namely those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, they should be opened every day depending on the situation, to allow pus to escape; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Often this abscess appears at the neck, under the chin, and in groins, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are very large, and they are joined together. And each scrofula is specifically within its rib cage, as the abscess of the neck and the aposteme of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are numerous. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malignant and do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good position in the patient and resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all sides and is not swollen around the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should cut it open from above, and peel off each part, and put the two edges of the knife close to the incisions, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull it gently and carefully, and ensure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not be too aggressive with the spatula or lance, so that the hand does not slip, and do not look too far ahead, so as not to cover what should not be covered.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you pass, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed and the wound softens and begins to purify. And when the pus is drained, return to your work as long as you complete it; then look for your guide if there remain small scrofulas in the root of the scrofula, cut them off and clean them up. And if there is a large scrofula in the root of the scrofula, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you close the two lips of the wound and sew them now, as there should be no remaining superfluity due to the largeness of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and draw pus, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas with superfluity, pierce there where it has matured; and pierce in such a way as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then introduce tweezers with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply ointment-enriched charcoal until it heals.
de squinance	The patient should lie on his back, with the affected leg raised and supported by a cushion or similar object. Then, using a sharp instrument, make an incision from the groin to the knee, following the natural creases of the thigh. This incision should be wide enough to expose the underlying tissues but not so deep as to injure the femoral artery or veins. After making the incision, carefully remove any necrotic tissue, pus, and other debris from the wound. Once the wound is clean, apply ointment-enriched charcoal to promote healing.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting (squinance), the incision of the throat called "epiglote" should be opened; and it should not be helped by these [people], because all the veins and the passageway for the sickness are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the passageway of the throat, it should be covered to avoid the danger of strangulation.   (When the sickness is located in the passageway of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent strangulation.)
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut below four circles or four small slits through the center, between the four circles, or according to the size of the slit, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if the patient is susceptible to the incision of the epiglottis, there should be no cartilage, and the veins are long in length for this.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, and cuts open the neck until it reaches the chin; and removes the veins containing blood, if you see anything, and then severs the trachea as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section of the river of the chin that jumps due to the fractured jaw and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care and sew up the entire area against the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce healing, until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient has been judged dead, and then let the bird fly away.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then press on the epiglottis because the patient cannot cough, and they breathe through the wound, and in this way they are kept from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the badness of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young girl took one knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and saw the blood coming out of it, and knew that she did not have any vein or conduit except for her throat, and the wind was going through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried up, sewed the wound, and healed it until it was cured.   Si com li malaide avoit dit, il n’avoit aucune voine ne conduit qui issi fust mort.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And it did not happen to the maiden except that her voice was hoarse, and afterwards she returned to her position.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that in the condition of the epiglottis one should not have fear.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia" and it is a large abscess of a greenish color, and it is common in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it is according to .ij. [two] ways: nature, and accidents; where nature has no instrument.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidents are according to .ij. [two] ways, where one is similar to fatty tissue and the other way is similar to abscess which comes from us due to arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it should not be worked on without force except in the one that is small, and [it] proves and searches at all the entrance.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it similar to fatty tissue and it does not open in any vein, if you press it, as one presses the nose, and draw it completely, if there is any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And carefully examine it entirely, and treat it as appropriate, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	We have found that... (Incomplete sentence due to missing text)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways of ours are there, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is necessary that I say all the differences that exist between a notch and an incision.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting, until the boils have passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the newborn there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains one bladder, which is its own sac and is of the same color as the body, and begins like a blister and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are according to two kinds: greasy or moist, and much of their color is as I said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the cure of the newt, that you examine and test first all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The manner of the incision for abscesses is that you take or the moister place which you find in the abscess, and turn your thumb little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then pull the entromissoire (the instrument), and take care that it does not fly out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs out of the wound, make it have the same color as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the incision no moisture comes out, knowing it is fatty, then make a cross incision, take hold of it with the forceps, peel it slightly from both sides and guard the coat where it lies so that you pull it safely with the suture;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out safely, pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If there remains nothing, the nose repeatedly returns many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if it remains a little and does not bother you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound tight, place warm things on the abscess to alleviate the pain, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the nose is large, you should cut two lips from the wound, and treat it with whatever heals flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is opposed to you, or if you hasten and employ the leech of vitriol crushed, let it lie for 2 or 3 days until the wound heals, and let the boil of blood rest; then return to cover what has remained unhealed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of incising instruments, and they are of four kinds: large, medium, and small; and if there are four squares which are called 'albaret', and one which is called 'breb', and of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses with fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are similar to the needles with which witches are sewn, and they are of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are more experienced in black plank for encircling the swellings of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the ulcers are much alike, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if an ulcer has two bumps in four ways as well;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if an ulcer has four bumps, it is also of four kinds; and if an ulcer has two bumps and one without a bump, they are all necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these [bones] which are being cut is sharp, and those who do not cut it from one side, only from part, as we scrape the nerves, for this reason that the vein or nerve is not struck.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these intrusions [arrows] are the splinters returned in bandages, so that the patient does not pierce himself at the opening of the abscess.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of four kinds: large, small, and medium-sized, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And one should not use it [the cautery] elsewhere except in charnu, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And at times, another small instrument resembling a set of tourniquets is used, shaped like this, to draw blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at times on the place where wounds heal quickly from veins and arteries, and sometimes round in this large shape.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At times, the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so that they resemble women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	And they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of the following line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and apply medication to the wound with soothing char, then close the lips of the wound together with stitches, and let it heal until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the limb bends downwards, and is deformed due to its large size as it often happens with women, then divide it into two pieces above by two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	With this, one should hold the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 'b' up to line 'g'.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips (of the wound), remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And let it heal as it consumes the remaining flesh and fat, then cure it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas where there are coats and if it contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the boil that is in the abscess is emptied, use old cotton on the wound and leave it until another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment afterwards until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound boils again, apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin closed over it, it often leads to abscesses, and the same thing happens with an opened vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows it by this sign, then the abscesses are long in length;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tight; and when it is for the vein, it appears rounded in appearance;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and groins and around the neck and in other places where it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	The iron cure must be avoided, and so must the one at the head. In the case of inflammation of an artery, cut through the skin from above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then cut open the belly along the usual incision, and carefully separate the artery from the linen, leaving it exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert an awl beneath it, and make it pierce to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in 2 inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then push the area between the 2 joints with an instrument until it bursts open and the abscesses are separated.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the cure of beechwood bark as long as the joint cries out.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this [injury] with ointment, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the opening of the vein, then you must sign your hand with it all over the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle under the skin that you hold with your hand, and make it go through, and have one double thread on it, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess as I told you, or sew one of the two parts to each of the two eyes with thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the thread isn't inserted, push another needle through one of the threads beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut away the abscess until the excess is removed, then cut away the curdled and leave that which is bound;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, then apply treatments with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As in the artery and vein come abscesses, so do abscesses of nerves when they are wounded or by excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This happens more often in the shoulder and the arm, and all joints where there are connections, which is called serious abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it feels pain in various positions.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but not throughout the body, but only under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it should be bound tightly from all sides, and neither go forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and he who is in the joints should not be covered with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And he who is at the head or forehead, scrape the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, take tweezers and strike its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is large, support it at the neck, and peel off the skin, then the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	hanging large growths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes happens in bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large heads; there are small ones and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw one man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were cut open, and ran continuously with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found and weighed one at 16 ounces, and the other at 7 ounces, and in the incision it is important to note that if the patient is moist and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the wound is large, and in your presence the fire cautery is required. For there are often excessive bleeding during the cutting process, and if blood escapes without cauterization, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the incision with iron, take one thread made well, tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for 2 days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then hold it (the shoulder), and not stop pulling on the cord of the pulley until it dislocates the joint, and you feel work being done; and if the roots are thick, be cautious about pulling too much from the belly, but you can certainly pull half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then burn (the shoulder) so it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to pull on the cord that is of a dark color, weak sensation, and poor sight.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of scrofula afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the buttock (or anus) is open/exposed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the buttock (or anus) comes from a wound or fissure due to cautery, and is on the abdomen and in some of the buttocks, as happens in other cases, or bleeding from veins or arteries, according to what is before, or diarrhea;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is through the fissure of the anus and the opening of the bowels, its appearance resembles the color of the abscess, and it causes little pain, and has an open wound with various discharge.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed with the fingers if it shrinks back, and then returns, and possibly if it is hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and by great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	If it is due to moisture, it is an easy thing, and opens readily when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and they are pierced according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to gas, it yields easily to the touch, and the procedure is that you observe whether its appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or gas.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you leave it (the patient) to heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, you must command the patient to strain his anals, and be stretched out straight, then press all around the abscess.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to press gently with your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the joint that you have signed with the spatula.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then spread the half of the abscess above to all the great uncine.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk, and bind the nails to the limb.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then work half of the abscess extended over the ligament, and insert your finger, and search for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it attached to the ligament, dislocate it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, take hold of it at its root, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the arteries or veins are obstructed, go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two thin wires through them, and place the two needles in a cross shape around what you have made pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then press the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is, and cut the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	When it becomes subtle and can be pierced, then treat as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and stitch up the wound.
dou chancre	two boils
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We said in the previous division the resemblances of boils and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to avoid the iron cure; and we say that a boil starts in the groin, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are in a place where it can be shaved as in boils that are on the breasts or in the thighs, and in similar places, one should remove them entirely at their beginning; and when they are large and old, it should not be approached because I never knew anyone to heal it; nor has anyone healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest fullness, then cut the patient one boin (a small knife) to perform the operation; then throw down your oncines (bandages or poultices) or boil, and shave off all the hair from all parts, and remove all the flesh without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and be careful to anoint the place with your hand or something, and if the discharge of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is coagulated; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already mentioned in the division the similarities of hydropisy and in what way water collection is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made with medicine and the one that is cured with iron: only these two similarities are to be treated; iron should not be used for these .ij. similarities, namely tympanites and yposarche, as it is a fatal thing; therefore, when treating this hydropisy-like condition which is called "eclites" with medicine, and the cure does not help, examine whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides hydropisy, such as dropsy of the belly and similar things; if there is no iron to be used, because there is doubt; but if you see the patient with great strength, who has only hydropisy and does not have any other disease, and he is neither too young nor too old, then work in this way:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lay the patient down straight on your hands, and the attendant presses the abdomen towards the lowest part of the side, then take the curved spatula as shown in this form: It should be sharp at two ends. And it should not be so pointed that it can reach the intestine when inserted, nor can it be blunted;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the urine is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must cut under the buttocks three inches straight up over the anus; and if the urine is due to liver disease, make the incision to the left of the buttocks three inches; and if it's due to stone, make it to the right, and it should not be done with the patient lying on the incision, so that excess fluids do not flow to the weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with an instrument, push and pull your hand until you reach the bladder, just as when peeling fruit to the thickness of a nail or more; then pierce the bladder so that the spatula comes to the watery place, which is its location, then withdraw it, and bring out this tool in the form described here: It resembles a thin silver chain, made of light iron or brass, with one small hole at its base; and it has four holes on one side, two on another, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a feather, and that's the shape of the incision where scribes cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	On the head above is the esophagus, so when the instrument comes to the water, then hold it up now on the instrument; empty the lower part or one-third, because if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he may fall down, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the amount of its power, and according to what the condition of the patient and his pulse indicate; then draw out the instrument and stop the water, and it is now held back for the caution that stops the bleeding which is above the siphon, as I have spoken about, that you perforate in this manner; then repeat the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from the water, and draw out a small amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day and be careful not to keep the water for too long but just a little. And if you have doubts about the patient, and you leave him with much water, cure him with sepulture or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is well, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of stopping the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	At no time are born children who do not have foreskins on their penis, or the foreskin is small or out of place. If necessary, it must be circumcised immediately with a very thin spatula according to this form: then place a fine piece of cloth under the foreskin and hold and keep it in place for 2 to 4 days until it wants to urinate, at which point the cloth should be removed, and urine passed, and then the foreskin is placed back; and by chance, there should be no problem, because the urine that comes out does not leave the opening closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the foreskin is small, it should be treated with a piece of cloth as we have said, so that it expands. Those who do not have a foreskin at its place are eunuchs because no one is born with the foreskin on the head of the penis; therefore, they cannot urinate before lifting their penis, and they cannot enjoy sex because matter cannot come to the opening, which is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of work is that the patient lies supine on their back, their head should be slightly elevated and the neck similarly to the thickness of a feather, so that the patient's chin touches their chest, as required; and guard against bleeding which occurs frequently, and if it happens, stop it by pressing the area that is bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albathion appears in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genital warts; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should take them one by one with a subtle instrument, cut and clean all of them, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top; then treat it with the ointment diafinicon until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the elbow is diseased with a putrid color and swollen, you must apply cautery. When you have heated it, and if the elbow joint is inside the arm and has both parts within the flesh and outside, you must first remove the diseased part that is inside; when it is seared, you should treat the outside. For when you are treating it together, the limb of the arm is not assured that it will not be pierced, and it becomes darker and corrupted in the arm and joint; therefore, you must scrape off all that is black and corrupted, then put it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pommegranate rind and various herbs, and treat it with other remedies until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizer should aid in two positions at once: namely, for bleeding and corruption; and if the limb of the arm is corrupted and retracted, you must bring or cause a cord made of yew wood from the arm, and make the patient urinate; when the hair is loose at the tip of the arm where it occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you must shave it with one instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and the limb of the arm is freed from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a grave matter to speak of this, you must shave it with one razor blade, a little bit of hair from the tip of the arm and the flesh; then squeeze it out very gently between 1 and 2 hours, and place 1 linen cloth dampened with cold vinegar on it so that it does not become inflamed immediately.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not just a cutting like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on infants, it is necessary to make the best and easiest work for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greater part of masters and saints who perform circumcision around day one, and for forces, and in all cases with a novacule; however, it is feared because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut, the one below may remain.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now it should be covered, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep in the limb, there is no assurance of the point of the member; and during the amputation of the nail, by chance the iron may slip, and spoil the work, and many times it is not necessary for amputation, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In amputation which is done with the forceps, I have found the advantage of the experiment, because the forceps cut evenly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all the time; but that the thread should be tightly wrapped around the skin; and follow the method of the first work, so you make the child think that you will not tie the thread only around the rod, but rather let it be free in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make it be between your hands straight, and reapply the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand to the shaft and blow or scream, and draw it up as far as the head of the shaft is in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it under one peg to another link; and hold it with two fingers by the second knot, and press between the links, then quickly pull the core upwards and draw the head of the shaft;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Leave the pus to flow out drop by drop, for it is the poison; and put powder on top and above the powder, one cloth glued with a mixture of cooked egg white steeped in rose water, combined with fresh rose oil, let it remain until the next day, and treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and their heads should be as large as a hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the incision of the womb is when the bowels inside are cut; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it with your nail so that the opening resembles an abscess, and then press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, grasp it with forceps, and then press.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the scrotum swells, leave it until the abscesses are appeased and gently incise the skin; then press as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the scrotum, which will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limb with things buried in a wound with the powder we have mentioned or how to treat wounds with powders, and if you press too hard, it will go upwards, but it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or frozen urine, or similar things, as we have said in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released and you see that retention occurs due to the stone lodged in or neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and his feet should be placed on a chair or the back, and he should extend his abdomen from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; then pressure is applied to the neck of the bladder to push out the stone, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not occur as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is the form: it should be made of thin delicate silver tube, like the quill of a bird; and the tip of one and a half palm length, and should be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	The way to extract urine is that you take a double thread, tie one end of it to a piece of wool or cotton, and stick the end of the thread into the syringe; then tie the excess wool and stick the end of the syringe, then oil or butter and egg white should be applied to the syringe, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and cold water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upward towards the anus; then insert the syringe in front up to the bladder, and make the patient feel the urine coming up to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conductor guides where it goes is twisted; then the thread is attached to all the wool pieces, and the urine follows the wool, then remove the thread, and correct the urine;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And fill the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient urinates.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medications, do with all the equipment that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the limbs join by which the medicine can be applied so that it stops the flow of moisture well, if it can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you wish to throw your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the cupping glass in the moisture, and draw out the drawing that is within; if you draw out the moisture with the cup, and then forcefully push back the drawing inside, the moisture will enter the glass, and come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle enema by which one administers an enema to the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or iron, and the head [the dislocated part] is raised higher; below it there is one breast or the ligaments fall; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between two breasts using a good thread doubled, and heat one end of the moistened bladder over the fire; then insert the head of the clistere [a tool used for introducing liquids into the body] into the urethra, then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture coming towards it, until the patient feels that the moisturized bladder has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like you would assemble a syringe, and put inside that which you use for oil, moisture, and water, and seal it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division about the ways of stone, and extraction combined with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in the flesh, and all the signs, and when to operate on it by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the member; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	The stone embedded in the bladder often happens to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like urine in its subtlety; it opens a hole, and makes the patient's member swell, and he pees many times, then strangles himself; and many foundations occur due to these jumps; and it is easy for children to heal until they are 4 years old, but it is severe in adults, and it is in the middle range for those who are between youth and old age; and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, first it is necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. Because it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, turn them and move them downwards, until the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never move it up again; then make him sit between your hands, his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then press and touch it with [something].
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut it above the stone. And if it does not fall with the touch, wet your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is an infant, or your thumb, if the patient is a young adult; and push it into its foundation, and squeeze the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press down on it, and push it towards the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the scrotum in the part where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And it should be between the coccyx and the pelvis, not in the middle but on the left side of the lower back; and it should be straight across the stone, and your hands should be close to or at the base, and the incision should be wide at the top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	In case the hands pressing down at the base jump due to strain, know that there is this stone or it has angles and edges: it is necessary to be careful; if it is soft like a plum and round, where the opening is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	For the one who has angles and edges, make the incision larger; if it does not open, you must tighten with pliers like a chisel at the tip to press the stone so it does not slip away; or you can use a small curved instrument at the tip to press down on it. And if you cannot deceive it in this way, make a small hole and cut through the stone without taking it out, then tighten with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	1. And if there is more than one arrow, push the largest one first into the bladder's neck, then strike it, pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any more. And if it is very large, it must be cut open, and make a larger incision.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Once you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it together, then place one damp, oil-soaked cloth on top of it or oil and cold rose water and cold water to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie down on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the bandage, clean the wound very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of defyacinicon and basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if an abscess comes in the wound and corrosion occurs, and blood congeals in the bladder, keeping the urine back, which is known to occur without pain with the urine: therefore press your hand on the wound, draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and cause its rupture;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	lift the wound from water and pus and dressings, and help in all ways you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that you tie up the two legs of the patient, and gather the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small and it is conducted by the urine and fixed inside, and the urine cannot be expelled; you should cure it with what I say next, namely, to cut many times, and excuse yourself from the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod of this form and sharpened at four angles on one point:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	then take one thread and twist it around the rod under the stone so that it cannot return into the bladder; then push the rod gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod slightly in the stone bit by bit, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes out immediately, press your hand on the part of the stone that is inside the rod. It will soon be broken, and pass with the urine, and the patient is healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do that for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then push the rod towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone appears in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a great grief for the woman, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well enough to be examined by mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of a man, therefore it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need assistance with this matter, then you must find a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate to call upon one chaste virgin; and present a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and order her to perform whatever you command regarding the incision of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And pay close attention to whether the woman is a virgin; then you should insert your finger or probe and search for the stone; if you find it, confine it under your finger, and advise her to push with her hand where the patient is in pain, and press her left hand against the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If you find it (the stone), you should make her push it gently from the entrance of the bladder towards the root of the thigh until it reaches the root; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh near the middle of the vagina, where it is moved apart, and feel the stone in that area; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it into pieces at the first small piece.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then push the root (of the stone) into the thigh, if you feel the stone, press the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, rough or smooth, long or round, and those with grooves. Know their characteristics to determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the wound opens up, apply powdered vitriol and hold it in place for an hour until the wound stops bleeding; then return to your work, while the stone remains hard, and have tools that I told you about for extracting the stone from a man to help you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the wound is an artery that has been cut, place powder on it and bind with bandages, do not start again and leave the stone untouched and do not draw it out for fear of killing the patient; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has decreased, return to your work while the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous is not otherwise called an accumulation of moisture or white chyle, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called "chyle," and sometimes it is properly in the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the bladder between the white chyle we have mentioned; and this does not happen except when there is an empty space.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this aqueous is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes there comes percussion on the head, and this moisture can have various colors: either it is yellowish declining, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, then it is an abscess, that is, long like an egg's figure, and does not open the head, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	and if there is moisture in the actual cloth, it is an abscess with part of an egg, and for this reason, they think that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If moisture is between the skin and the white flesh (subcutaneous tissue), it can be felt easily; therefore, to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly with the intruder, so that you can determine its form as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge what is inside through the intruder.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	When we cure it with iron (using a fire cautery), the patient should be purified as much as possible and his body should be filled. Then lay him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put many cloths underneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then he should lie on his left side, and command the minister to be on his right, and extend the arm towards one of the two ribs of the chest.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, strike the chest's skin between them along its length until reaching the nipple, and make your incision straight in dividing the chest's skin up to the white line, and peel off the skin gently according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white part with one large hole and drain all the fluid, then put your thumbs, and stretch the white part upward; and do not touch the nipple but only the white part; strike everywhere or in pieces gently the rib of it if you don't strike it well, the fluid will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the egg (fetus) jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the procedure with the knife; then gather the two levers from the knees and stitch them together, then treat it as for other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If the egg (fetus) is corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the release of blood; next, cut the cord entirely and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the egg (fetus) is assembled in two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, next squeeze out the blood, and put linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And place other moistened wool in vinegar and oil on it, and put two coins on top, and cover with double cloths, and tie it above all the band that is in this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths, and use moistened linen according to this pattern and assemble them in the loincloth strap, and one of the coins should be placed on the bottom up to the back, and the other at the hilt part; and the other coin on top of the two angles, and assemble the rest of the strap in the buckle of the loincloth.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this remedy is a cautery ramie in the size of an iron knife, and you should take one subtle cautery cutlery, and make the hide of the coins hot as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If one takes the fire cautery in this form, and pierces it through to the bones at once, and burns it with this subtle cautery heat:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And make it in all ways as you can, until everything is heated up; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg (meaning: do not burn too deep); and know that this work is more salutary; and always be cautious about the flow of blood, and take care to avoid cutting into the bone.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything happens contrary (to what you expect), either an abscess forms or the flow of blood or something else, then treat what is happening contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this work due to its horribleness, you should perform puncture, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that ramice aquouse is in place,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	place the patient on a raised seat (or chair); then pierce the abscess in the lower part with a broad lancet and make the puncture long along the body length; ensure that the wounds are wide enough for all the pus to flow.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton over the place and hold it (the puncture site), letting the remaining pus flow out, then care for the wound until it heals.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white linen cloth does not allow the fluid to flow from the wound's mouth, you must insert a needle or the instrument used to treat the fluid of edema (as described previously); enlarge one-half inch the wound, and verify that the fluid returns, and assemble it after 5 months or so, and when it is assembled as before, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the abscess of the eye
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Verify that in the section of this treatment many people are afraid with various dispositions, which is why it seems to me that one should leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Then, many abscesses come from bodies or heads; this happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excessive sour and hot fluid spreading in the head, or due to injury.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; it does not bring pain, but is a severe abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And by chance there is an abscess hard and painful, and of such color, and sometimes comes from the artery, or from swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it comes from the artery, it is known by the abscess being hot to the touch, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	And you should not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	A person who is swollen with vein is known by his disposition at the expression of touch on the fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can easily make an incision on this appearance, and on other charms;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the core of the cyst, then the egg is raised high, and draw out the white pus from its center and release the suspension (or suture) from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already soft with these born characters, then it is necessary to draw out the egg and cut it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is air within the bladder, or in that which is inside the bladder, you should release all of its contents and strike it repeatedly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the bladder is at the back, you should strike it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, you should apply the wound with damp wool in oil of roses and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the tonsils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess covered by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the tumors.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient moans severely when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this disease is as dangerous as it has been previously described.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And yet we shall tell you its workings, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is required that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspension from the hips downwards to your hands.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	extend all the vessels which are close to the penis and brand them with the master's iron, and stretch them out correctly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut the sharp spatula wide across the vessels, until they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off on both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temple.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert an awl where there is a single double thread, and tie it to the first place where the wound is, and tie it straight to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then press the bones in midline straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt humors.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as in other cases where one applies bowen, so that no evil smelling matter flows from either of the eyes.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because by doing this no harm will come, and if all the humors flow from the eyes, it is necessary to drain all the humors.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the eye loses its nourishment due to the incision of vessels, they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sinus (or sinew)
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this hernia are through the section that comes or through the sifac (ligament), or extension on the abdomen in the area of the groins; because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the anuses.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this hernia is either through the sifac or its extension, and there are these two ways of its most common causes: either due to impact, jump, strain, lifting heavy objects, or similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is of the extension of the fracture, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are equal up to the full depth because the fracture presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is of the section of the fracture, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously under the skin near, and this is because of the issue of the intestines and the body turning away from the fracture.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines protrude through the circle, and it is retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, so it is fitting to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of work is that you command the patient to insert their hand inside the intestine into the wound, if it can go in.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then place him supine on his back, with his legs lifted.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then cut the skin above, and remove all the hair with length.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then insert your fingers into the wound as needed to open the abscess, and make sure they are thick enough for the pus to come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the underlying tissue that is under the skin of the hump, until the white underlying tissue becomes hard and is exposed all around.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then push your finger into the cavity, into the space between the white bone (synovial sheath) that is under the eggshell membrane (the periosteum), and between the second synovial sheath.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and move it back behind the eggshell, and between the second synovial sheath; then move your right hand inside the joint cavity, and lift up the white bone (synovial sheath) to your left hand, and remove the eggshell towards the lower abdomen.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to extend the eggshell upwards, and detach what is in front of the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if the intestines are wrapped around your thumb or hard white matter is found and you discover anything of the sort, push it into the stomach beneath.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Take an awl with a large thread made of 10 strands and push it into the back part of the white matter, which is behind the skin of the cockscomb; after the waist, then cut the limbs that appear to be attached with threads, until there are 4 threads left.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble the threads one on top of another in a cross shape and tie the white matter (which is behind the skin of the cockscomb) with a strong thread of 2 parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the fingers, and tie them together with strips of cloth, so that no servant who feeds them can enter inside, except an abscess cloth does not come in.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the ligature according to the first ligature long by 2 fingers of that length, and afterwards leave the siphon (or opening) which is below the neck large enough for a thumb to pass through.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after that (ligature), according to the roundness that an egg carries; then strike in the part which is below the skin of the knuckles, as much as it needs, and bend, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then bring moistened linen in oil, put it on the wounds, and bring the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes white boils are cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of the discharge of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and leave the thread until it falls out by itself; and if it does not fall quickly, it should be burned with hot water, and put on what we have said until it falls.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then cure the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of a carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done in a manner similar to the remedy which includes a nail, in such a way that you tie the vessels, above the wound lightly below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, insert the nail and heal the abscess of those who are opening, as long as the vessels leak; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes rot comes in wounds, as we have said, and they are opened; no intestines should be removed from the openings, and if some are, it is little, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	Moreover, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or ulcer grows so much that the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens because of the swelling of the ulcer in wounds, as we have said, since it is extended, then softened and opened the flesh.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously stated; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swelling along the rupture with a flatiron of three fingers width;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and draw out the pus that is under the skin, then take the rod and put it on the swollen area of the sore;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press firmly with the abdomen, then cut the two visible areas of the sore on top of the rod, and cut both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then straighten the head (of the patient), and do not apply any oil or cover it with an egg nor extend the eye nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramyke (abscess) of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then treat it with wound treatments. And when you apply threads, if he suffers from an abscess and treats the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ointment is confined and has no appearance in the wound, and cauteries are made here and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men, because the glands within are softened and there is pus to see; and when it is observed that it needs to be cured, it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, and to strike the softened skin with the natural skin; then bring together the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then strike between the stitches, and let the cure be as for other wounds, until it is healed, and stitch the threads.
dou chastrement	When struck with a blow
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	1. Know that castrations are condemned in our law, and I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the eyes answer when questioned about it and its cure; and the other, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as a pig, a sheep, a goat and others. I therefore say that castrations are done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method we do by attraction, we seize the animal in hot water until the genitals soften and swell; then we grasp it with our hand, keeping it pressed until it is put back and you no longer feel it.
des hermofrodites	The translation for "des hermofrodites" in this context would be "hermaphrodites". This term refers to individuals with both male and female sexual characteristics or reproductive organs. In medieval times, such individuals were often considered abnormal or even monstrous by some societies due to their ambiguous gender identity.
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are of two types: in men, there is an opening between the two genitals as in the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair and sometimes urine from inside. And in women, it has something like a penis and two genitals. The treatment for men and women is to cut around the scrotum and heal them as with other wounds; but in the second case, for men who urinate through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the torture
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	The torture is a boil located on a natural part, which is too ugly to look at; and some women have as large a boil as a hand, and it is called a cure. It is necessary that you dye the surplus of the boil with your hand or onions, and gently strike it; do not go too deep so that blood does not come out, then heal it with another treatment until it becomes healthy again; and at another boil that arises from the mouth of the sore, use it, and perhaps jump out and resemble a cow, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "kowe disease". If you must strike it, as we have said about the boil, then heal it until it becomes healthy again.
de erratique	Of the eructation
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	1. The erratic is when the nature of a woman is not discernible, or it is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes about; or it is by false union, or from subtle or thick sperm, and it is complete in the marriage, or outside, wherever it may be; and they must conceive, give birth, and sometimes produce flowers; and their knowledge of this is through the observation of the belly. If the effusion appears imminent, whether at your hand or side, if it is subtle sperm, and it is near the two leves (levels?), hasten and act in this way: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two leves (levels?), so that the subtle sperm is rounded, and the effusion is stopped; then take wool, wet it in oil, and put it on the spot, and have the woman lie down at home every day, so that it does not heal. And if the sperm is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatumile (spatula), shaped like a mirte leaf. If the effusion is of blood, stop it at the onyx (clitoris) and cut; have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, along with much egg; then bring a wide plank bandage so that the wound does not heal; and in this way, it should be long-lasting, and bring a linen dry tent; then cure other wounds until it heals. And when in marriage, char nee (blood) comes, it must be covered in this manner, unless there is an abscess festered. For the abscess festered that is in the marriage, one should not touch to heal.
des emorroides	Emorroidal lesions
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Emorroidal openings are exposures of veins, which without treatment usually occur; and when emorroidal openings become old, they swell; and as we have said in the division, their resemblances, signs, and cures have been explained. I will now tell you those that respond to treatment. I say that emorroids and the swelling, when they are fully formed in the anus, cannot be felt, unless they are treated with iron. Those at the opening of the anus can be felt, and these are those that can be cured. Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then attach the swelling to the tweezers, and cut off its roots. Then sprinkle medicinal powders on it, such as acacia powder and dragon's blood powder and incense and similar things; then press her feet against the opening for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. And when bleeding stops, place her in a decoction of sumac and grapefruit peel and hawthorn leaves and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on her back. If it itches, that is good. If not, fartether blisters on the back and near the nipples without piercing them; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or jujube tree leaves with old wine, and apply it to the area. And when the abscess rests, cure the area with ointment until it heals; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough crust, which should be covered as I have said for the swelling; and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come in the anus, such as boils, hard and painful abscesses, herpes, ulcers, fistulas, emorroids, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary for me to tell you here about the hot abscess that comes in the anus, which is not one of the boils that are round; and if you want to know how to use iron, observe if the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, filled with heat and fever, and turns red when touched. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain subsides; and then place the patient on one seat, or two small seats where he can lean, and support his back and feet against the legs; and spread his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope; then direct the pus towards the right side, and bring out the tool for opening the anus, as follows: when you bring this tool, it is necessary that when you introduce it, it does not go in too far and does not hurt the patient; if the tool is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the anus with cloth, so that the tool does not hurt it; and it must be inserted with the cup of the tool on top, and tied. And when the abscess opens, and one massages it by hand, it should be covered with a linen cloth at the head, and with a spatula made of soft leather or waxed paper; and when the pus is emptied, it should be covered with tents moistened in rose oil or dry green oil; place the tent over the wound towards the back and over the anus and over the handle with clean, wet linen that has been boiled or macerated. Then treat it after two days with ointment as previously described until it heals; and sometimes the anus and the wound are lifted with water and honey, and then long root of lis or aristolochia root cooked in water is applied; then return to the ointment. And if the wound returns to the anus, it is necessary to avoid using iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The midwife must first recognize the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman dilate in the lower part and desire to smell the air; then hasten for the infant to come forth; thus know that this childbirth is according to nature, and is born through the vagina, accompanied by a second one; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's belly so that the infant comes out quickly; for when it descends towards the head, the second one follows it, and the husband cleans himself of his superfluities with good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes over its feet, or the body or the shoulders, or the hands, or on the belly, or on the back, and is turned by chance over its neck, and in other evil ways; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these matters, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out over its head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have other women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then the midwife should insert a small spatula of this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	1. And split the second [birth canal], and strike its tip with its nail until the moisture which is within it comes out; and hold the woman's belly as the baby descends, and if it doesn't descend, you must plaster her with musk-based poultice of fenugreek with camomile oil; then make her take in deep breaths and vomit, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: this will now help the baby.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	3. Of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby comes out on its feet, you must push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn the thigh bone by thigh bone, until they are even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take a piece and stretch the thigh bone by thigh bone.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump up to the knees if commanded, and make it expel everything inside with a push?
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If God wills, it will jump.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, take muskroot of height, and oil from the sage plant, and melted resin, and grind all in one mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put this ointment inside the female's nature (i.e., the vagina).    The text is referring to a treatment using an ointment for a medical issue that involves the female reproductive system, but it doesn't specify what the issue is. The translation provided is a guess based on the context of the surrounding sentences and the meaning of the words used. It is always best to consult with an expert or multiple sources when interpreting historical texts.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then make him sit upright in great pain down to his chest.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	And when it is softened beneath, make one myrrh collar and put it underneath, leaving for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make him sit on a chair, then make him vomit and hold his mouth and nose shut, and press his stomach gently because the child is about to jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When an infant comes in this form, place his hands apart bit by bit;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then hold him by the neck and hang the feet below, and lay him on a single bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands bit by bit, then hold his hands above the stomach, and open the buttocks below, until it is prepared for birth.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the infant does not jump, take its feet and bend it forward, then bend it upward, then put your hands in.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	And rock the infant gently; instruct the woman to hold it until it urinates.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The discharge from the child comes down one hand wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise a way to return the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be returned (to its place), raise the woman (patient) and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, make her lie down on a bed and spread her legs apart.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the musk oil that I mentioned earlier.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if it does not give birth [to a baby], make her sit on a seat or stool, then study the method of repositioning the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And have her push out the baby according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and tell her to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the baby by its neck and spread out your hands, then turn its face towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	The ball should hold [the baby's] hand, then gently pull and twist it [in a clockwise direction].
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is even, place on top the muscle balm of high altitude and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move slowly;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	Then, once you have done this, make her sit on a chair and instruct her to grab hold of herself; then make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same way, you must follow it through to the end.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this method, you must continue the procedure until the moisture is drained by squeezing the instrument with your fingernail.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the infant is placed on its face and neck, press down on the abdomen, so that it is not held back, and the infant dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then push the child inside until you have put it as necessary, and command the woman to take care of herself once.
adonques si istra legierement.	gently pull (the child) out.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born often, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not strange and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are rare and do not live long if you call them by name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and they are destroyed by the scribe who divides them, who is associated with death.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes it occurs as naturally as one gives birth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If it comes forth laboriously, as the treatment has been described and let the balm be subtle, make it quickly and lightly as required.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And make it according to what is worth moving towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the sagely grown,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary that the bailiff knows this, for by chance similar things may happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Then act according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of a dead or unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to work by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of good virtue, and has no sickness or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the midwife should pull on both sides of the woman's belly, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with musk and aloe and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then push gently into the joint, then hold one joint where it pushes in until it can be moved.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and prepare if the bone is dislocated upward towards its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	insert fingers in the joint or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or wrist or near the sides.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if the dislocation is at the feet, insert or press and apply pressure to the middle of the bones.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that the onyx be held with the right hand, and place the concavity between its two hands of the left hand, and push gently with all his hand, and pierce the onyx in one of the positions we have mentioned, until it comes to an empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the shape of the onyx:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then pierce against one other onyx, or where you have it at hand, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then equal it by moving it from one side to the other, so that it may move; and the joints should be set for holding it in place, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains some part of it, the healer applies oil to some of his fingers and pushes into that part, drawing the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains no part of it, put this joint or higher up and do so until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	If one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned by pulling,  \]
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If you need to turn something over, do it until it's all turned.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then fold the leather at the joint of the foot or the heel, and in this way you should do it with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is fat and narrow at the exit, or if it has a sharp collection of bone.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it is necessary for you to insert the sharp spinal splint between your fingers, and then press the head and draw out the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	You will go to the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do the same with any other natural swelling.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull the bones apart with pliers
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	if the head of the shoulder jumps out and it is held in place by a splint, it should be cut open until the moisture that is deeper inside comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, then you must cut it open until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the baby is above its feet, it moves lightly, and the alignment towards the mouth of the birth canal is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is in the stomach or the belly, you must draw it out with one swaddling cloth wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	And stretch the stomach or belly until the moisture that is there is corrected.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if other members are dislocated, and the head remains.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if you press the ball of the thumb deeply into the wound and draw it as far as the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then insert one or two fingers, and pull forcefully;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	but if the mouth of the wound is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, there is no need to work;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	It is necessary to administer moist and fat substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And apply plasters, soak in warm softening and moistening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the bone is protruding from the body and you can make it level, then administer what was said for live bone.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if you do not have the ability to do this, break it into pieces and remove nothing from the second part (the broken bone).
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring him what we said in bandages for abscesses that come in marriage;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, apply sharp binding, and bring other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose belly had been stillborn, then consulted with another on this matter, and revived the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong plaster of attraction, and afterwards, some bone came out, and after several days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I probe/examine the wound and insert my fingers into the bone until the woman is in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and keep the woman in this position for a long time, and then proceed with a little bit of pressure on the bone;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not encountered this chapter but for this reason: when the master finds an unusual thing, he knows how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the husband to his place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Here is the translation:
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the length of the rod be one palm and a half, and the width of the hollowed-out part of the prongs be one finger's breadth, and their length one span.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two limbs should be two joints of the same bone, which are joined together firmly in one and in the other, half a palm's length or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And this pair of joints are driven into the mouth of the jaw to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And let the two shoulders have two joints, as you see, of one palm's length, and two fingers' width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you wish to open the woman on all the instruments, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging and legs apart;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then push the two shoulders together towards the woman, and hold the head of the instrument beneath her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then take your hand to all the tools, just as you have done with the scissors equally, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the wound, while the bailiff does what he wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These tools are all mounted, and have similar appearances; and when the smith has equipped them, he works more quickly, and higher for men according to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disdain the tool that you have not equipped, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold in her urine, and then make her vomit with something bitter, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If she jumps because of this, it's alright.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a small pot, and make a pessary or cup, and put in it herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, camphor, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs or some of them should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cloth or lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it simmer until the vapors reach the patient; then make him vomit as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient suddenly falls down.   In this medieval medical treatise, the author provides guidance on various medical procedures such as cauterizing wounds, treating dislocations, and administering herbal remedies. The text also acknowledges the potential dangers of these procedures, such as the risk of death due to fear or complications. It is important to note that while the language used in this treatise may seem archaic and difficult to understand, it provides valuable insights into medieval medicine and healthcare practices.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or mustard plaster, then apply it to nature.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And if the second bone is found, seize and stretch it out straight, so that the marriage does not resist during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But you must move it gently to the right and left, then pull; it will come and dislocate itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the bladder is stretched, we have said the cure for emptying, and the fumigation of herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	if it does not have all that we have said, then ensure you do not draw it out.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but the one at the mouth of the bladder must be tied to the woman's thigh, then clisterize with four-ingredient ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it passes and returns, and comes out again; nevertheless, when it does so, if the patient experiences a bad smell in the stomach and head, and swells, it harms the sick person.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary for suitable fumigations for this purpose: no ancient one has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the expulsion of the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is made of glass resembling a dog's head, and a thin neck is put in its nature, and large cheeks over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And let the fumigation be over the coals, and the itch while it is destroyed, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet pierced their foundation, but it has been stopped by some subtle means.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, it is necessary to open that stoppage in the proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spur, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then cure with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay in place, then insert a wooden peg, and leave it for many hours, and remove it when the patient sees fit to move to rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes there comes a sudden swelling of a wound or an abscess; in this case cover it with lard (i.e., pork fat). If it is to be treated, do as we have said about the wooden peg.   This text suggests that the authors are discussing how to treat wounds and abscesses. They recommend using a wooden peg for certain types of injuries, and also suggest covering them with lard (pork fat) if they swell suddenly.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula (a passage between two organs or cavities that is not supposed to be there, such as an anal fistula) from its base    This line suggests that the text is discussing a medical condition known as a "fistula" which is an abnormal passage between two organs. The phrase "de la fistule dou fondement" refers to treating this condition from its base.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Bladder stones that come from beneath the foundation are nodular, and those that emerge from the foundation's side, or in the gap between two parts,   (Translation for line 1)
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is a fistula or more than one, and when the nodular mass is old, it works, and fresh moisture wakes up pus or thin boils,    (Translation for line 2)
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And sometimes these fistulas are chronic; and they are known by those who observe them when the patient has an emission or wind-passage, and in some cases, it jumps out one way or another.  (Translation for line 3)
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate to the bladder and halfway down the penis; and they reach as far as the knee joint, and into the hollow of the cavity of the hip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes a fistula that is penetrating to its root, but not penetrating:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And you insert your index finger or root into the fistula, and insert a fine awl of iron or steel into the fistula if there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has tortuosity, push a thin tent of plank (or a horse's hair), as much as you feel the tent or the hair against your hand;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no purulent discharge, neither wind nor worms, as we have said:   -= No comment or contextual information added. Here's the translation only:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not pierce through (the flesh); hurry up to cure it. -= No comment or contextual information added. Here's the translation only:
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or the urinary passage, if it urinates through it and cannot be sealed with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the joint of the leg, if it comes out blood at the level.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if it does not have tortuosity and the location of the pain is around it, then it is definitely broken, and no medicine or ointment can heal it.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these Persian blisters, there is no remedy but hard work, and the vain attempts of foolish doctors who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are not Persian and not old, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,  ...
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift up the legs to above the knees, and have the knees inclined towards the stomach;  ...
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a tent of linen or wood if there is crookedness, as you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around the base, you must insert your finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	If it pierces the patient through, and it is discovered or you feel between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is penetrated.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	and it shall not be worked at all, for it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One must know that one can heal some, but it happens little;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and help is given to him, when one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and fill the entire thing in the fistula until it comes out from its base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as you know that these little charred things should be burned, which are similar to a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then heal the swollen tents with butter, until the heat subsides, then heal it with a healing ointment, warm and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If that heals, that's good. But if it cannot be healed otherwise,
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters in, and does not pierce to the depth where the foundation is, and between your hand and the tent put a thick covering of skin or cloth, and you see the fistula beneath that cover with care.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the edge of the fistula begins, push it forward toward the tent, and then apply the fire cautery until it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	The tent will be released and cut; then take out the charred pieces that seem like a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh wounds itself, cut between you and the wound; then cauterize it with fire or medicine ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauteries have two good qualities: burning of these charred pieces and stopping the flow of blood and drying up the moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then, treat wet tent wounds with butter or crushed oatmeal until the flesh becomes soft and the charred part is submerged in it.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat deep, hard, charred sores with dry, sharp instruments as the remedies are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the full depth and is removed from the body, push it down towards the foundation and examine it.   The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the temptation and there is a thin cloth or leather or skin close to piercing it, there should be no escape but only a way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you plunge it to the hilt, or if there is pus, place a lance and cure it as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far in, covering the foundation's support, and let the exudations come out through it voluntarily;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then heal, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	if by chance it becomes healthy, then you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut off at the base, either with a probe or another instrument pointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then disinfect that charred flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the area away from the base: it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you bite the tent (or opening) into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation underneath the skin on top.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	Take a small hole pierced on the cheek in this manner:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and push one thread of cord through it (the small hole), and push the tent into the fistula all the way to its end, along with the thread.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is perforated at the foundation margin inside, then pull out the thread so that you can push your finger (or the foundation).
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And draw out the head with thread, and put together the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for 1 or 2 days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	And hold it without moving, until the threads sew together these things that are between them, and bind;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound when it is sewn up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there is no fistula, make it pierced in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.  \[Fistula is a tube-like passage between two organs or through the skin.\]
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not right to cover the fracture with a bandage immediately upon setting it, and then heal it as we have said, until it heals completely.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the thorn-like splint used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cuts through.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand it is not blunt, so as not to cover what should not be covered, as you see here.
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Emordices are of two kinds: they are within the foundation, as grain of resin, and if there are small or large ones, and on the outside blood is present.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, they are displaced from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are displaced have a little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And still always or a little amount of citrus juice or a little blood, and have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the care of those who have it within the foundation, is that you command the patient to strain themselves to urinate in chambers, until the foundations subside, and the sons appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and pierce it with tongs or hold it with your nail, then strike its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tongs cannot hold them because of moisture, then take it with a cloth or cotton or a piece of gauze.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And pull it to your arms, then strike it, and powder on top of some hot powders that are in place of the cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize it as stated or in the chapter on cauterization, then you treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, clisterize the patient with a harsh and biting clyster to wash the affected area, so that it comes out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	The patient should not prepare himself, and if his veins are forced from their foundation, it is a light cure.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you should grasp them with your nail or tweezers and strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healthy and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	You should apply the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread, put it into a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is wide, make the stitches close, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one for draining excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerot on the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then leave it until it stops draining, and when it has stopped, heal the wound with ointment and other treatments until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of drying from the fire or foundation   (This seems to be incomplete as it's not clear what "of" refers to)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying from the fire in the intestines and by the constraint of nature, and when the sickness is old and medicine does not work.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you score the surface of a splinter or your fingernail with a pointed instrument, so it does not get moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it until it heals as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and be cauterized.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let it heal completely.
dou fremit	great trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fleas are a small parasite that enters the body deeply;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the fever strikes, and it is felt like death due to trembling, spreading throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the remedy is that you take a cane of an ostrich feather or a strong eagle's feather and place it on the trembling (part), so that the purple circles surround the trembling completely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the cane until you cover the trembling completely and immerse it (the cane) entirely, and dry the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a cane of iron or copper according to the following form, and it should be fine-tuned both inside and outside:  (no direct translation for "subtilz desoz et traians desus" which could mean finely made on the inside and smooth on the outside)
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, to keep it warm and press; and if you see it tremble, cauterize the quiver, as in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the shape of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they make a silver or arsenic suppository, or melted lead or wax; and sometimes they make small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those who are treated in children's care or who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cloister is both small and large, or the bellies are bound in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it should have an opening where the bellies are bound, as you see, and the chins should be pierced inside; and on one side there are two holes, and in the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the bellies where medicine is put from a beast's bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around with small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And place a space between each wound, then push a strong thread through each wound, twisted in ten or more turns around, and bind the belly as if it were a goatskin;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is inside [the wound], tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then smear with an ointment; and this is the shape of a circle;
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or egg yolk ointment, or similar, then push it gently in.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the ministers stretch the patient's two hands together until they are completely visible, then remove the cloth and wash the patient's legs.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine appears to come out, squeeze it as much as possible; and if it does not open for a whole night, it is more beneficial.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the disease of swollen stomach with a poultice, and the medicine comes out quickly, continue to apply it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are festered or abscessed, the poultice should be as subtle as for an infant;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the form of the subtle enema when the skin is tightened:
des plaies	for the wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the previous section about the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and for how they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Wounds are made by the thrust of a spear, cut of sword and knife, or lance, club, arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the rules of the body, as in a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for it will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say when a simple wound comes or a head, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from arrow shot or similar things, and the skin is torn completely and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and if there is doubt about the abscess rising: make it drain from the head itself immediately whether blood comes from the wound, or on the contrary drain from the damaged area;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	empty the patient of excessive wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not want to heal, reduce its flesh, and let it drink no wine, nor eat any meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And put on the wound, if an abscess grows there, wool dampened in rose oil only, or in styptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, put on the fresh wound with all its blood, which is not moving due to air, and the following powder:   ...
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the arrow has moved it (the wound), put some ointments on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is open to the bone, and pitted, and does not hold but only a little, then close it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And command the patient to eat large foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as peas and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	If you find or see rotten flesh without reaching the bone, strike the entire rotten area and throw it away, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped with medicine, cut it and find where the artery is dislocated. Tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: it is that you put this powder on it which will harden as soon as the arsenic moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	The manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live coal 4 parts, and grind them finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and treat the wound, press it firmly so that it drains well and unites with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And then tie it up well, and leave it to heal without being untied, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Occasionally, one does this with alum only, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the sore has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the sore has moved itself, it must not be put on this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	But place on some digested ointments, or poultices made from flour of barley boiled with water and honey, until it exudes pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you after the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck   (or "wounds of the neck")
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple (without complication), it does not differ from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are severed.   (or "If a wound comes about or on the neck and it is simple without any difference with that of the head, but if the nerves or arteries of the neck are severed.")
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nose, there is no other remedy but to let it heal and not put anything restricting, for it harms the nose and causes it to recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nose is cold, and its continuation with the brain which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed in sweet oil and mixed with rose oil, and boiled water washed similarly in sweet oil.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	And other stones of similar kind in this manner, and always moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, tie it with strips, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and pus-filled, pierce or make an incision lower down.   \] Et s’il en a plusieurs, puis les cercle par une corsse en longueur et largeur convenables, si com li maistre me l'a dit;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arteries are cut, bleeding will follow, so tie off the wound, and cauterization is necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the spine of the throat or the veins are cut, the conduct should be kept so that the meat (flesh) can go through.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	If the vein is on the throat's neck, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then let it heal naturally, and leave it for some days, then treat with warm herbs until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound presses on the bone, cut it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	And if there are pieces of bone, pull them all out as you can, and those that you cannot pull out, leave until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	make the opening narrow and even.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a lance or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If the wound is from a lance or sword and it is deep, check if it is breathing quickly; then know that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not healed, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it immediately nor bind it for the blood which will dissolve completely.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	return to the heart, and cut open the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have ointment, put old cotton on the wound to draw out moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	And make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	If it does not cause spasm or bad trembling of the heart nor drawing of the entrails;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, you will know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then remove the tents (bandages) and other treatments, once it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	If it cannot heal and open, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as appropriate.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, deeper or on the back, then treat what is in front of it.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, sew it up; if it is small, powder it and if it has reached the bone and taken pieces of it, whether the wound or the openings are forced, treat them.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if [the wounds] are not drained, let them drain by themselves, align the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and medium-sized and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the large wound, sometimes the intestines or the intestinal nerves jump out, due to which the introduction of them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because it is better to push the intestines back in, if not from end to end;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell soon when they feel the cold, so push them back more gently.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because it is more necessary to heal the mother's wound, it is moved (the intestines) back to their place in her, rather than in others (two).
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	Know that the cut of the belly follows four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The first two common cuts occur in the incision of the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The other cuts in the body and two other specific cuts are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all of them are more suitable with a stitch from the belly, and I shall say each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	If the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines protrudes,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And the groin area is difficult to reset, which is one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	For the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For because the intestines are swollen by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or a linen cloth only with cold water.
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	cook in cold squill and cyperus and spike (a plant species)
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and open the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And at times, this wine restraining makes it swell as if to burst open.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	When you see the distension spreading, soften the intestines with water or milk and have them cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for this is the reason for the intestines to close up little by little;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	And if it cannot enter, they make a small wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first remedy is to apply leeches.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	we should not cut it unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument to cut through:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	Cut inside the hollow part and do not split, check the shape here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is opened up, and the intestines leap out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If you push it back in its natural shape into its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you have the power, for it is worth trying.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and located in the lower abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	you must make the patient lie on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and raise their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	then place the head and the buttocks higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and similarly if the hernia of the belly is in one of the two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	then put your attention on the fact that the affected part should be higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus, it should be administered as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds use what is prepared.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then take a compassionate assistant with one hand holding the whole wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	And this is the common method of suturing;
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the top of the wound a distance of one finger's space, and insert a needle with a single thread of strong filament.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two joints of the chest with the two joints of the sawbones.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and put together the two joints of the sawbones four together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then tighten a double thread around the awl of two parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then assemble the two heads of the wound facing each other,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and leave one space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and continue doing this with the number of needles needed,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is held in place;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be medium-sized, neither too thin nor thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles cut all the fat, while too thick ones cannot enter well;
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because they must be amputated
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not advisable to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not cut and open a wound before the joint.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	then cut the joints with needles so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And he places bands or cloths on the head of arrows to keep them still.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let it stay until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of suturing arrows is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it strengthens an arrow or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you assemble the two shoulder blades with the two ribs together with a needle, having one strong medium thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced all four of them together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	If you straighten the needle at the part where you have started, in the manner as they often sew cloths;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a small egg;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching heals the man;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	Who was wounded by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound is more than one palm wide,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it exposes the intestines about two palms in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine as it had been twenty-four hours earlier,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal him with medicine, for I was in one place where there was none found, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And place old cotton above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it becomes clean.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Then I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and insert it from the outside part to inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has pierced the heart directly, if the key of the lock is inside the sheep's hide or cost [object] where you have inserted the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the inside to the outside until it appears there.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the tailor does with leather.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave one side of the sheep's hide open at first, and close it from the other side once the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of suturing, which Galen calls specifically,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is like anyone who brings together the two parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the edges of the skin to the other edge, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or the edge of the mirror nearby and pierce only that spot,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And let the two cheeks of the shoulder rest.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part until within.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	two cheeks of the shoulder
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one and the other from the outer part until within, in the two other cheeks that are on the opposite side of the chest bone.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And it is the moistened manner of stitching, and it is the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen said this word, and no one can deny it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One must sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and should one drive one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather garments.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And know that when the rupture is within the abdomen,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	then the stitching of the wound in the abdomen is more severe than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgement of the wound is like the judgement of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you open the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the arrow has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	If one reinstates the intestine and its casing, then place powder stimulating heat on top.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if it has moved the arrow, place any salve that is present until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and clean the threads and tie them together with sutures and the needle.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	And if you have no medicine, put (something) on it as soon as it begins to emit pus, old cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it two times a day until it is drained.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound might cause spread to the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	It is necessary that you soak linen lightly in warm oil or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it around the affected areas, and underneath the blisters.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	if there is pain or boils in the belly, and it happens many times,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the enemas with black wine are too hot, and especially if the boils come up to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	And pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when perforated,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is due to the planting of worms in them, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the herb jumps from the wound, place it back as with the intestines, while it is still fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	And if it is old and turned black, you must cauterize the black area where blood flow should not come.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then grip that which is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And hang the two heads suspended from the part below the wound until it opens up to align the extraction, as the bones fall, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	of the swelling of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are round and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If it can be restored in some men, [this refers to] dislocated limbs.
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen a man pierced or wounded with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became swollen and turned into a fistula, with emission and windiness.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied a cure according to what I knew, and did not stop refining until it was healed, and the limbs were sewn together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw the patient being sewn up, I feared that he had an ailment in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no illness, but remained in better condition, with food and drink.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they said to any experimenters that when it has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take thick thread, then gather together the lips of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thread has passed through the mouth, place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it draws the mouth outwards.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then hold the head (of the patient) firmly so it cannot dislocate.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then put another plaster after in this manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head becomes inflamed in the intestines, it does not cause any harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And it can be tied with a fine thread from the intestine of an animal.
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this thread made from the intestine that is very sharp.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	then tie it to the head of this thread with a fine linen cord.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then thread the wire through the needle, sew up the intestine, and tie it in the wound.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this method of stitching sores is not without fear and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or health, unless through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	All wounds or abscesses, when they mature, are universally called "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is filled and bursts open.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the truth, a hard and white node, where there is no pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is as swollen as the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes clear and other times thick bend.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes shallow, and other times quite deep.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and there is no flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is only by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It is to be known, by the small amount of blood or heart. (translation)
ou por sa malice;	or for its ill nature; (translation)
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within it, above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow. (translation)
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or if there is too much pus. (translation)
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	When the limb is broken, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	when the medicine is not good in the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because the corruption is manner of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	because in the region, digestion is slow, and health slows down and declines by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And I must tell you the cure for a fistula that is made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the bladder, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it affects the property of the main member, and similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all these fistulas that are in this manner are grave healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is any fistula that does not go down to the level I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you see it recognized, if it is straight, take a tent of wax or iron, and pierce it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	And if the fistula is twisted, seek a thin probe to straighten it.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the probe bends due to twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many holes that you cannot probe with thin probes,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you are to use the clyster (enema) through one of the holes,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For moisture is cut from one place to another, and it is purified.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then seek out cautiously within your power, whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is closed completely.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	ask the patient carefully about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein.
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the joints I have mentioned, if the shoulder follows what I have said,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and break the fracture and corrupt bones that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	then heal it until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well drilled in a straight line, you must cut through to the bone, as much as possible,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then he puts dampened plasters in the medication, and pushes them to the head of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medication corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he puts healing ointments in clean jars, while they are still clean;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if they are not clean by this means, then cauterize them as we have said;
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, strike it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If neither veins nor nerves trouble or principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, scrape it until all corruption is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the harmful things while it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, then render it soft as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not yet at the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you discover and seek until you reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	And remove all corruption, then reset its place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other device but the natural rest.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it with pliers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is possible using an instrument,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	And if there are multiple bones, remove all of them, do not leave any one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If hot and moist and fat, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something irritating like mustard.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the flesh is purged around the bones.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will more easily remove the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	and press only the corruption so that the blackness is completely removed.
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corruption that reaches the bone marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it must be cut and covered up until corruption sets in, then heal it as long as it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you about a fistula that occurs on one man's leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	Take it as an example and help in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	A young man of about thirty years had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within his body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As long as the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but they pierced it repeatedly out of folly, so that the abscesses opened up.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they discharged a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and much pus came out that made them all weak and full of moisture in the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many people applied treatment for two years without any skilled hand in medicine.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	As long as I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which ran through the wounds with great pain.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man's body turned red, and he had a yellow complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I made a tent over one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	And I found that they come against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	Then I quickly went to one wound and cut into it until I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it corrupted and pierced through, and the corruption reached down to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I appeared to be that which was corrupt in the bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except for what I left.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And began to heal the wound with salty medicines for a long time, but could not suture.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I reinforced it, and uncovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	And I found continuous corruption in the bone, and I removed it, and then I left it to heal, and afterwards I tried to mend the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not as I wrapped a palm of bone around it and pull it away completely from its socket.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicine; and it healed and mended quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	And because of the fear of death he had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely cured.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard cyst grew in the place of the bone, and was of good condition and had no harm or opposite effect at all, neither in the air nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if any bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a ligature (or thread), and hold it at the head of the open bone.
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	And command someone to stretch it upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	And take another thicker thread of linen and tie it above the cartilage that is on top of the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And stretch the head so that you pull the corrupt cartilage downwards,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	And uncover the flesh on the place where you want to be, let the flesh not bleed.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	And put a splint or a plank under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	It must be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupt but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	If you uncover the flesh completely; then put one iron pin underneath.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and let the corruption from one part to another be covered with silk, and let the silk be the same length as the corruption (as we have said);
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	if the corruption is in a joint, cover the corrupted joint and let the bone on the other side be visible;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	if the corruption is between two joints, then it should only be covered (with something).
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	And if the corruption is at the end of the hand, or at the heel of the foot, it is very serious.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but it is necessary that you investigate this corruption, how it opened up;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way possible, but ensure the vein or nerve does not oppose you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incision and the needles for covering these bones are many, according to the location of the bone and its appearance.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	for this reason it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for each type of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If one considers the tool required according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	The fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may dislocate either from within or from outside;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have treated that corruption with medicine and the treatment does not work,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	It is necessary to cover that member up to the level where corruption comes.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If the patient shivers because of death or due to greater evil from the member's failure.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs are that the member turns black as if it were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And afterwards, the blackness spreads, then comes the corruption of one member to another.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	And takes hold of the whole body; hasten to cover it.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the strike of some venomous beasts such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corruption is at the head of the finger, strike it and do not give it any space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	If it comes up to the hand, strike at the joint so that the corruption does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes to the arm, strike at the bone; and if it passes the bone, it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and nothing else is needed but the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and do as follows when the corrosion comes or piety: if it comes in the first joint, then strike after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to piety, strike all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	And if it moves up into the leg, strike at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	If it comes above the thigh, there is no other remedy for the patient but to kill him.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	The manner of covering or healing the member is that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister below the tie, and another minister above it.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you sever the flesh that is between the two ligaments at one space of about a thumb's width wide, while the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then put the copper or silk, and place one linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy area,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and another wound or abscess occurs on the patient;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And when bleeding occurs as you work, quickly cauterize the area.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	and apply some powders that restrain [the bleeding]; then return to your medication until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the limb with a tight bandage and let it heal until it is sound;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you about what happened to one man in a similar situation:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	It happened to him a blackness resembling burned flesh,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion began first on his tooth root, until it ate through all the tooth;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he pierced the tooth with a copper instrument, and became healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	And long time afterwards it returns the corruption or tooth of the hand, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put it on things reflective after the purification of the body, and the corruption did not cease.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he commanded me to cut off the hand, and I did not wish, if I had hope of reflection (of the matter).
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	He also feared that if I were to cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	The virtues of a man were weak; he despaired completely and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and struck himself with a knife on the hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not heard this story otherwise, unless there is a need for it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	An abscess sometimes appears in the groin area and remains so long that it causes a great accumulation of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	And then they run and pierce, and leap the bow, and keep the place firm, as a vassal.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	The skin that is above is also as thin as a delicate cloth cut open.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not pierce to the bone or to the nerve, and such a disease is called "wounded".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it (the dislocation) is so long that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and you cook the meat entirely outside (of the body), similarly when it is thin, like a thin cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it should not be avoided due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	If you have suspicion that the meat (flesh) is rotten, but the corruption is not in the bone,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is thick with flesh, if you cure it with a poultice like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look to see if the breast is large and the sore in it smells bad,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Then prepare the Egyptian medicine poultice like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take asafetida (or "aisil"), oil, and litharge, mix them equally, and cook in one vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from this according to your need, and make it into water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and anoint the breast and apply pressure (to the wound);
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine in for two hours, then draw it out while waiting.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the breast is softened and pus removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes it is cleansed with ash water.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash, pour water on it.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then filter, and apply as a poultice, until you know that the wound is properly healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	but if the patient cannot tolerate it, or the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if the poultice is made with water and honey and a little bit of litharge powder.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you anoint it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey has properties of cleansing and washing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound heal.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the anointing of these substances causes pus to form in them.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you are to prepare a plaster of definite consistency, and make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	And you are to apply a plaster of certain medicines and liniments, whose properties for treating wounds I have mentioned.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	If the wound in the breast is small, and the linen cloth of the plaster cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if the wound is about the width of a finger, and you place a tent of Egyptian liniment over it,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	Apply basilicon ointment, as it is diluted.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, cut it so that only one inch or a cleansing cloth can enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the ulcer that falls out is above, press it down or lower than it.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the wound is fully open, do not let any pus enter.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	arrange it in such a way that the wound points downward as much as possible,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the wound is fully open, do not let any pus enter.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the chest beneath as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then tie it in this manner: let the sinew run lightly downwards without leaving anything of the sinew;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medicines that consolidate to put on the chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and lay one linen cloth over it that covers the entire chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then apply force to the breast wound, i.e., one slightly larger than the first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then spread the liniment or other cloth according to the size of the wound,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place the linen over the breast wound to straighten the blow, and do not remove the large cloth immediately but after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and one who is over the breast wound, often removes it in order to relieve the blow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know what runs from the wound, whether it is poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been applied in this manner, and you see the nature jump over the breastbone,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts have already begun to swell, approach the healthy;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then dislocate it in the morning or the third day, when you dislocate the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Change one bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are swollen improperly after many days, know that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons cure for a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the healing approaches. For there are men who delay the healing of flesh in their wounds, and from those who act contrary to this;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and bends improperly out of joint from the breast after many days, knowing that breasts do not dislocate;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breast takes a long time to heal and is swollen, apply drying medications that are moist in substance and dry in effect;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	Like an eggshell defined, for there is much part of glass [or vitreous material], and it is the final remedy.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take the eggshell-like substance defined, make it with rose oil, and rise [beat] it with aged wine of equal consistency.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then boil and use it; and the same is made better thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when the eggshell-like substance defined is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Take myrrh, aloe, and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder on honey while it is over the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	Then dip one cloth and place it on the breast, and at times administer an Aristolochia longa.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is like the flour and centaur.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and use of simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and sprinkle on the honey as I said, and use.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	And if the patient is whole, and not treated by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that corruption enters completely, and makes an impression on the bone or hard members or ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the fistula (fistula treatment), as we said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess at the nailbed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Pouria is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or in the toe, or by chance it arises in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it becomes inflamed and is not cared for, one abscess follows another.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and throw boiling water on it until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it burns all of it.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And comes the corruption up to the bone, until pain smells, and the cheeks are wide, and the color turns red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the section above, and the treatment does not help at all.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it doesn't work, you must cut off everything that is left of the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healed.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail under the skin begins to push through, and it starts to swell and blister,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It is necessary that you put the salve under the nail so that it does not push through the skin.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and apply it to the top, and press down on the swelling gently and lightly,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And place on top of the reset bone, hot and corrosive medicine for removing everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	If the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the tooth corrupt, strike it in one blow as previously stated.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal while he is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded, pierced, and feeling great pain, it is necessary that you drain him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail with a sharp spatula from above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And guard that the tip does not reach the bone which is beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If it happens, place something on top to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand is fading
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The fingers that spring up accidentally on some men are all fat.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	And by chance there is a tooth or bone, and sometimes a nail.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or their growth is in some of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	The one born in any nail of the finger does not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and the one born at the joint of the finger may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The girth (circumference) of one who is fat is light, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The girth (circumference) of one who is fat is to be measured at the root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	One born at the root of a joint is difficult to cure; keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or should be at the navel, it is necessary that you cover the raw flesh around the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bind the bone with an appropriate splint, then heal it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come to the joints all at once are due to birth, or from a blow to the wound, or by burning, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary to bind that dislocation, it should repair according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two cloths or dampened linen soaked in oil roset, so that they do not adhere together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	And you place between two thin pieces of wood, until the joints are soldered, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of its two sides comes with the palm, then strike the splint as required.
Des vils	The peasants
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are large and rounded, full of melancholic superfluidities that come in many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more often happens in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must sometimes administer cleansing with vinegar, and then apply the basilica (a medicinal ointment or paste made from powdered herbs).
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The method of iron treatment is in two ways: one is to strike it and draw out black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And the other way is to open the vein and let all the blood flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The thigh is prepared in this manner: first, warm the leg with very hot water, making sure that the flesh does not become too thin.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then hold the patient's leg from above the knee to the part below the kneecap;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut the vein in one, two, or three places, making a large incision.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then extract and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And tie it up, and instruct him to eat black meat with a bitter sauce.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And begin the evacuation and purification again when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The swelling is treated in this manner: raise the limb of the patient, if there is much hair.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then immerse it (the affected part) in warm water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if there is no warm water, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein near the knee or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then scrape the skin with a knife at the edge, and peel off the vein from both sides until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	It will appear red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then push the shoulder blade beneath, until it is raised to the skin, and then bend it at the little angle lightly.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then strike one other place under four fingers; then cut the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then tie the shoulder again, just like you did before, and bend it at another little angle, just like you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then cut another piece, or more if necessary, then tie, and bend it to the thigh.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then draw and drain up to the second joint; then pull it out joint by joint, until it completely comes out, then break it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot draw and drain, push an awl with a single, very strong double thread through [it].
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and draw and pull it out, and push a rod under it, then turn your hand on both sides until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep it from bruising, for if it bruises, one cannot draw or lift it out, and this brings harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it completely, place on the wound linen soaked in wine and rose oil; let it heal until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the wounds are contracted, twisted, and entwined together, not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	You must cut it obliquely but do not cover it; pull it out as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of iron used to pierce the eye does not curve and does not cut, but only pierces the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large curve because if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but be large as we have said, and here is its shape:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And sometimes it happens elsewhere than in the legs, which occurs due to rot that comes beneath the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	As it comes within the body and turns, insert a probe between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	If the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg with a very large swelling,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then the swelling changes, and the vein begins to emerge, just as a root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder is opened up, it is necessary that you wrap around it with a piece of wood from one and a half to two feet long, and sew it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	leave the wood in place on the leg and each time it threatens to slip out, wrap it again with the wood and sew.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	if it is too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remaining part, but do not cover its root until it is completely out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, it will retreat into the flesh and cause abscess or gangrene or other disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For that thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and this vein when it is treated from 5 fingers' length, or 10,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and once an honest man came to me, from whom the vein issued from 10 fingers' length, and when you cut it, it swelled a little or leaked and pierced all the way down to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	So let everything be empty; and empty the matter that is within, and bring medicine to its place that causes no pain for three days, then heal it as in abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes at this vein, many raindrops, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or arm,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And much blood comes out, from where it jumps out; heal it therefore as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," because it often affects cattle.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, which travels through the entire body expanding and contracting,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And it feels to him as if all his limbs are dislocated, until he tears the skin or it jumps forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And worms of putrefaction of some humors come towards and snakes, lice, and roundworms or belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its malice, for when it passes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	Sometimes it enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him to cure and drain, one can do it only when he goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong cord tightly.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then press on top and pull hard, and if his wound is full to the flesh, you do not draw it out,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize the fire on top, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greater harm it causes is that it runs oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it approaching or near the oil, hold a sorcerer's wand beneath it, then strike on top and pull;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And the patient must use body cleansing with soluble medicines to remove bad humors;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if there is corruption of meats, let it be thrown away.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And afterward, the eye rises like a worm to the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	faster than nothing, just as living silver when it is cut from one piece.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain divides itself from that place and pierces into the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and a little afterward it runs all through the body until it comes to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then he told me it was returning around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled greatly how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I had often seen pain move from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had never seen it as clearly in a woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and therefore that constrained windiness appears;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear according to this reason to those who are ill and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If the limb above and below is pressed tightly, then press down on it until the swelling is forced back to its place.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the area; if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	If the cure for these swellings is by pills such as fetid pills and pill of serapion, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity among them is that some have large points, and small ones, and blunt, and bound ones.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those with two points, and of those with tongues, and of those that have splinters;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and an arrow that strikes any limb does so in two ways: either it pierces through the principal part of the limb, or
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	As a brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls in any place of these organs, and the signs of death that I will tell you hereafter will appear to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If you wish to extract this arrow, you must be careful, for death may come in many ways afterwards.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear at all, and the arrow is not fully embedded, pull it out, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when the sign of the skull appears where the arrow strikes the bone, and it breaks through the skull cover,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	It is when there are swelling and abscesses, scrofula and eruptions, redness and inflammation of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And by chance, it may happen without force from the nostrils or ears; and by chance, he may lose speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	And jumps out of the wound white matter resembling pus, and jumps also like boiling tar.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	If this sign appears to you, hold back from the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces through is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it has been driven into something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance the patient becomes silent like the hair, and in a black blood flow, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and faintness.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, the patient clearly senses death approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow that does not pierce the flesh is when bubbles of pus jump out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow falls on the bedcover of the sick person, it is dislodged from the side ribs; and it releases a lot of fluid and pain and heavy breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or food sticks in its wound, by chance something from the indigestible meat might jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach, and something from the intestine passage might jump out, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow strikes in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, shoulders, shoulders blades, spine of the back, wrists, hips, legs, and similar, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, you do the following.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	A certain man had an arrow lodged or splintered in the root of his neck.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I drew it out from another side beneath the ear fat and found no injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And drew with force an arrow that had lodged in the oil under the paper underneath,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was set straight, and it could not reach further than the tip towards the flesh.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was large, the size of a Turkish bow, completely sharp at one end and slightly curved towards the ears; the wound was healed, and no evil accident happened to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And passed through an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow had Arabic ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I was barbered, and made it thin until I passed through it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And draw an arrow out of a man, who was head or stomach, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, contrived it, drew it out, and had no bad consequences.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if a man receives an arrow in his back or chest, and the wound is sutured;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	And the arrow remained within it, and did not change its natural position.
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor found any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man who was pierced by an arrow in his flesh, and the wound was sutured;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	for a long time he endured great pain; and many similar things happened to him.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And draw an arrow from a man of the princes, the king who was stuck in snow.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and he was slightly sloping to the right side; and the arrow was completely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was summoned for treatment after it had been three days. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I pierced it with a thin needle and felt nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	He feels pricking and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was the tip of an arrowhead.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I applied a soothing plaster with digestive properties, because the wounds were not swollen.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the wound of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I place the plaster on for many hours, and heal the wound directly, and keep the patient in that state for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he feels the arrow within his neck for one day; and he tells me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put a corrosive medicine on the wound by hand for many hours until it is cured.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow that was attached to the place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then align in the opening of the wound with this astringent medicine, until the head of the arrow appears visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it passed the boundaries beyond four months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And then I closed the wound that I had opened with the tweezers, and it did not heal from one side or the other.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I did not cease to refine and to try various instruments until I took a pair of tweezers well made for one day,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to the shape that comes at the end of this chapter, keep following it and return the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	The judgment of the mirrors is that the nose cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	Then I will restore it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Here is the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you apply your treatment to this (condition), I do not say all of it, for the books cannot entirely grasp it;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters understand a little thing, and on this that is failing;
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	true nine work, and it is new invention, in the explanation of things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are inserted except in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the hole where they enter, or from another side.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out from the place where it enters is an arrow entering in a soft part of the body, and sometimes it jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh has healed around it and let the opening be closed.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And similarly, if it [the dislocation] is lodged in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	Then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around it with a sharp awl wherever the joint is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	If the arrow is lodged in the skull bone and reaches one of the brain cavities,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And some of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: do not draw it out at all, but let it remain equal after several days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if an arrow comes up to such a point, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	If the arrow has not pierced beyond the bone but only comes up to this point,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And the patient remains for several days without any bad accidents, then attempt to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be withdrawn, administer tourniquets around it, as I have told you; then heal the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if an arrow is lodged inside the body so it cannot be seen, press all around it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	And if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable tool.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	And if it cannot be done due to the narrowness of the wound and the deepness of the arrowhead,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, so make an incision as wide as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	draw out the arrow if possible, and if there are ears on the arrow like hooks to hold onto it,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If bone the flesh which is pierced by two parts in the muscles that you can feel,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the arrowhead until you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	be careful not to break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, press the flesh around it, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes (the procedure), bring what we have said about its treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard yourself from cutting the nerve and the vein, and use an instrument as you can pull out the arrow without risk.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow hit him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	because it is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, place him according to what the signs indicate to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	Arrow that comes from elsewhere, if you open anything related to it, or the skin is swollen in some place as can be seen or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Then cut, so long as the pliers can grasp it, and then pull it out; if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then round your hand and push it into the bone, expand the bone, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	And if it were of an arrow inside, push it all out.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it were a dislocation, and you wish to administer treatment, give one instrument of traction.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; then push forcefully.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is covered, place one sharp instrument at its point to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow has been touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or penetrates the belly, bladder, side, or chest and is near, and you can cover it, then do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	but be careful not to cut the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, and then stitch the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And the treatment while it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shapes of the tweezers used to extract arrows are similar to an eagle's beak, and here is their shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The form of the hair root is like the feather of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	To point the arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pliers for pointed and for measuring, as shown here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins in the human body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	From veins from which one recovers are 31, of which the head is 16,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	this means: it is known, two veins that are after the ears, which are called the "double 'herbech'" [literally, double herbs];
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in two temples visible;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the hollows of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers" [literally, inspirers];
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	1) and the vein which is on the forehead;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	3) and the two arteries which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	4) and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	5) and the two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins commonly used for letting blood are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the median (the one that was called "faste" in earlier times) is composed of the cephalic and the basilic.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; and the abscess is located on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	This is the one that heals, which opens clearly above the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	The saviatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two rains (joints).
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and foot there are 3 veins: one is beneath the hollow of the left thigh,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	The second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "anse," which is in the left ankle;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg there are 3 veins beneath those (veins).
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The vein that is after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins or veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then cut them with a knife where you feel the pulse beneath your hand,
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lance, and thrust it beneath the vein until the bone, then pull your hand along the entire vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And pierce the skin and the vein well with two fingers deep through, and make the blood come out as much as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then tie it and let it be until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The sanitation of the two arteries which are in the two temples, is worth ancient migration, [in modern English: The cleaning of the two arteries located in the two temples has an old-fashioned curative effect]
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and softening, and eye treatment that is common, and for the eyes with inflamed glands;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of sanitation are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient extends his neck, until both veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	And feel the pulses beneath your throat, then press on them.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lift the vein at the top of your neck, near the artery, and push the needle under it.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	lift the vein upwards and tie it off, as you have done in the two other veins, and stop the blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And then form the ligature (a type of stitch or binding), and leave it until it heals; we have spoken about its covering and its removal, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein in the forehead is as effective as the healing of the cranial wounds from the ancient facial diseases that have migrated and turned red.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	The quality is such that the patient stretches their neck while twisting it, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called "fossoir", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press up from your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and not at any time should the operation be done with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flame should not be too sharp; and the vein should be cut across because the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The cutting of the two veins that are in each eyelid helps with the eyes, and with the temple, and with the jaw, and with the ear in oil, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the qualities of their sanity are such that the patient stretches their neck in twisting with any cord, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the sanity, and it is the sanitizer of the cross, a small length of fire, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is fine, perhaps it breaks; then make the sanitizer of the blood, as much as you need, and then lay it on cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The sanitizer of the vein from the neck is useful against ague, scrofula, and diseases of the face.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If it swells and reddens as if coming out in a boil, especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the characteristics of the pus are such that the patient compresses his neck, then squeezes his nose with your left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle flame long, and thrust it into the gap between the two nostrils.
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the veins do not open well there, and the blood will soon begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	And do not go too deep, and correct the blood according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, for it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The salves of the two kinds aid in the treatment of ulcers, the beginning of leprosy, and many diseases, and in stopping pustules, corrosion, eruptions, and sores.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the qualities of the salve are that the patients stretch their necks under both arms, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	And let the master stand over the head of the sick person, and the sick person sit on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then open the vein along a long stretch, then draw out the blood moderately, as needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then repair another vein on the other side, then untie the ligature, and gently compress all the veins,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The patient should not strangle [himself]; and he should leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of the wounds on the lips above helps with the congestion in the mouth and corruption of gums, and cuts or cracks in the lips, as well as toothaches and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the wound are to have the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they can be recognized because they are black, and because there are small veins surrounding them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Therefore take both, and if you do not know them, and you have doubts,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you strike the largest of each part, and similarly make incisions in the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Draining the saliva under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Draining the veins that are under the tongue helps after the cranial drainage and is used for narrowing of the throat, eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	And the quality of draining is that the patient lies on their back before the sun, lifts the tongue, and looks down at each side to find a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Keep then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The incisions in the body, which are commonly healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with a sharp point, large mirret flame or subtle olive oil like you measure, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	And they (veins) are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of fire mirrhine is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	It is necessary to open veins that are swollen and filled with thick, troubled blood.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the form of olive oil fire:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtly pointed out, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle, citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basilica vein (one of the subtle veins), helps with diseases that are below the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And the master should drain it skillfully and make sure to avoid the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it pierces the artery, and bleeding comes out, it should be cauterized, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	but must not be pricked by the flame, but cut like a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the bladder does not open manifestly, you should open it and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you wish to have any drain from it, or you heal in its place the vein into the arm: it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cup to the fire anoint, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the location of the wound, then it is necessary that you straighten the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the wound, then bind the arm, and burn the vein with fire.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And be careful not to cut into the artery when you see it swollen, for that is the artery; therefore, avoid cutting into it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rise high like the urine of a child, and the wound is red and delicate, know that it is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Then place your hand on top for a long time, then cut through the wound where it is red, because often there are:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	tie the arm and leave it like that, do not move it for the patient; and be careful, do not move it until it becomes clean.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not bleeding and it swells, and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery if it is open, because it will shrink; and stop the bleeding from the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fennel root, cut it and take one half and bind it firmly until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it does not stop bleeding, that is good; if not, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the application of cauterization should not be applied in various conditions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the ligament in the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above, and from the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to wander along the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it inflames and the patient may get sick, and perhaps cannot recover;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	And this nerve opens wide many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must draw the instrument anesthetic on it; and pull the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The sanity of the cephalic helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to cauterize by pricking with the olive oil flame or the myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is no nerve or artery below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Furthermore, you must seek the most accessible joint, and do not cause harm in the first attempt, and you can start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And occasionally veins swell up in some men, in which case, do not cause harm in the first attempt.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about treating wounds is that wound treatment is not brought about except to preserve health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And the wound should be treated in one of the four veins that are cut: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be bled at the beginning of springtime in goose, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of saturation appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it should be bled the first day or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour, but whenever need be, either day or night, at all hours and in every instance.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it should not be bled children under 12 years old, nor women carrying a child until the fourth month after conception up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One should not heal the elderly who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be healed in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if they have retained many feces, so that the veins are not able to expel the superfluidities which could harm the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	one should not heal those who are excessively salted with foods, drunk, until they recover, or those who have dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if he is wounded after colic affliction, vomiting, abdominal distension, excessive copulation with women, hard work, staying up late, and all that weakens the strength, or by something related to the weapon or the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then purify the bodily fluids, if they are large, through food and drinks and medications, if you have that ability;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	afterwards take a bath, unless something prevents it, to purify the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And heal the vein with the wound around the third part, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	Keep him that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	And be lying down and comfortable, and let the healer be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then draw out the ligature slightly, because if it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal properly;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the joint with hands until the veins swell, and feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then moisten the bladder with a little bit of old oil and place your thumb of your left hand on top of that vein beneath the joint as much as you want to cauterize it.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not burst or split when striking (or cutting).
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that behave like strings in the bladder, and some are filled with windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If you put it over the flame, if you remove from the flame, and it cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if it opens the vein, but the wound is too narrow, then the surgeons should be aware of such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good; if not, then continue a little more under that level or quickly above it, if the area is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is inflamed and the patient becomes frightened, leave him for one or two days and do not bind his arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	By chance, an abscess may come; do not enter a bath, then resume the healing if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small or the wound subtle, and you doubt whether it will not bleed as much as you see, then be bold in that same perforation with full flame directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and open it a little hastily, so that the flesh is inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the flesh inflamed, do not resume the healing, and put a little oil on it, for the oil cools the blood and is congealed in that place by the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the remedy of oil in each wound that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this same thing should be ground and boiled from them when it is placed on the wound; if it becomes too thick, grind it again to make it finer.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	If an abscess becomes large, which often happens when the wound is not opened until that time,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you are in a hurry, place a damp and warm sponge on the wound and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh below the wound, poultice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance in the sanctuary of the basilica; therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel it soft under the pressure of your hand, then it is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not place anything on it from what we have said, because by chance, in court without the artery; but make one dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its power, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is full and hollow, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed little and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bloodletting is safe from disorder of the blood and damage to the nerve, and it is more effective than long bleeding or wide bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for one whose body needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give moistened bread below pomegranate seeds; if he is chilled, draw blood four or six times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold constitution, feed it with soft bread soaked in sweet syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it swells after the evacuation of blood, then it is necessary for him to drink broth made from charcoal and fragrant subtle syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to dislocate his arm, and strain it another time, if necessary, when it is weakened by excessive strain, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to dislocate his arm after the first strain, and it has rest for nine hours after the first strain, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another part, should heal within two days or three.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood inside the body that has already become heated and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large amount and to widen the opening until it yields pus.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you heal all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the toes when it is healthy, so that death does not come in place of pus.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary that you dislocate the arm, make blood flow a second time, and the wound has closed, but you should push firmly;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is curved, extend the arm as much as possible, for it would not be good.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	Leave it until it heals the second time; or you pierce it with the tip of the flame, until the coagulated blood from the vein has flowed out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on one piece of new linen soaked in hot water and press slightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is drawn from the vein of the head because it is composed [of the same thing].
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of drawing blood is that the patient places their hand in hot water until the vein turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then tie it moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, then press it firmly with your fingers, not too wide nor too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and make the cuts wide, and press firmly near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be pierced, press the hot water into it, let the blood flow out into the hot water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is summer, do not press the hot water into it, because it puts more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the vein of this one [vein] is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the left arm saves [all] liver diseases, and this is how it works:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	hold the hand, and push in hot sharp [object], until the vein has escaped, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the vein is crossed, and you cut it all through, it causes no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not go too deep, because the nerves are entirely bare under the skin,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Then replace the hand in hot water, so that it does not freeze in the wound, and is unable to come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sore on his left hand is beneficial for the sickness of mice, and do as I told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The sore in the chest is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	like the illnesses of the belly, and retention of fluids, and the sickness of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is such that the patient should put his foot in hot water and rub it over the vein until it bleeds.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and on top of the ankle-joint, and the vein is located below the foot, and it should be rubbed much with oil.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then let him use the larger vein or one at the ankle, which is more useful.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if [you] pierce it through the skin that is below, pierce also in the same way as in cutting; and let the flame be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if [the skin] cannot be pierced out, place the point in the water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it requires suturing for the first time, begin a second time a little higher because the skin is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And do not be afraid of the nerve, as we have said, and likewise proceed with the suturing of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The head of the sciatic nerve is located at the knee joint, and its pain resembles that of the heel when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the qualities of its pain are such that the patient immerses himself or herself in hot water up to the knee joint, while twisting the leg four times.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, you should treat it in all possible ways and by crossing it.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is necessary that you cut it, for the nerve is withdrawn, and it is very difficult to touch with hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't pull it [the bone or limb] out correctly, no remedy will open or heal its back or its end, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	Make the vein bleed as much as possible so that you see it, then tie it and place cotton on it and press; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Venous Sutures (or stitching)
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Venous ligatures (or stitching) are made of horns, antler, or glass; and venous ligation is done in two ways: by making an incision and drawing blood, or without making an incision.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventosation, which is caused to wound, exists in two ways: it is either for all fires or with fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and this ventosation which is made by wounding and extraction of blood is performed in fourteen places of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	because one is located in the head entirely; and the others are in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in the sides of the neck; and the ventosations under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the boils on the two shoulders; and the boils on the calves.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	The above line translates to: "And the boils on the two arms; and the boils on the two legs."
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	And the boils on the two ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood, except for minor veins that are scattered in the flesh.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	And therefore it should not be done at all, like we do with venesection of veins.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered, neither with all fire nor fire sense, in any disease that comes from swelling, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	If there is a need for bloodletting due to illness, or by custom, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and at midday and every time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need bloodletting, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, head, or neck, the eyes should be held steady.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And for those who find a spot of blood in their mouth and have swollen the tongue, and are bleeding;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And for those who think they are pregnant, and see dark blood and abort and die, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially if it is within the month, we order to fumigate after 4 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The purging of the mouth helps alleviate the headache that comes to the eyes; and it should not be done after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	...and this ventilation is in place of the purging of the head.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it should not be used by those with a cold complexion or who have constipation, as it causes them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	...and therefore it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who recovers often becomes negligent, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass slightly lower due to the doubt of negligence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping at the neck is in the place of the recovery of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial for the fracture of the bone.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to cut through the channel of the throat, and immediately, and to fill (it).
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it must be pushed gently, for if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction in the intestine or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventosation of the two ribs from the neck is worth the pains in the head, and otalgia and migraines, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the position of the basilica artery; and you must command the Lord to extend his hand, so that he does not cut the artery, and there should be no flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventosations (ventosation) beneath the chin is useful for mouth diseases and gum corruption, and similar oral ailments; and it is located in the vicinity of the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations (ventosation) of the shoulder is useful for diseases caused by heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventosations (ventosation) of the ribs are as effective as four veins in the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For it attracts blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the lord not to pierce too deeply, for the limb is bare of flesh, and knows beneath dark and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The poultice that is on the buttocks is useful for piles from their foundation and diseases below, and it should be large, made of flax, which needs to be well drawn out; and by chance, if it were fine, it would break; and it causes big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Poultices on the legs heal quickly because they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for old pains in the knees and ankles, and bladder and urinary tract problems, and remove inflammation; and they are located between the two shins and two ankles, and weaken the body over a long period of time, causing swelling in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the bladder is that you first empty it, and fill it promptly, and place it hastily, and move it equally, and not cease doing so until you see the area turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then tie, and replace the bladders, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have soft flesh and clear veins: it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make large incisions, and one shallow; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If the flesh is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to refine the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the flesh is very thick, it is necessary to pierce the third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we wish to have much blood, let us frequently remedy it; and if the wound is closed, break it open thoroughly, and let the veins be pierced quickly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And for those with thick and hard skin, and with narrow pores, you should anoint the joints of the armpits with stimulating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in summer, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is ivy, oil of watercress, lilies, chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the one whose wound is to be healed has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it should be washed after the ventilation with rose water, cold water, water of blackberries, water of cucumber, water of porcelain, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from ashes of myrtle, or water of bilberry, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with excessive fluids should rise from old wine or juice of sourdock, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to let the blood before bath or in bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after bloodletting.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary that he urinates when he should let blood and after bloodletting.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch for the patient who is sanguine and bilious, and if he is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then it is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in the form of juice;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and cook peas, meat of chicken, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and eat barley meal, and drink barley porridge and small birds and young birds.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will vomit, he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	It is necessary to give some men sometimes tricolor or muscat before or after vomiting, to strengthen the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And the wine must be made subtle, but it must not be drunk by those who are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The blisters placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, abdomen, kidney, and loins, because these members cannot bear to be wounded there.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we do with the testicles when they are swollen; to remove the thickening in the member, just as we place blisters on the abdomen and the loins to reduce its size.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	And alleviate the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, if possible it draws the obstruction by its attracting virtue, or removes the arrow from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	And so it is done when placed upon the liver and spleen where there is retained wind.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these windy conditions are treated with emptiness to suck only; sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner the windy condition is filled with hot water, or cold water where there has been cooked comfrey herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the bladder (or cupping glass) treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	It should have two fingers' width in length and half a palm in depth, and it should have one small hole on each side, similar to the size of pushing an awl.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be made of horn or leather in front so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	And have in the middle a rod of iron or steel, to make an incision, a puncture.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who suffer them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the swellings of children are different from those of adults, and thin people from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And this swelling should be placed on the limb in this way:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Use a candle of wax or linen thread, and place it through the hole in the syringe that is in the plunger.
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light is at the bottom of the syringe so as not to burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the member, and your hands should be above the wound as we have said, so that when you see it, if steam goes out, remove the syringe.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And wrap it with linen as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the bladder that is administered in a case of pleurisy, there should be neither prick nor puncture, and it should not be used unless when it is full of fluid, and placed on the member only.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Incisions are not applied except to members where it is not possible to apply leeches due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare skin areas, such as the hand or neck, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and it is known that when you find leeches in clean, sweet and clear water, you may take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in clean water until they are accustomed to it and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	And then let it be bled from the vein and from the blisters, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place sulphur on it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are full and hot, if it is a place where a blister can be applied, do so, because it is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If there is no place for a blister, lift the wound from ashes, then with water, very well, and then sprinkle it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the wounds heal too quickly due to the sulphur, moisten one linen cloth with cold water and place it on top until the wound is healed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the wound is multiplying, apply powdered vitriol (or something similar), and let it dry until it is completely dried.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Apply half a handful of peeled beans to the wound and let it stay until it dries and stops bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other snakesbane (a potent poison).
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the snakesbane is not available, apply fresh blood to the wound and insert an awl until the poison comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And then place [them] on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they bleed.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle some aloe and crushed linseed or ashes over it, then they will stop bleeding now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and concerns the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Inform the foolish child that the madman throws himself out of this chapter, that he never saw any old books or read any letter from them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason, knowledge is estranged in our land, for I never found anyone good with it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing else except by the knowledge of old books, where I have studied the science, and through experience, and the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	And I have described to you in this chapter what it contains, and I have summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are brought in, as I have done in these 2 chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us now say the prologue of this book, the subjects in which wisdom places its understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or swelling comes to anyone, you should hasten to heal the patient from both sides, unless something prevents it, such as weakness of the body, infancy, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the time is not very hot or too cold, and if it consumes cold foods, specifically cold meats such as eye of round and veal, and does not drink wine nor consume any fatty meats, and does not fill itself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about the abscess heating up or spreading matter in the limb; then the patient returns to his first treatment as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that make good nourishment or have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, meat, head, feet, pork, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this nourishment, the bones heal faster and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the elderly and weak cannot be well recovered or mended according to their nature due to the fragility of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But there is no cure, reset the broken bone, i.e. large tendons that bind and join the limb together until it heals as it was before; and not let him do any work, and for this reason, nourish him with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that heals by itself, and another that becomes sharper, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with an open wound, or one with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each kind there is its tool and proper instrument for restoration, as memory comes to mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known that the bone break occurs when the place is twisted, widely open by dislocation, and sounds when compressed by the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And if there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no break.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it may have a twist, fracture, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand, but put on medications that come after this, and then hold it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breaks that go to the artery, and are the two parts disjoined, they should now be set equally, thus the abscess will heal well.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess comes, let it be left for some time until the abscess is calm.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then equalize it to the bone that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are pieces; then bind it as described hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is in the foot or hand, or with one hand if it is a small member, or with two ropes, or with one rope and one hand:
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	And put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are disjoined, you reset them by every means possible in their original positions, and make sure through your work that the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	Align well the two bones of the joint according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be well aligned: straighten it nicely and do not strain or press too much as those who apply pressure through their work cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have often observed.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is broken, cautiously immobilize the patient so that they do not move, whether awake or sleeping, turning, or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And ensure that the limb is securely set so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For if it feels no pain, then it has not been properly set and must be re-set in such a way that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	Ensure that it is put rightly, for twisting will result when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And the qualities of a broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs come in various shapes, sizes and forms.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, like fingers, toes, and such: you must wrap linen cloths that are soft and thin around them.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those who are fat, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the large bandages embrace the entire large member and equally constrict from all sides, so that there is no sore.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie light bandages around it, 3 or 4 times according to the member, and hold your hand a little on the entire bandage, then go above the break and constrict less, so that the break is constrained. Then move away a little from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the bandage little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy side, then take another bandage and wrap it directly over the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go to the part under the break, and hold it gently, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put cotton threads or cloth strips equal in length between the joints, then tie it all up with bandage, and then put well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or swelling, place something soothing and warm on top of it to help with the abscess and reduce swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then hold your arm-lengths (approximately half a cane) firmly, either with a saw or a plaster rod, or with palm branches, and they should be shaped as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But the arm-lengths that one places on the break should be a little thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and should also be as long as necessary for the small or large limb.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then hold above the shoulders in the same way you did at the first location, then tie upwards with a thread as on the first location on the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	Then pull tighter but not too much, and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of fine linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their knots with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, because the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is not good that there should be less than two fingers' space between each shoulder.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient has a splinter in his shoulder bones after setting them in healthy places, place lin or wool padding over it to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a break and the veins are cut open, I will tell you the cure below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know that it is not necessary to set all broken limbs immediately on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to set bones forcefully before 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you shall take flour that is kept in the mill walls, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method for restoring a fracture in various ways, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Here is another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take barley meal, linseed oil, elder, marshmallow root, mastic, anise, cinnamon, and gum arabic, mix them in equal parts; add myrrh, aloeswood, and seven times as much alkanet root; make this into a powder and mix it with enough egg; if the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for twisting: take mastic and marshmallow root, mix them in equal parts; add myrrh and aloeswood, seven times as much; beat well, then combine with vinegar or enough egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones, soothe the pain occurring, and cut the bone, and break it: take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but it is good for easing abscess heat, and treating bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that sets broken bones: take dried leaves of the fig tree and leaves of ground ivy, grind them together, and make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to hasten the healing of abscesses. Take roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, a part of each; grind them together, add wine, and if the limbs are scalded, use moist coriander water instead, or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plastering, more forceful than the first, when the restoration of a limb comes due after an abscess has hardened. Take roots of mugwort, flax, balm, sweet clover, and sage, as well as flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them up, and cook with salt water, sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its state of rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that nothing other than beeswax and oil should be put on a broken limb to restore it, and it should not be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It appears Galen says that dry and slightly warm substances should be put on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is beneficial for injuries and pain: take ground mugwort and crushed human hair, or feathers of birds, and equal parts of vismale and oil, and grind them together, and make a plaster from the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	Then wait a little while after that, and make sure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not dislocate it for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	If pain or itching occurs at the site, or there is no rest, swelling, or inflammation, hurry and dislocate it immediately, remove the plaster now; take a light cloth, sea sponge moistened with seawater, and immerse the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then place dry linen on it, dampen in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it above with a nut, until you are sure of heating the abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the member rest, and the pain be removed, then begin the binding again subtly, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; bind subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has subsided and the redness, pain, and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need plaster and linen, then begin again as you did before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if no swelling comes to the limb as we have said, do not release it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and the dislocation approaches the flesh.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then hold it more tightly and the flesh swells, as I said before; and if you see the limb drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then apply hot moist heat to the area every time you release it, and this should be done three times a day, and slightly loosen the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work therefore cut the nerves in the limb and fix carefully what the foolish doctors do, who twist the limb: it is harmful, and it is a fearful work, and I see nothing but to weaken and to work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breaks, and various shapes, and the causes are intended.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For it has breaks made by sword blows, and the hilt strikes the whole bone up to the shaft that is beneath the bone, as happens in a hack or thrust; and for this reason, this method of breaking is called "hack-wound".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above, it is called this type of break "absolute"; and the wound caused by these two breaks can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or a fracture or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent break that approaches the membrane located beneath the bone or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound heals against the bone as thinly as hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called a "hairline" fracture.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling, or something similar, and forces the bone piece inside, and the fracture is closed like a potter when he puts it on the pottery oven; if the stone is inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often in those who have or a moist bone head, like a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it occurs in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged, like this; and I will speak about its treatment.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	We should know all the ways of fractures by traction above them, and the probe for tenting, and the corruption of flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known by this: when one exposes the bone and rubs above it, if the fracture opens black,
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of the symptoms of the patient; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of senses, extension, swelling, fever, and hairs to fall out and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an uncertain accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when a wound first comes to you in winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day if possible.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is a fracture, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the consequences as we have said come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, you must cut along the broken part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's head with your left hand, and expose the bone above in all possible ways, and on the surface of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if there is discharge of blood in uncovering the bone or an abscess formed, help it as necessary, and it is that you fill the area with dampened linen soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And make the wound rest until the abscess has calmed down and you are assured of the flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of working: one way is that you cut at a narrow incision in front, and this is called the first method.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron; and work gently so as not to pierce the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is pushed out and hard, you must pierce it around, so that you provide holes with drills, but not so deep that they pass through the bone to the skin; and it should have a margin or circle on top where the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place at the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all places; and this is the form of the four kinds of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the drill a little to one side, and do this all around, and then cut the space of the bone between the fractures, making it as thinly and gently as possible, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand or any of the tools you have, such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you remove the compacted part that remains of the bone with an instrument resembling a cutter, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other cutters.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there remain small bones or no scales, gently remove them with tools; then treat the wound with the remedies we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is more secure; and they highly praise it, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture has moved apart, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place the lenticular anvil underneath it as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And it shall not be cut from one side, and the parts are sharp on two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adhered to the bone, break it gently, for it is broken badly and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone does not break through the cloth, and the bone is only chopped from above, and there are small pieces, then you must follow that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, which you should have in various quantities, to provide the most convenient amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If (the patient) shaves very closely at first, and afterward with something more subtle, and does not cease doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other type of haircut and break (injury), you must bring about the remedy according to his condition; this is not something that can be answered by one who has devoted study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is open, then you must take one piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another piece of linen doubled either twice or four times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first linen; and do this more gently so as not to hurt the wound, then administer another ligature, but do not tighten it more than necessary to cover the wound.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And let it remain for one day or two, until the abscesses subside, then release it, and administer medicines like those of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, aromatics, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and place it on the wound, and administer immediately medicines without harm or poison.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And ensure that the wound is always clean, do not let any salve or pus accumulate, nor let it collect blood, for when pus accumulates on the brain cloth, it will rot and fester, causing great harm to the patient; for when something biting is applied, it causes pain by pressing from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, beware of any bad accidents happening to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with great certainty.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come forcefully except for medicine that has been placed upon it, whose virtue is such, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in gum apply one piece of linen cloth, and place it thereon.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the care should be done according to wound treatments until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but instead causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or thumb into the nose, and place the break equal to the index finger inside the nose, and to the mouth by force, until the nose returns according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach the place, you must place it equal to the knuckle of a finger (a thumb) on top of the nose.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, mend it thus, and hasten to restore it within the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then bind to the head of the wound with linen cloths if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Tie another piece of linen on the other side if the break is there; let the cloths be thick enough to fill the wounds of the head.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	They said that any restoration should be moistened with butter and changed every day. I do not think it is good, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and flour; then leave the cloth until the bone is hard, and the cartilage becomes hard.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers from an owl are placed instead of tweezers, and if there is a single soft cloth around it, and the breakage is held, and the patient breathes through it; then do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess bursts while you are working on it, place camphor or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of alum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	If the abscess does not burst, apply plaster outside of it, made from flour of wheat and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top but do not tie the abscess.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then make the incision, and the treatment of such things with healing charms, suturing, as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no wound within the neck, treat it with bandages, and place planks of wood on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	The treatment for a jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible (jawbone) is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside, and the breakage is only external but not broken through, if it can be recognized easily, it is corbeled within.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the breakage is in the right part (of the jawbone), you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the breakage is in the left mandible, insert your index finger from the right hand and push gently towards the breakage and align it with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two parts, then you must provide two equal extensions until it becomes equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the teeth occurs or breakage, hold them in place with a golden, silver or silk thread, then place a broken mandible splint on it, and put one double cloth on top; and place on the cloth a large well-made stud or equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and secure it as you can, and command the patient to rest, and encourage them to eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see the figure change, dislocate it again on the third day, and then reset to its original position; put a plaster over it, made from milled powder with egg or meal of comfrey, after removing the splint; place a light linen plaster over the plaster, and if the plaster swells, remove it, and leave the dislocation until it heals; it often heals in four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If an abscess comes to the surface, bring what we have said before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone with the tools suitable for such.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, enlarge it as needed with fire.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the pieces and there is no remaining part, close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one or more suitable bandages to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forearm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is according to 3 types: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is in several fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when the fracture is with an injury, that you have two assistants, one holds the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then align the fracture to your fingers, so that the form should be as it should be, and not have any appearance or protrusion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; stretch and lift the fracture, and pull the cushion towards your hand, so that you align the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side, and place one small pillow under the shoulder; and push the ministers (assistants) downward on the shoulder until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut above; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and resemble a spoon, not narrow, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two prongs, as you see, and one large and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are certain of the abscess being hot, if it opens and the wound is small, or you doubt that the abscess is hot, then use linen and bandages on the wound according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses are cold, moisten a linen cloth in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The binding of the bone, when there are wounds and cuts, is to place a plaster made from flour and egg white on the bone, put light packs on top, and place a splint beneath it if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very long bandage of a palm's width, then put one double cloth dampened on top of it, and apply it; then take a thin stick that is three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the end of the bandage hangs.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the stick on the fractured bone, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the patient's armpit, and under the healthy arm; then pull it from each side, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the stick does not move above the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and when the swelling subsides, hold it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under his armpit to raise the shoulder; align the fracture by adjusting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then resume the treatment, if it seems necessary to you, and hold it and keep it in that state until it is restored; and it is restored in about 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	The break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It often happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal by itself, and it should only be forced back with the touch; arrange it according to the shape of the dislocation, and reset it in its natural form in all ways possible; then apply powder from the mill with plenty of egg whites, and soft bandages, and put on a double cloth; then put a broad and thin strip, slightly larger than the shoulder, over it, and if there is a hollow under the strip anywhere on the shoulder, fill that hollow with soft bandages of linen, so that the strip lies evenly; and then tighten it firmly, so that the strip does not move from its place, and watch the patient every day; and whenever it swells, tighten it again, and adjust the strip if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be healed in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is complete, loosen it, and be careful because it is not easy for bone to move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not beneath the skin, raise it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment for abscess alleviation by hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture with a splint
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	Bone fractures sometimes occur in the middle, but not often; however, they usually break at an angle. And when it is broken inside, it slips downward, causing the patient great pain, and lack of alignment, swelling, and immediately vomiting blood. The openings in the fractured bones appear wide.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down with his face on his back, and one cushion is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed and the ribs of the two sides are assembled to your hands, and subtly put it all together in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as required; then lay on plasters and poultices of salt or another light substance, wrap it in one bandage, and place it on the broken bone so that it does not move; turn the limb roundabout, stretch it gradually, and every hour check the bandage, and if it becomes soft, tighten it; and if it requires dislocation due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hurry and dislocate it, remove the plaster, and address those who have come in methods of treatment; then reset the plaster, stretch it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs only comes from large falls on the back and in the chest, and they do not break except when they are slippery; and it is felt well at the investigation with hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resetting is that you must set the fracture evenly, as necessary. Then put a splint and bind it with a stick, if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is concave inwards, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, like with pleurisy, because the bone pierces through; and points at the end, and immediately vomits a large quantity of blood, which is a grave illness, and the ancients have made great efforts.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot irons come unless they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have come, we heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And someone said that we put leeches on the joint, to draw out pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leeches will attract the superfluidities to the joint due to its weak composition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And someone said that one should cover the joint with damp linen soaked in hot oil and place a splint between the ribs to make the joint equal on all sides, then it should be cured with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that does not pierce through the flesh, and doubt exists for the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the rib on the broken side, and a tool should be placed there to support it; and afterwards it must be cut, pulled out gently, and then the two edges of the wound should be sewn together if they are large, and dressed with ointment until it heals. And if an abscess arises, then oil-soaked linen cloths should be placed on it; and treat the rib while it is healing, and let him lie on the affected side until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Occasionally there is a break of the neck bones, and sometimes it bends; and similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if you see his hands softened, swollen and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many positions, and if he is silent and feels well when they are straightened and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if the feet are softened, and if there is injury in the hands, and sudden movement of the wind and evacuation without will; and when it is supported on the stomach, it moves with no will. And when it is supported on its back and wants to sit, it cannot. Know that it is deadly: do not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this event does not happen to him, it will be an easier situation.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply warm oil (either rosin or egg yolk oil) if there is an abscess, then place a comforting and drying ointment on top of it, bind it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, cover it with oil; remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by sewing them, and apply a healing ointment made of charred material until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", press your left thumb against it and align it with your right hand as far as you can, then place the ointment and dressing on top, if necessary; then tie it, and if there is dislocated bone, push it back, remove it, and heal the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the shinbone (tibia)
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is only a little lessening at the head; it extends long and breaks apart at the ends, causing pain to the patient at the place, and pierces and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the breakage; and learn which is the breakage and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then equalize the breakage, while it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is long or it declines inside, then lay the patient on their belly, until the restoration of the breakage comes to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, place the splint upon it, then put a stick or a key on top, and hold the break steady so that it does not move; and keep the limb under the ribs until the break is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess has burst, do not touch it until the abscess has healed, and place what we have previously mentioned on top of it; then return to treatment, hold it as needed, unless there is any bad incident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder break
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the neck and the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take a splint made of large thread, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of the splint with two cords, and raise them upwards, and position the patient supine on one couch; then lay his broken arm on the splint, until it reaches its place, and have a hump of splint in the middle, then raise something heavy above or the assistants stretch it downstream; then place the mirrors the break equal to their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to lay the patient on his bed, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds what is above the break with both hands, and the other holds beneath all the cord, and stretch each side separately.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction is forced, hold one ligament beneath the break and one above it, and extend each of the assistants to their part. If the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must put a moderate ligament beneath the dislocation, and another towards the side, beneath the break; and similarly if the break is towards the side, you must put a light one without effort, as long as the break is equal on the joint, and on the side; then make it equal, as required, and hold it, if no abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses come, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and place soft linen with rose oil on top of the abscess to calm it; then you can hold it, and the method of holding is that you put a clamp on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest; and put a cloth on it, and hold it on the shoulder and on the arm so that the arm remains in place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is moving, use wedges, and place a larger and stronger one on the break than the others, and have at least two inches of space between each wedge, and make each wedge so large that it passes over the break by four inches from each side; then hold them with wedges, as I said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the break, more firmly and less in alignment.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the abscess of the bone and the swelling, as we have said, when you are restoring the broken limb, and doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for up to seven days, as we have said; then look every three days at the healing, that pus does not grow or come to the place, or new swelling comes to the member because it is too tight. Follow this advice, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	If no such accidents happen, do not remove the splint before four days or more; let the patient lie on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach; put a cushion made of equal linen under the shoulder, and look every hour of the day or night to see if the figure of the broken limb moves or if the splint becomes soft; then follow this advice by means of medicine, and give him the meat that was mentioned earlier, in such a way that the meat is initially tender; and when it begins to recover, let it become thick. It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be repositioned within 40 days of the whole accident; then you must remove the splint and administer baths and ointment-like medicines to guide the healing process. If the fracture is crooked and swollen, wait one day or two months to remove it.
de la brisure du bras	on the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "dui" ("two"); one is small, and it is the one that forms the elbow; and the other is large, and it is the one located towards the little finger near the wrist; by accident, only the large bone may break, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small bone is broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large bone is broken, healing is difficult and more painful than when both are broken together. If it is only the small bone that is broken, you should gently extend it slightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	If it is the large bone that is broken, you should apply more force; stretch it up to one inch, raise the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and lower the small finger below the others, and cross the patient's arms over themselves, placing a stick one inch above them to prevent the patient from feeling any labor; then extend the minister's arm to the lower part beneath his hand or to one link, and another minister above. Then make the broken bones even, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken in pieces, place each piece back in its proper place, and if there is any dislocated part that refuses to return, set the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breakage in wounds, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of healing, abscesses occur, apply one cloth made of rose oil and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; lay one cloth on top of it delicately until the abscess is appeased. Then remove the wax and put in the plaster made from the powder of mill with egg, then insert splints; the splint at the breakage should be more prominent and a bit larger than others; you will need seven splints or more for various positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two. Keep the splint above the breakage tighter than other places, but looser elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are above the breakage be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the threads, which hold it, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And observe the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that happens to the limb, you should irrigate the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and do not let the limb rest. Then begin the binding, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, give advice accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the narrowing of the anus cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, you should soften it a little and leave for some days until the narrowing comes, then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have mentioned come to the patient, you should not release him until 20 days have passed, or inquire about it within that time. Then lay his hands on his neck and make sure they are even, and keep him from movement and turning, and sleep on his back; know that this fracture will be restored in 30 or 40 days, and possibly in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The fracture at the back of the hand and fingers occurs rarely, but it bends repeatedly.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient must cross his arms and sit straight in front of him equally; then he should place his hand on a cloth stretched out, and extend the broken bones, align them with mirrors as they are, until they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not occur, then place a splint according to the severity of the fracture, and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is at the groin area around the lower abdomen of the leg, make a splint from cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken leg; then bind it with a long cloth, and make sure the wooden splint is as thick as the hand, and bind it, as required.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the elbow, it is necessary that you place a splint above and another below in the hand, so that the fingers are covered and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the two bones.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, make it straight, as required; bind it with the palm, and if you see that it moves, place a small straight splint to hold the fracture steady; and if the fracture is in other fingers like the index or another one, make it straight, and bind it with the adjacent healthy finger; or tie them all together in one bundle, as appropriate, or place a splint on top of it, as with the thumb; take care in the healing and positioning of the abscess, and treat it as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the leg are often broken and one sees it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one tie a splint above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his splint equally to their respective parts; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If the break is near the root of the leg, one splint should be towards the heel, and the other splints below the break. And if it is near the knee, then the splints should be on each side of the knee, and the extension should be distal; then adjust the bone equal to its two hands, according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and bind, without abscess coming.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool down first, then return to your work and your treatment; the process is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should place a bandage made of thick double fabric for two or three layers, and let the excess be removed, then bend the leg so that the heels reach the root of the thigh, and insert one long thread between the calf and the thigh, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread to the top; then bend both the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then put the broken bones on either side of the bandage, and place a bone splint over the leg bone; then use soft linen cloth between the leg and the thigh to equalize the binding, then begin to tie four turns or more around the fracture; as you go higher on the fracture, loosen the bindings; then take the two threads that you have inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return to below the top thread, so that you can pass under the foot; tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it, so that there is no sign of an abscess or swelling or anything else.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens (that the broken bone pierces the skin), you should separate them, directing where they are coming from, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that are protruding, they must be cut off, if possible; and if not, the limb must be cut open, and the flesh removed; and treat it as we have said before, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone is broken so that splints are set in it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, when restored in this manner, it does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is restored within a day, or slightly less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the groin of the knee, there is little fracture but it bends often. And if it breaks, it is not a complete break, but rather a fissure or a piercing, causing all pain and pain sensation.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one equalizes the limb that is dislocated to its joints, as long as it can be assembled; then put the splint on, and place a round piece of iron, if you have need of it, and tighten it as needed; then check all the positions that we have said in other breaks, like an abscess and others; place at each accident whatever is needed, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break in the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called directly "anus" and the other is called "fibula"; and it happens equally as a break in the arm, and therefore the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it bends underneath. Then apply the extension, make it even, and align the edges equally; however, if the break is misaligned and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust the alignment according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fusts that hold the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee to underneath; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and secure it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should provide a splint of the length of the leg, and it be made from fust, and place the leg for prevention of movement, and properly make it at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to see if there is abscess or another accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a break and the toes also, and it does not happen often except in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if they were walking, and then place your foot on their foot where the bones are raised, press it until they return to their places; then apply a splint and muffler, and place a small table with two flat cushions under the sole of the foot, then tighten the strap towards the affected foot, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when four or six days have passed, undo the strap, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then set a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be slightly larger; then place the padding mentioned under the splint and tighten it; and if there are 2 or more, or more, break each bone with a splint, wrapped in one linen cloth, and tighten the padding beneath the splint; and let them remain above the belly of the bone, so that they cover it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, after we have said them; and treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the finger bone break
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female pelvis is broken, make her sit with legs spread apart, then incline her to the part of the back and hold her from behind; fill the cavity with cotton and put as much as a stone in it; then turn the woman, lift up the buttocks little by little, and when the cotton reaches the entrance of the pelvis, the bone will return with the stone; when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or more: the fracture will be restored. If you see, take a bladder of barley, and tie one end of a string to it, and push the entire bladder into the pelvis; then inflate the string forcefully until the bladder is swollen inside: the fracture will return; fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said regarding the bone of the thigh; and these fractures should not be hidden from him who applies his study and use to them, and pay attention to my book. For fractures signify in many ways the right way of restoration: therefore, take note of this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis (verge), when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	With break (or fracture) with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For the one who has a break (or fracture) with wound, especially if it is large such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, it should be cleaned now, as the cleansings that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, anoint it with vinegar (or other solution), then proceed to restore the break in that same hour or on that day, unless abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for restoration, allowing the abscess to calm down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears under the skin, it should be set gently with light pressure and small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the fractured bone cannot be set equal to your hands, it should be set with this tool which is of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; therefore, it is necessary for the mirror that he takes 3 or 4 depending on what is needed in each treatment of fracture; it should be round and slightly large, so it does not bend during the setting process of the member in your work, and it should be sharp at the tip and thick from the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because the curved shoulders should be placed on top of the apparent bone; and push it once, until it returns, and let it be even one against the other. If the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instruments have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument such as a chisel or saw, at your power; then strike that part of the bone which remains in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone has been brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. You must continue to set it until it is in its proper position, then moisten a linen cloth in black-stiptic vinegar, and make sure it is not hot; do not apply it over the seared wound or anything that has oil, as it may cause decay and corruption; instead, administer stitches when you have restored the bone, leaving the wound exposed, and cover the surrounding area according to the size of the wound, taking care not to compress the wound with the fracture; and many times this has been done by the foolish surgeon, causing death or rotting of the patient sometimes; let the ligatures be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accident may come, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, do not put poultices on it; instead wrap around it, in place of poultices, hard cloths and bind it.  And when after one day or two, you see new fluid coming from the wound, remove whatever you had applied and apply healing ointment to the wound, such as therapeutic ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	The limbs should be arranged in such a way that the bone moves downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it remains for many days and cannot heal but continues to boil, know that there are small bone fragments, which is why you must be careful with the wound and remove all the loose fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	If a fistula or some other form of corruption appears, you must treat it, as stated in the chapter before this one. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not drain it, because many times death occurs, but let it heal by itself; perhaps it will close up after twenty or thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	broken bones that come upon a suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often encounter [the condition] after health following the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a disfigured sight to see the form of the limb; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take care of the fracture: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, saracolle, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these things or all together, and grind them with a stifling wine or with a lot of egg white or ashes; and put it on the knot in bandages, and tighten it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then dislocate it, and start another, until the swelling is removed; or you hold above a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are such that it removes all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodulation has turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed, if the head is exposed, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it with any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it when it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb that is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is set and remains afterwards, the limbs are weak and delicate, this happens for various reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nourishment could not reach the member; or due to an abundance of swelling; or because of excessive movements, not within its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and to make his body lean, until the blood is multiplied in him; then provide baths, and give joy and sweetness; afterwards apply ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts great nourishment, and reduce the swelling often with cold water, until the nourishment goes to the member; and return it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that a member must be broken anew, and many fools have done this in our land; this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and perhaps death. However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they should be softened with hot water or with softening herbs such as violet leaves, roots, medicks, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, like daqquilon well made. You also take the musk of violets, and mix it with ginger oil or linseed oil, and apply the poultice on it. Or you take figs oiled, grind them with colon flour, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the node is cut off by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. Movement should be brought to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortures are old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to cut it with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the incision made gently with a sharp instrument; and put cushions and soft fabrics in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, now it must be returned with care.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one waits, the joint swells, and in case it is put back to its place with force; therefore, one should not move it until the swelling has subsided, for many times it causes pus and other pain.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Whenever this happens, clean the patient, then let him rest until all abscesses have subsided; then immerse the affected limb in hot water and oil, gently massage it, and treat each member as medicine requires at its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head from the neck to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	1. It often happens that the lower jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both sides are in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and the saliva drops out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it returns in more ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it promptly, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a manner that the minister grasps the head of the patient, and presses one of his fingers from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be opened, to make them even; and instructs the patient to soften, their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers are equalized, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, then immerse them in hot water and oil, until they are gently reset, do not force it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they (the dislocated limbs) are reset equally, the mouth of the patient should be closed and softened with a cloth soaked in an ointment made of rose oil and wax, then it should be tied gently with several bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient should sleep on his back with his shoulders between two pillows, so that he does not move to either side nor tries to exert himself in any way, but should take light food until the pains have subsided, and the jaws should be tied.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then he should eat lightly whatever he wants, but he must not exert himself in opening his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaws are well tied and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their proper place, fevers and accustomed sweating come, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is ruin; and many times he who experiences this dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the noose   (specifically a noose used in executions)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The splint cannot dislocate within the ribcage and along the spine, and it is dislocated once to the side, and this is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back and extends his arms; then presses the joint forward with your palm, and it will return; then put the splint and bind it, and hold it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is towards the costal cannot dislocate; if it does not, but if it dislocates once, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put the splint and bind it, and hold it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he recovers.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	When the shoulder joint is dislocated.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only four ways: The first way is when it dislocates to the lower part of the socket; and the second is at the back part; and occasionally it dislocates at the upper part, but this rarely happens;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	It does not dislocate behind the shoulder or inside the nerves, and it often dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because it can easily move out of place; for those with enough flesh, it moves out only slightly, and returns quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some men, percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you should verify [the shoulder], until you are sure; and then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	Dislocation is known when it moves towards the joint and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one. You will find a clear distinction between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below press on the lower part of the shoulder as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return his hand to its place nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And if it is dislocated upwards, do not hide this, for you will clearly feel it by pressing.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This method of dislocation is not only to be returned when it is new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his thumbs underneath the joint, and forces the joint upward to its place; the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it up, puts it back down; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	If it does not come as we have said in hand days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring comforting and soothing ointment, such as a decotion of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and bring this.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be placed on his back, and put a piece of linen equal to the joint under the heel, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the minister's foot on the cloth, and pull the head of the shoulder upwards properly, and draw the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another servant binds the patient's head so that it does not move downward; the shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you see this happening, reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and place a person larger than the patient on the opposite side of the shoulder, facing towards its costal region, and press the patient's shoulder down, lifting their head so that the patient hangs over the edge;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And another servant pulls the patient's hand downward towards their abdomen. If the patient is too light, give them something heavy to hold, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is also reset in another way: and this is when a long needle is inserted into the earth, with the head being as round as a pea, and not too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it is placed beneath the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be lying down longwise along the staff; then his hand should be extended on the other side and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return due to all the things we have said, then perform this cure: take a needle that is two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a round head for entering deeply into the assele (shoulder socket) in this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the rod, wrapped in cloth, on top of the patient's head, so that it does not prick the patient, then place him under the cushion of the patient; extend his arm above the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod, and the forearm at the end of the upper arm, then lift the arm onto one iron hook of a scale with a large hole, and spread out the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will be relocated in this manner.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whichever way that may be, you must put an equal piece of wool under the cushion, then apply the plaster made of mill powder, along with incense and egg whites, over the entire shoulder and around, then tie it under the cushion with a thread, turn the thread around the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary to give food, as long as the limbs are comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then give more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes hard and does not soften, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then you must administer three fire cauteries as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all of this and it still dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint can never be pushed back into place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the thighs or hips, and the backside, is caused by forceful pushing and stretching with hands, and another method of treatment is applied; and it is cured when it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes swelling to the member, and it moves slowly; have the patient use baths many times until the swelling subsides, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation, the cost is great.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the jointure of cost is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated in all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not repaired, for it can be seen well and felt well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick person's shoulder with the healthy one, make sure you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder completely.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	Then you must reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess opens up, for if an abscess opens up, it is harmful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and in many cases death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be reset that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around it, above and below, and push the joint back to its sockets together, or to the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and pierces the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they bind it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then when you have wound a double-length and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the master joins the joint to the hand, he applies some oil to soften the joint, then presses the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in place, place dry plaster made with egg white on it and hold it firmly, and have the patient keep his arm at his neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly held in place, remove the bandage and leave it alone; if you see that the joint does not hold properly, repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If it feels grating after the reset of the joint and it swells, bathe it well and scrub it, and press until it is soothed; or put a lamb's wool pad on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let it enter the water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it swells, gently rub the joint, then place the nail on top, and then immerse [the affected area]; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm moistened hay wrapped in butter on it and hold it; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	swelling of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is quick to dislocate more than other joints; it must be returned to its place quickly as soon as it is dislocated, unless the lews are swollen or there is hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the re-positioning is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and make the damaged part equal, so that it places its palm over the appearance of the jointure, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Furthermore, you should look if it is in its proper position; then place the patient's hand palm down on a table for both extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand palm down on the table, and make your hand over the appearance of the jointure. If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, hold a warm poultice against abscesses that have been opened, and leave it to start healing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if it cannot bear weight, and you are unable to set it again within certain days, then the dislocated joint remains unhealed.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and it does not help the patient unless his hand is numb, and he cannot exert any pressure: know then that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other remedy but to compress with a fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the poultice we have mentioned on it, then compress and leave it for 5 days, then release and let it be as it is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no grating, moist warm water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocations of the fingers of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then push the finger, and apply the dislocation to your chest as it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it rest for two days, then equalize it on that day; and bind it, as we have said, and release it from binding, and make it move, and rebind it; and do this frequently, until it is tight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated from the abdomen of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly approaches the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the stools pass without control and cannot be held, and many limbs become softened, such as the two legs or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the vertebra in the lower back becomes paralyzed, and it is called "gibbosity."
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The physician should note whether the ailment is due to childhood gynecological problems, as there will be no cure or healing in that case.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those resulting from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of healing have spoken of in great words, but they are not always beneficial.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	I have abridged it according to my intention and made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gynecological problem mentioned earlier, there is no remedy or healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And similarly the one that comes straight into two sides, can be cured by no other than the one who comes from behind, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and the patient should be extended on his back in one even place, and have someone hold him under to prevent bleeding;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert one needle in the head into the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a rope around the ankles of the patient, and another around the knees, hips, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers know the ligaments, one to the head and others to the feet, among the four tendons;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And let them be well closed, the tendons as we have said, and the mirrors place their hands on the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a board four spans long and sharpened at the end, and place the patient on his side, then push the top of the board under the side, then put the middle of the board on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrors feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the turning wheel that rotates by hand.  (This is referring to the use of a device called a traction splint or "tornet" to reposition dislocated bones.)
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you stick two needles in the head of the patient's arm of great length, and between each needle, an inch of space from one another;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have one prick for each needle where the tendon turns, and let the needles be firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between two needles have one turning needle, like a rope, and have two small needles of an inch long for turning the turning needle to turn the tendon.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the cord that is among the tendons to the tendon towards the head, and the other cord towards the feet at the other tendon, and each minister turns his tendon all along the cord, and the master puts the splint equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place a drying plaster on it with much egg, then pound it, then the stick of a table-flat three fingers long, which brings out the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a string, as we have said, and use the patient with gentle nursing, until it is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the stick we have mentioned before; and sometimes a piece of wood is administered.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And sometimes the appearance comes at the lower part of the spine, and it is thought to be a dislocation; but this is the bone that opens, for which reason one should not have presumption, because in such a case death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Note that the dislocations of the shoulder and the shoulder joint occur only due to dislocations and not like other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside, and less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open the sick person's knee than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the loosened area that is swollen with abscess, because the calf of the leg comes there.   | The text means that when a dislocation occurs in the shoulder joint, it causes the limb to be misaligned, causing pain and injury to the patient. Additionally, the shoulder joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside, and less so in front and back. The knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open the sick person's knee than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in the fire. The swelling of the area with abscess occurs because the calf of the leg comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that whose it comes to dislocation, is that this event is opposite to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that whose it happens before, are that his leg is well set according to the completion; however, do not double the knee pain, and if you wish to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that whose it happens after, are that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are such that you observe whether the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there should be any assumption made about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocations, you hurry up to turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is required.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong assistant and hold the leg firmly with two hands or with one link attached above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand over in such a manner that he pushes his hands under the knees, then tightens a rope-like loop on the thigh; and another grips the head of the loop;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they all extend up and down at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and hangs there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not (the shoulder), it is necessary to treat its appearance. When the dislocation is at the front, it is necessary that you raise the patient on their sound side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the part that is under the angle, then tighten the rope towards the angle, and towards the neck;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another assistant and grasp the large part of the diseased thigh, and extend it outwards in the form of a bow; if it returns to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong cord above the heels and knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two feet more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let him be hanged by the neck from a post, and his legs should be .j. (two) arms' length above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the thigh, and another minister should be hanging with the patient, who should then embrace the thigh, for the joint is returning now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when dislocation occurs at the hip, let the patient lie as we have said in the one who has slipped, and draw a cord around the affected leg properly, and also around the pelvis.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then insert two needles, one at the neck and one at the feet, then pass a needle between the thighs at the patient's groin.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And it should be planted with moist cloths around, so as not to burn the patient, then each minister should extend towards him, and the mirror place equal distance from its hand to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, put it on a table and press as we have said in the swelling, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately, as I have said; and place the mirror on the opposite side of the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and draw it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is toward the outside, it should not be stretched out further nor raised above the ground, but rather it should remain as when a bed is dislocated to the outside, as we have said in the lying down on two beds;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on its face, and the limb stretched out as we have said before, and press upon the joint against the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and tie it with a bandage so that the bed does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And it rests for three or four days, then you dislocate it, and place a splint on it; if they are even, hold them steady as before, and let it be. Three days; then you dislocate it again, and make it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside, outside, and backside; do not dislocate it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all [parts] is that you make the patient sit straight, extend their leg if they can, place your back on their chest, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take hold of their thighs with your hands, pull them apart between your palms, then bend the two sides of the thighs together; and another servant extends their foot so that the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends lightly at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And place the plaster on top, and make the leg straight from the knee to the ankle, and let them remain together strongly for 3 or 4 days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not straight, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it heals.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The re-alignment is light, and it should be stretched lightly with the hands when it is only smashed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie four ministers around the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then raise it up and push the foot strongly upward;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the process, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and make a firm passageway with a stick between his legs, and tie rags around it so that it does not hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then mark the ministers the thigh, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or at least one joint, so that he lies across the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister extends equally, and the assistants should be close between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when he is stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the mirrors equalize the dislocation in their hands, and another minister marks the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is set, place the plaster and padding on top, form it, bind the leg to the foot, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle, so the ligatures are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments loosen, tighten them again; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and keep the patient in bed for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	If it goes beyond that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes to the surface, you must drain it, as we have said before, until it is healed.
des dois	The two [hands]
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two hands are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without exertion, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is at any angle in relation to the back or feet, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface (or table) straight up and place your foot over the affected joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is level and nothing appears, place a table with two legs under the foot of the patient, then apply force, leave it for three days, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	About wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it needs to be restored, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in healing, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and slow, do not be brave.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And at the beginning, use cooling abscesses, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you see no hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as soon as the abscess subsides.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to abscess heat and heal the wound, as needed, with cauterized ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	If there is a dislocation with broken bones and small splinters, set the bone, and do what we have said for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And beware of entering into fear, as I have said, because it is useful to you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the medical textbook.
