O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have completed this book for you, most dear son, which is the conclusion of the science of medicine together with its contents, and I have finished it by means of explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this for you with this treatise, which is the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is prohibited in our region and foreign to all things everywhere, the science and art are perishing and decaying, and nothing remains of it that the hands have not changed from the ancient descriptions in books.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes errors and vanity, and intentions are closed and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I will bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of fire cauterization instruments, and other tools of work along with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands is found in our times, the art of medicine has grown distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must be summoned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and joints and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and the location of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so Hippocrates says that "nothing with nothing is something," and the same applies in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the opening of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should be careful lest he err and cut men; as I have seen many times those who engage in this science, abandoning their science and sense.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut one abscess from the neck of a woman and cut the arteries of her neck; hence so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who pulled out a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; with it, he took a piece of his bladder, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called upon to treat it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut into it, he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another doctor who treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors in ignorance set the break above the wound by strong force, and did not leave any splint at the wound, and left it in this state; and he commanded that it should not be released; and it remained like this until the leg swelled completely and the feet came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come and release the leg; and when I released it, it was peaceful and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption of the limb was already confirmed and could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop going through the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And a second person who collapses an abscess, enlarges it, and then sets it on fire due to the wickedness of his authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancer, when it is filled with melancholic humor, one must not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all can be removed that has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one in which there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your weapons in custody, and begin with your patients gently but firmly, and use the best method so that by God's grace you come to salvation and be praised; leave aside diseases full of great suffering; remove your weapons from that which causes doubt, and have faith within you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen warns in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil disease, lest you be called a foolish man."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are on fire cauteries and counter-cauteries for ague, and they are arranged from head to foot; also concerning the shapes of instruments, and the tools for fire cautery, and everything necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about draining and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; also arranged and concerning the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, as we remember of the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and harm are the longest words and subtle science and secret answers; and many wise ones spoke of this, and agreed on it; and they do not satisfy much by their words, for I will shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be of the two constitutions: namely hot constitution with matter, and dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry constitution along with matter, some have spoken and said that cautionery is of great help; and others say the opposite: that cautionery is not useful for disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure a hot disease by heat or dryness; and he who said the opposite stated that cautionery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and its heat to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true on one occasion through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere unnecessarily except for those who have tested it and know through long experience the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the occurrences and duration of time; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the attendants assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that a fire cautery is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater goodness than a burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it affects only the member that is burned, and it harms no other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another in spreading, and they bring diseases of severe healing to the sick member; and perhaps they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not do it if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put in the art, and it was above the truth about things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, since I do not want to deprive you of the secret which is hidden concerning fire, and the quality of the work, how it vanquishes diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be performed and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm occurring is hidden below with the help of cautery; and especially if the cauteries are necessary for pain that cannot be delayed until a greater evil may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	Do not ever think, dear child, as the foolish do; for a sickness that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say it thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not only medicine that changes the complexion, but also dries up the humors that cause pain, and its power is quicker than medicine, and by the virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the sickness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its power; and superfluidities are collected within it by the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in that location where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this does not prevent the pain from returning, but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but this is true; however, they do not believe that cauteries are useful after medicine, but their beliefs are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the beliefs of foolish masters.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold or the nobility of its substance; rather, they said that the metal of a cautery does not promote pus, but this is not true, for I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case, when you heat [something] intensely with gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and soon it cools down; and if it is overheated, it burns; thus there is enough hindrance to it.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for that reason, we use the fire cautery which has been fitted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Hot oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is beneficial for both heat and cold in the brain, and it is used to treat a disease called "soda," and various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and numerous dreams and pain in teeth and throat, and similarly for all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient is purged with a soluble medicine, cleansing the head for three or four days, according to what the patient's strength and the medicine's properties and the patient's accustomed can bear; then heat is applied to the back of the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And next make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a pillow; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his penis between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed. Then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is described here:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the place where it bleeds, and draw and tighten your hand little by little while turning it; then remove your hand immediately, and look at the place to see if you see a small bone; and if you don't see it, continue heating the cautery as I have told you until you see the bone. Then take one pouce of oil, put it in soft and warm cotton within, and put it on the place, and leave it for four days; then put moist cotton over it; and let it remain until the burning is removed; afterwards, heal the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; and because of this, they aid movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said to some that the fire cautery should be left so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then reset the burnt part of the bone, and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said to the others that the cautery should be left so long and pushed in as deeply as a verduil, which are the width of women's needles because the humors come out moist; and then it should be left open for a long time; afterwards, it should be healed and sutured.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in all things, except for those with fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the chies are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and also when the chies of the sick person are weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems more beneficial and useful to me, and from this usage, I work for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic and long-lasting pain comes in the head, the patient should use wormwood and pills called "cochie", and of purges for the head and oils and plasters; and if they do the fire cautery as we have said before, it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize it with a little bit more of the cautery than we have said before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing the cautery on each corner of the head as we have said before, and do one cautery or two called "vasselz"; there is one leek in which ventouses are put; align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the corners should be more subtle than those done on the middle part of the head, and this is its shape:
dou cautere dou chief	The fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head, and the illness extends to the oil, and the head is purged by medicines that cleanse, and other treatments have been performed as I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then cauteries are applied according to two methods, namely with medicine that burns and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery by burning medicine is as follows: take a piece of aloes and remove the bark and cut it into two halves, one for each cheek, then make an incision in the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can place the aloe under the skin; and when it is placed, hold it firmly and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and apply the juice of the garlic to the aloe-wound, leaving the wound for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in butter on it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that such burning medications, which I have written or twelfth treat the burning medications, are used.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is of this kind. Heat the cauter iron to the shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the tip is shaped like a claw or has about one finger of curvature, and in the middle it appears small; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and make the iron pierce slightly, until half of the thickness of the desired depth is burned; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let abundant blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on the wound, leave it for 3 days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and afterwards cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migration with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip of the blade, be careful not to hit the artery in this migration which should not be old.
de emigraine	from the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migration as we have previously said in the division of diseases and it does not improve, and you see that cauterization beforehand does not help at all, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and hold it against the side of the wound for half a finger's length, and press once with your hand, ensuring not to hit the artery or reach the bone; be careful not to damage the jaw that cannot move when eating, and not to irritate nerves, nor for spasms to come to the patient, and beware of arterial blood leakage when it is cut, or fear greatly, especially those who do not know it, and are not studied and experienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the neck as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on artery extraction, with a cautery having two blades; this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain from the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain in the ear due to coldness persists despite medications and other treatments as we have said in the division, then heat this cautery called "poins" according to its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After marking all around the sick ear, or around the two where the pain is present in both, move away slightly from the root of the ear as you have indicated the spot; and place ten marks around each ear; after curing the spot until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	A torture that is to be cured by cautery is not applicable to those that move due to phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform a cautery on the similar conditions that come from secretion and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that stems from the flow of idres and purges of the head and throat, which is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third at the corner of the lips; place the cautery in the healthy part and make it cauterize near the top of the ear a little below the skull's horn, and another in the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until the middle of the charcoal is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the shape of the scalpel that we have mentioned, but it is slightly more subtle and the blades should be a bit thicker; after curing the wound as I have previously said, ensure it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	And if apoplexy is long-standing and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the wound is called "vasselz" as we have mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; cure it as we have said before.
de litargie	of cautery
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large year and pills made of refined cereal; then anoint the head of the patient with a plaster made of mustard seed, which is written or explained in the plasters chapter; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy, it is good; and if not, make him undergo four cauteries of emmer at the head starting from the neck and leaving a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as with other diseases, and if you see any improvement, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, apply two more on the temples, and treat until it is healthy; and let the cautery that is called "olive oil" be as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head of the patient should be cleansed for years and as we have previously said; after that, cleanse the head of the sick man, then make a cautery in the head and one on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is wet and the sick person is enduring pain, and the disease is out, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; let it burn until the most painful part is burnt, then rinse your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is healthy, and let the cautery that is called "olivare" as we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	From the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilentics should not use fire cautery except for those who are fleumatic, and it is necessary first to purify the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is old and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make gargarism and frequent mastication for purifying the brain with good foods; afterwards rub the head well, and make one cautery according to what we have said earlier, and one cautery on the navel, and on each horn; and if the patient is out of breath and able to endure it, make cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excessive or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then the fire cautery of such cauteries should be applied as we have said to those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the humors are declining towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, as has been described before in the divisions.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the king (the physician), make one linen bandage well made, like a circle, and place it around the head of the patient; cross the patient, and keep them well held from all sides; then apply the leech, which is worth mullein root of old age; heat it gently so that the patient can bear it; then empty the circle from within the head, and let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you wish to perform cauterization, make multiple pricks all over the cautery. This method of cauterizing helps the brain greatly; then place moistened cotton in butter and linseed oil on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first with the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something cleansing the head, keeping it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe multiple times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the patient bends backwards, have a fire cautery applied to his head, and make two cauteries on the two temples where the wound is located or where there are two wounds together; or if there is only one wound, apply the cautery to it. Close all the veins and arteries beneath the skull with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; be careful not to let blood flow out, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it as you are able.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of the cautery how to stretch it; sometimes a fire cautery or some other instrument is made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	the heart of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or open the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is seen that this is excess cold fluid, then do the cauterization that I have mentioned at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: i.e., cauterize in the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries where the temples are below the 2 bones; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully over the eye with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	inside the body of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient 4 cooked roaches; after that, give him a head of cabbage or an olive oil cautery; and make 2 cauteries called "clavilis" above the eyebrows, a small amount under the hair; beware of the artery you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery called "olivare" should be done. This is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to do two cauterizations on the same two scorptions as long as they are; and do not leave the hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted to tears and prick the eye; and it makes fire or burning medication cauterization according to two methods: namely with fire or with medicine that is hot.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient on a clean surface; afterward, on top of the eyelashes, draw a figure like the fennel seed, and start from the base of the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil over the eye, then heat the cautery with this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have pointed out several times, let the sores be burned in that place; and the signs of the healing of the wound are that you see the papyrus recede, and the hairs rise at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like that for 3 days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; after that, apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs appear and the papyrus becomes soft, then start the cautery on that same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs are falling out, cauterize it until the papyrus rises to its natural level and is even, and the hairs do not prick at the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot chalk, of each one an ounce, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the parchment in the same way as the myrtle leaf, and put the hairs on top; and if the patient has only one sore, it should be worked on one, and if both are affected; and place cotton soaked in egg white under the oil; and the patient's hand should be clean and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press a little and move all the time when the patient feels burning of the medicine, for it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this (i.e., dislocating the limb), apply the medicine to your shoulder.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the dislocation has passed, lift up the limb and check if you see the paper lifted in the same way it was raised by heating or incision; if it is like this, then it is good. If not, apply more medicine on the shoulder or where the medicine hasn't worked yet, as long as your efforts are equal and your fingers are positioned correctly; then put cotton dampened in butter on top until the burns have healed, afterwards cure the limb with the ointment called "diaphenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well at your work so that the medicine does not prick the eyes, and if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then restart the medicine on that limb which has been made moist by the paper properly, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it is healthy; and this is the form of the fennel seed:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eye of man is diverse in size and smallness, according to your constraints; do not deviate from the correct path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or turn aside; after that put cotton soaked in egg white or in jujube oil over the area; after heating the cautery, place it on the head in such a manner as the shape of a feather from a quill, together with the cautery itself; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but regardless, this which is placed on the head serves for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, remove the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it, remove the worms; after that place the hot cautery on top, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck near the oil, so your hands do not slip; and put the cautery in the oil fat and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you start the cautery up to the bone, that is good. If not, continue the cautery again once and another if needed, and let it rest for 3 days; after that put soft cotton in butter on top and cure it with drying ointment until it is healthy, and if after 40 days it is still not healthy, put corrosive medicine on the bone as directed by your king according to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And here is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Listen to the meaning of the word "fistula" and imagine it as if you were cutting it open, then put one subtle camphor stick (as follows in its form):
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they apply the amount of a pound's weight; hold your hand or grip firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the lead does not scatter from its oil; it is necessary to put cotton moistened in egg white or oil on top of the oil of the patient: the lead will heal the wound, and the healthy part will recover marvelously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If the wound is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer hot poultices and bring the wound back to the heat of the body as it should be in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often, cracks appear in lips which are called "hairs," and the same happens with children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When curing these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel in this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply it immediately to those cracks until it reaches the bottom, then treat the area with cerote (cerotum) until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the eye, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after becoming pus-filled and growing and turning into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve; then it is necessary that you have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after closing or sealing the fistula, keep your hand until the iron becomes hot at its point and at its base; and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then you must find the location and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the slight movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but that does not work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery so that its form will come here in this manner: you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside immediately, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after removing your hand, repeat the cautery as desired; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water and holding it for an hour, rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the teeth that are moving should be immobilized, and the gums softened, and the moisture corrupt dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the remedies of medicine are of no use, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the end in a iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and wet it in boiled butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it gets cold; and do this frequently until its effect reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and linen are wet with cold butter, put it back on the tooth, and put hot iron on top until the heat comes to the tooth's apex.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery is made with a rod of iron or steel, large enough that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; heat the cautioner, causing the shape to come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautioner is cooled; do this often, as the pain will be alleviated the same day or the next. It is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then blow hard; this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on whichever place you wish, and according to what you are able; this is the form of the rod.
des scrophules	of scrofula (scrofulous diseases)
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of fever and cold moisture, and do not respond to medicines for digestion, then heat the cautery comb as described next, make two holes for smoke to exit from the other part; place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; then put soft cotton soaked in butter on it until the pus is gone; afterwards, treat the area with ointments and plasters until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When cold moisture prevails over the intestinal channels, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be cleansed with soluble medicines; afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, but do not go up to the throat and be careful not to burn it too much; afterwards, make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavile" as we have described before; and treat the area until it heals as we have said earlier.
de la toust	Toast (noun)
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and diseases of worm are from cold moistures, and the patients do not have fever nor heat, and it is an old disease, make two fire cauterizations on the shoulder blades; and one other cauterization between the breasts; and let the cauterization that is called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cauterization by piercing the entire cauterization that is called "poins" of this shape in the disease of ears; and let the piercings be up to 30, or less around. After curing the side as mentioned before, let the cauterizations be at four intervals according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make four of them.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After placing the patient on their back and on their side; after feeling the cavity within the chest with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery of the shape shown below:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the pancreas up to the costal margin, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and this is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are four cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is joined above this one nerve, because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards put on the cautery that is broken with silk; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above (the shoulder), this happens rarely, then perform a cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient becomes healthy.
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the treatment of pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs)
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleurisy (inflammation of the lining of the lungs), one should make cauteries using roots of aristolochia (a type of plant), and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, heat it over the fire, and perform a cautery. Make one large cautery between the chest and neck, and two small cauteries a little lower in the area under the beard; make two more cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slanting downwards slightly; make one cautery on the bladder and another on the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two more on the sides of the abdomen, near the cautery that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand tightly, but make it open as when you are sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And they said that any ancient man uses a cautery like a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain leaps away, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
de la mice	And they said that any ancient man uses a pestle like a razor...
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the pestle as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it doesn't help, then they suggest four ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	The first sentence to translate is: "From which manner it is that you make 3 or 4 cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the vein, according to the shape of the cautery for the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware on his back."
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and carve the groove that is towards the vein, where the patient's artery comes from the left, and raise the elevations from the groove according to the groove, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Then insert the two nerves and heat them until the grooves are pierced from the other side, and then pull the cautery through, thus there will be four. And if you see, if you cauterize with a single nerve, then cauterize the entire cautery at four nerves. After the cure, when it has discharged pus for a long time, it is better to use the other remedy mentioned before.
de ydropisie	From hydropisy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	The fire cautery is not effective for hydropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauterizations around the bladder, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one near the kidney; and let the cauteries be close to the swelling.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the cautery is opened to purge pus for a long time, do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions (i.e., the patient's health and the cauterization) will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape for the belly cautery is like a key that we have shown before; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as mentioned earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in a person who is edematous and full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lower your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep, so as not to hurt the yellow water, and let the cautery be in this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two incisions in each leg with the scalpel, place two cauteries at the tip of each incision; and let the cautery be long, one under the thigh in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterized areas to heal, as needed; after healing all the other treatments mentioned.
de la menoison	From the dislocation... (Dislocation is the main topic of this sentence)
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the inflammation of the stomach results from cold and moisture, retaining and digestive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong pain, make one large cautery on the stomach as discussed earlier (cautery of the stomach), around the circumference; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, one thin cautery at the navel, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see excessive moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery on the joint, one cautery on each sore, and two small cauteries on the stomach in front of the larger one, for the cure is beneficial where there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are rooted or multiple and old, filled with thick cold and moist corrupted humor, and are treated as mentioned in divisions, it does not help if cauteries are performed: four on the spine of the back, one that is completely removed below the anus pointed triangularly, and one below the buttocks. Two cauteries should be done;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you think that his stomach is chilled and the meat does not cook, and swelling is observed on his face, then a large cautery is applied to the stomach as previously stated, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the cauteries being held together; leave the cauteries open for a long time. After healing the place where the cautery was applied until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the sores called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat thelul, if the cautery seems like a razor, heat it and then place it all around the treated sore; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that it burns; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after these cure with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery on the charcoal, it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an ill-healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, as we will describe in its place, comes a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes and becomes swollen with putrid matter and corrupted moisture, one should investigate it thoroughly and be certain of the depth to which it has penetrated. After heating the cautery that appears as if it were a shaver, insert it into the fistula according to the thickness of the tissue that it has entered, and continue the cautery until the body becomes burnt and corrupted, once, or twice, or thrice, depending on the amount of tissue needing to be burned; beware of burning the nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestine, be careful in this area, and do not perform this procedure outside of a charnel house, and believe that it is not sinful; after curing the area until it is healed, if the area becomes septic and matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the area is healed completely; if the matter has not been removed, know that the area is not healed, and burn the bone to make it heal. As we will describe in its place, one of these procedures.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the kidneys comes with cold and large wind, and does not take on the form of a woman, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys from both sides with a cautery iron as we have previously said; and if we perform cauterization in the middle (of the body), there will be four cauteries in a line, and it will provide more aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	If the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then perform cauterization on the part outside the bladder, where the pubic hair starts, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as the knuckle of your finger; and perform one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and make sure the cauteries are shaped as previously described.
de la marris	of the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the womb, as we have said in the caution of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterization be sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the infection
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend into the joint of the hip, and for this reason it becomes immobile from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the limbs are found to be out of their socket, if you need to cauterize the patient over the joint of the hip with a circular cautery, facing in front of the joint around the socket so that the joint is within the circle; and if the cauterization is like those used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not available to you, make four large olive-shaped cauteries and make them as sharp as all the others; and use it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the belly of the loin (lower back), and it is due to coldness and moisture; and the patient is treated for this as we have said in the division but the cure is not effective; and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: namely with burning substances, and the fire cautery. The fire cautery is according to many ways, one of which is as follows: you shall cauterize on the belly of the loin four triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and width; and there should be space between each cautery the size of a dove; and the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes, the cautery is made in the middle of the lower back, so there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery is made at the circular cautery that we have mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the loin; but do it in this way so that the circles encompass the entire loin, and all the spaces of the kidney are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the method that is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the lower back and does not reach the thigh or the leg. If it reaches the thigh and the leg, two cauteries are applied where the patient says the pain lies, and one cautery above the ankle at a distance of 4 fingers from the left side; and whether the cautery is cutler's or arsenic is applied to the sore spot; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the level of the foot or close by, the cauterization should be done where they feel the pain - three points or four at the cauterization point called "points."
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If necessary, more are done; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, a cautionery of cutler's or circular cautery is applied, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cauter too long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not make any greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen more who applied caution on the ankle of the foot, and they left it too long that the leg was all swollen, and the feet as well, and they were pierced and corrupted through all the toes. After a belly solution in which they died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, perform cautery on one and the other, following this manner. The wise shall say about the caution of the hunchback, as follows: make one nail of iron and be as thick as a finger of thumb or slightly smaller, and either between-the-cheeks or from one between-the-cheek to the other with a distance equal to the size of a nut of walnut; and let the between-the-cheeks be across two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and have one handle of iron well made; and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And scald until it is all red and blisters, then place it on the hunchback's patient's side, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize one time with the iron once and let it rest for four days; then apply a plaster of butter, leaving the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure with ointment until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its gaze, and few who use it; however, this is one of the good cauteries, which can be borne by those who can endure it, and where it is applied.
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When the back pain comes from falling or striking, excessive bleeding, or similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are suitable for cauterization except to the one who is affected by the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that the patient be emptied of poisonous pills or similar substances, which are placed on the back where the pain is located, marked with three lines and in each line five cauteries or more according to their strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make four cauteries or four using a medium-sized cauterizer in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they strain, fearful; and you can find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that appears above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and want to cure it, you should cauterize it with the cautery of that part according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	The cautery should enlarge each part of the spine equally. If you see, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .2 lines or .3, and the points should be close to each other. After curing the area until it is healthy according to what has been said, beware not to apply the cautery in gilbositeit which is in nerve spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is due to swellings that occur on every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which are called 'gout' properly, and when it is due to cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cautery in this manner: make the patient lie down with a cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary to pinch on the face of the foot, make a cautery all over the cautery called "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make a cautery on each knee four times or four on each side, with an olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do so, but not beyond that point where the edges of the burn are burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	1. And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
de la routure dou syfac	The next sentence is: "de la routure dou syfac." Without additional context or comments, the translation of this sentence into English is: "Of the dislocation of the shoulder."
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the dislocation of the shoulder occurs in anger, and the arms descend towards the chest and this is new, then when you see it to be treated, it should not eat anything that day; and use things which loosen the stomach, so that the farts decrease from the stomach; afterwards, make the patient sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his elbow as long as the dislocation remains, and reposition it at your fingertips, and press down firmly over the dislocation above the joint of the shoulder; and use a sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery in the shape shown here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Keep the hairs long and even while it is white and it exudes pus. Then move the shoulders back into place; and the attendant holds his hand above so that they do not return; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put one cushion and one bandage on the thighs, and another on the affected part which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the mark all over your hand, hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again as long as you come to the bone; and be careful that the boil does not burst when you perform the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that through this the patient does not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that if you do not come to the bone during cautery, your work is worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and those of larger people also large according to their measure; after four days cure the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; after that, cure with other ointments until it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wounds are well healed; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long, so that the boil does not burst when he is ready to leave the room.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made bandage and let it be for another forty days; let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much or strain himself, and avoid excessive drinking, eating, and shouting; and if he follows this teaching, he will heal completely. And I will say more about the surgery in its chapter afterward.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the hernia of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When hernias occur in other bellies and are recognized as not growing any more, do this. Apply one fire cautery according to its size, and burn the third part of it; afterwards cure as we have said; and no old man has said that it should be cauterized at four angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	Mark the position of the hernia and make a line above it in its width, and another below it, and place your hand all along the cautery rod. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	Of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any member, whether from falling or being injured, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the medicine does not heal it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its size and weakness, and its virtue and location of twists and its pain. If it is healed from the first cauterization, that is good; if not, repeat one more cauterization on top of it, as this custom is that it must change in the nearby member, so you should perform the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
de meselerie	To mix medicines.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The remedies are sometimes helped by cautery with great aid, and especially those illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it being cauterized, take care if the sickness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither bleeds nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the entire patient, then perform 5 cauteries on the head: one on the neck, and another towards the front at the end of the hair; two on the temples, and one behind the ear; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out from it, allowing the vapors of the gross humors to escape; and cauterize the private parts according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered everywhere; it will certainly perish, you must then burn it with the cauteries we have mentioned: one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the shin and another on the ankle, two on each shoulder; two on the hips, two on the tendons of the feet, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; be careful not to burn the nerves that are above the heels, you should not burn them; never apply a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Know that the more you use cautery, the more help it provides and it benefits him; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in manners of iron. After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it heals.
de enfleure	inflammation or swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When a swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then you should perform cauterization on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the limb; and the cauterization may be a small incision in the thick part of the skin. Then you heal it with unguents until it is healed. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that immobilizes the limb, and in such a case the swelling is removed; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the issues of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	When a sore appears on any member and it is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, but it is not cured, then you should perform an incision (albaras) on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the limb; and the incision may be a small cut in the thick part of the skin. Then you heal it with ointments until it is cured. Sometimes an incision is done on the hand, foot, back, at the nerve issue that immobilizes the limb, and in such a case the sore is removed; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the issues of moving nerves in the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" becomes mature and the medicines do not work, then cauterize it with a deep cautery (according to the thickness of the skin), until the white spot is removed and its color changes; then heal it with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and banana leaves, and ox blood and eagle blood, in equal parts; and mix everything together, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is cured.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When syphilis begins and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that appears to be one circle around the syphilitic sore; and although the wise say that a cautery should also be applied in the middle of the syphilitic sore; yet I do not think this is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once before; and more proper is that it be cauterized with the "circular" cautery, as we have said in the discussion of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The swelling that cannot measure (grow)
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which is slow to heal or because of the excess it causes, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning too old), and have little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around it; afterwards leave it in this state. For it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it being pierced with the entire cautery, heat the cautery in the form described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery pierces the core, and make sure the cauteries are such that the patient feels them outside in this manner so that the flow of the pus is even. Afterwards cure it until it heals perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a rotting of the limb, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place where a fire cure can be applied, then heat the irons, both large and small, according to what is required in the place or location of the disease; after heating all parts until all corruption is reached and nothing remains of it, that everything corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply soft cauterized ointment with oil as often as the burns from fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the healing of the wounds, generate char. And if after three days you see that healthy char does not grow, that's good; if not, repeat the cautery on the remaining corrupted parts. And this rotting is sometimes cured with ague medicine instead of fire cure; however, fire cure is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for ague in its division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	swellings that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often, toes suffer from a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, which is a large swelling that hurts the foot. The cures for this disease are in two ways. One is fire cautery, and the other is hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat one iron cautery like a feather of a raven, made of good iron so it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it should have fine margins; after that, place everything hot on the nail, turn your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the base of the nail; then leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a plaster of wild herbs crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night; the nail will shrink and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with soothing ointment until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	If they are converted on the outside of the body (meaning external wounds), and it often happens in hands and feet, you must provide hot water cautery; and it is done like this: take a cane made of iron or a raven feather, and place it on the nail and burn blisters (meaning boils); then place the cane so that it surrounds it completely, then put a little hot water, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and let the hot water penetrate deeply to the root; allow the patient to bear the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as it is, and it will uproot itself from all its roots. Do this again until you have heated all those on the body, then treat them with ointments that soothe.
li cure dou trembler	the trembling cures
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes with cold or from quartan fever or something else, it is necessary that you make 4 or 5 fire cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and 1 cauterization near the navel, and 1 on the stomach at the olive oil cauterization site; this will stop the shaking and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	pus-filled blisters (boils)
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes the body appears to be bathed with boils, which come from corrupted matter. It is necessary, at first when they appear, that cautery be made over each head of the boil: a subtle cautery from myrtle stick, so that it can grasp fire, or from long root of aristolochia, or cauterize with lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized from the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter which comes from them is discharged, and they become healthy; however, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound or at the abscess incision, or during cauterization of the limb, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to cause bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Moreover, whenever this happens to anyone, you should quickly put your finger on the wound vein and press it very hard until the blood is stopped from flowing; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red; then take one (either large or small according to the size of the wound and where the artery is located), and place the cautery on that vein where your finger is placed, and hold it there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the vein suddenly jumps when you hold your finger on it and the cauteries go out, take quickly another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the artery is closed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and let no other harm come to the patient; know that when the artery dries up, it cannot be well kept closed when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied that can keep blood from flowing; and let it be tied and tightened accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies a narrow binding tightly with cloth or places hot things on it, or similar things, if it does not help, it does not profit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have medicine present, he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out well until it is closed above the wound and the vein; and it must not be moved, but the wound should be cooled with cold water often so that the artery becomes frozen, thickened, and closed; and make inquiries about cauteries and medicines ahead.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the treatments for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all kinds of diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and their causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; I have placed that chapter in its entirety up to the feet, and I will go into this chapter through the same path because it is easier to understand what you are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of that, it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come into treatment. Some of them arrive with such illness that they die quickly due to the frenzy they find in their disease, and from the greatness of its malice; and fear is deserved from these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And from these there are those who give you counsel and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is deceitful. It should not be that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and from which you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, may Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have organized this chapter in sections, following the sequence of the cauteries that I previously described to you from head to feet, because you will find these easier to understand which ones you may need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full head with water (meaning swollen)
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often comes to children during birth, and when the vagina contracts too strongly around the child's head; and sometimes it comes from causes that are not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, except for children; and all that I have seen, death hastens; and because of this it seems to me that I should abandon the work in some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen a child whose shoulders were swollen with water, and his head grew larger every day until he could no longer support it; and the moisture was so great that death was believed to have occurred, and this moisture is collected beneath the bone and between the cartilage and the bone; and if the moisture is between the cartilage and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should make a large incision in the head, extending as far as two fingers, and follow the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, you should make two incisions in a cross-like manner, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the joints of the head opening on each side, and the hollow gap jumps when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond; then you must cut the head open in three places as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After the incision, remove all the moisture outside. Then bind up the wounds with linen and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and let it be as such for five days; then unbind, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and keep the head stretched out until it heals well, and give dry meat of the moisture to the patient so that the member is comforted and becomes healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess swelling is greatest, and the opening of the wound; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, open the abscess or wound and drain the pus, and do as you can with it; but avoid covering the artery; and let some blood flow, so that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of moisture in a proper manner.
de reume	Repeat the procedure.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is any disease called "catarrh" among the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help, then the last resort is the cautery, by which two arteries will be burned.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you cover their eyes, the patient must lie down on their back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then grasp the patient's neck with one rough cloth; then look for where the veins meet, and the joints of both sides are behind the ears, and the shoulders are returned to their original position; then mark the places of reattachment, then pierce one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts. This should cut until the tip reaches the bone, and this should be at the base of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And when you pierce, push the spatula under the artery and strike above it, cutting as deep as two fingers.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is struck, it should jump up repeatedly out of place.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open on its own, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then incise and cut up to the bone; and the quantity of blood that must be let out is about 5 cubic centimeters, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the swelling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without spreading, then the pus from an abscess does not come, then hold the wound closed and bind, and apply ointment until the wound is healed.
de emigrainne	And in moving (the dislocated limb), if it cannot be returned to its place without pain, then it must be moved gently with a warm cloth or a small hot iron, and then immobilized with bandages so that it can rest until the swelling subsides.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old dislocation comes and acute catarrh occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and other similar conditions, and it is treated by various means of medicines but does not improve, then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as previously mentioned.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extraction of these [things] is that the patient should shave their temples, and pay attention to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by beating, and is not easily responded to except in some cold individuals; and if it is responded, the patient should tighten their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a harsh cloth, and warm the area with hot water until the artery becomes apparent; then take the spatumile of which this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then lightly scrape the skin to see the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs and carefully separate the cloths on both sides; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the tip of the scissors, then press that part according to the size of the two heads. For if it is not pressed, it will not open by itself entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood from 5 cubits, up to 4; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong silk threads, so that pus does not come out before the wound closes, and there is a flow of blood; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in that same hour itself, and if you see, you cauterize the cautery cutter up to the bone until the heads are separated; and this is the muddling work, if the patient does not have a fever and they are of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is aid in healing moisters: therefore it is of greatest aid to moisters.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the area with old cotton and place good bandages over it; and when they are to be cut open, if it is cured with dry medicines that cause heat, and bandages, until it heals; and if without a tourniquet from the artery as you operate, hurry to cover it with cautery or use vitriol on your hand so that the area does not bleed; and if this is not present, place your finger over the area until it congeals, and rub the area with cold water until it stops bleeding, and bind it as necessary; and that which is softened and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein from this sharp cautery cutting two parts, but the cuts should be thick to keep its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the strings are too thin, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the 2 incisions, one deep and wide apart, and then when you have signed the incision of 2 places, and heat the iron hot above until it reaches the bone, and cut through the vein in 2 places; and they must be separated between the 2 heads because it is not bonded all over with this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	And the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from veins located on the forehead above the head, and it does not benefit from any medicine that is applied, and you see the patient writhing in pain as if with fever; and when they are thin and moist to the point that hair falls out like paper, and the skin around the eye area is burnt and scorched by the tears, this requires this kind of treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the ancients "cure contuse", and you shall do this to the patient who has this disease: shave his head from the front, then make three cuts or the same length on the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one cut should be like two fingers below the eyebrows going straight down until the nose, and the other two should be in the temples above the eyebrows, and avoid cutting the arteries that are in the temples above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and each wound shall have the size of three fingers together.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and take a piece of sponge and dampen it with linen to squeeze the blood, then insert the sharp spatula of two parts in this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is at the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts along the entire bone, then continue from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then pull out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Push the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first opening. It is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other side, and it is shaped like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the vessels that descend from the eye to the hairs, until the incision is continuous up to the opening of the wound, and then make another incision on the other side; and then drain the blood equally, and press the area for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each opening, and place damp linen soaked in vinegar, oil, and asafoetida over it, and ensure that no pus comes out; on the third day, remove the suture, and apply great heat from mustard plaster, then the treatment with ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with an acute catarrh, you often see the eyes swell and become small, blur vision, burn paper, hair falls out, and a headache ensues at great pain; and the patient coughs; then recognize these signs that such materials and this catarrh do not come from anywhere but from many veins, and the remedy for the cure is in it, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And command the patient to recline their head, then make a large cut on the back of the head, and another deep one. Then start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then apply cotton between the two edges of the cut and bandage it with linen; then place damp linen cloths on it and guard against hot abscess; when the bone is removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat with things that encourage char growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; then administer it to the wounds to encourage char growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, stones or similar items such as iron; or seeds, peas, beans; or something flowing like water and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	If a stone or other foreign object falls into the ear and does not fit properly in the ear, or it becomes swollen in the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you can see the stone, apply a few drops of violet oil or camphor oil, then administer extraction; and make the patient sneeze with ginger, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold it upwards. Many times pus is produced by this cure; and if it does not produce pus, use fine tweezers for extraction as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a subtle hook of small thickness; and if it doesn't jump out by this means, make a thread of wax and push the head of the thread or earplug strongly, stop the area around the thread with melted wax so that the air can't enter with the thread; then pull firmly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, take some glue and catch the animals, and put any suitable instrument on top of it; and place a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or something else, and pull firmly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't jump out from all the things we have said, then hurry to cut the ear when abscess pus comes and spasms; and the method of cutting is that you first anesthetize the patient with a head anesthetic, draw blood according to the measure of its potency, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or skin depends; let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then extract it with all your might, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and heal it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that have entered and swell, apply extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, apply a thin, fine spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision in that grain. However, do not do so if you think the grain is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it using fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, to ensure the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then the patient should use ear drops of strong condysum and stuff the ear with old cotton. The patient must lie on the same side where the water has fallen. If it jumps out because of this, that is good. If not, take many small and light pieces of straw, heat them slightly in the fire; then have the patient put one end of the straw into his ear and hold the other end with a pair of tweezers from the other side, and press another piece of straw onto the straw in the ear; continue pressing the straw against the straw in the ear until the water jumps out completely, and when you see it jump out, take one thread, insert one end into the ear, and burn the other end with fire as much as the thread is burned; then repeat this process with more threads until the water has all come out, as we have said earlier.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast (insect), if it is small, like fleas and similar creatures, treat it as we have said earlier; but if it is large enough to feel, then use extraction with tweezers; and it is easier to remove what is in the ear with lighter tools.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and where to administer distillations, if it does not improve, you must observe the ear in sunlight; if any worms open, remove them with subtle tweezers, if no worms appear, take a string of this shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	Make it narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Push the most subtle part of the string into the ear according to the severity of the patient's pain, then pull the entire string; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they don't emerge, stop up the string with cotton as I said earlier; if no worms protrude as we have mentioned, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the treatment of worms, and you will find them where to administer distillations or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this device as shown, you will find it here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or brass narrow at the bottom with one small opening and wider on top for distillation; and to press within the distillation, use a well-made device made of brass; if you see, take a scraper and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or liquid and whatever medicine you wish into the string, and place it in the ear. Then push the scraper with all the cotton inside to press the medicine and distill the oils or liquids from the ear. The patient will smell it inside, and let the distillation be one heated pot as when it is distilled in the ear; but make sure it's not too cold, for the medicine will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to ear injury or pus coming from within the ear, and this perforation sometimes occurs completely inside the ear if it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is only a small hole perforated and it can be easily seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if the perforation is not visible, it is difficult to treat in various positions, and in this case you must place the sick person's ear in the sun and look inside. If you see the opus (pus) appearing, then open the perforation with this spatula shaped as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be cauterized and incised in front and behind completely, so that it does not touch the ear; if the opening is of cartilage or bone of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers and lightly crush it until all the cartilage is crushed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If the opening is at the front of the ear, take a fine and sharp razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the cartilage of the ear. If you feel the opening from which the patient feels pain in the ear, make a small incision, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put a bandage of appropriate size into the ear and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound heals, or take a bandage and moisten it with rose water and powdered vitriol broken; if you see the ear swell, then it is necessary to pull out the bandage and insert another bandage moistened with cerote made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling disappears; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And when bleeding comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are either to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the charcoal from paper (this likely refers to a substance used for healing or treating wounds)
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from paper leaves when they are moist and dry should be stretched with tweezers and forceps, then scraped with a spatula at its roots; then place it on the wound covered in vitriol (a type of acid).
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if no incision is made, the subtle lancet cautery should be used on the cauterized spot, and it is beneficial to cauterize after the incision; and many times they heal, since nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hailstorm
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times hail-like things come in papers that appear similar in shape and hardness, and because of this, the disease is called "grandine," which is a thick collection of moisture on the paper above and below; the remedy is as follows: Take care if the hailstorm becomes muted from one side or the other, and it is an easy thing to know; then make an incision on both sides, then peel off each part lightly, take it with the tweezers and squeeze. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, do not worry the patient; and if the tear is large, gather it in stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply force because the oilmen restore it soon and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grains (small particles) are descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and hold the grains with tweezers, and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it doesn't matter; and when the grain is pressed, apply salty oil to it, and heal the wound of the one who suffers pain until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes (eyelids)
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat rendered in paper-like cloths, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes them great pain, and they come down with catarrh at mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because their eyes are watery; and therefore they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep on top of it, and their paper is damp under their eyelids covered by the exinach that opens in oil. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on a pillow; and then takes one linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then puts it below; and presses with your hands on both sides, so that exirnach is assembled inside the circle; then they make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatumile, but not too large than the wound one makes to open a vein; and cut the skin completely until you see the exirnach; and in many positions, exirnach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then stretch out a piece of folded cloth between your hands and turn your hand to both sides until it is spread; and be careful not to injure in the incision, that you do not go too deep with the spatumile, that you do not cut it open.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the incision, then slightly raise the incision to make it appear; then stretch out as we have said, then wet cloths with oil and water, and place them on the wound, and hold down bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such men break the seal and put it over to corrupt that moisture which has remained. Then cure it until it is healed. If it comes to an abscess hot, then heal it with poultices soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from paper other than nature, and are nurtured, they harm the eyes and bring about ways of diseases such as common tears and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes; and there are four methods of cure: either by cautery together with fire, or by medicine according to what is before in this chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by caustics, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your side, then turn the paper with the oil on your left hand; if it has been converted, it is good; if not, insert an awl through one of the holes; and it should be pierced through the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull one filament across the entire paper, then shave the paper; then make a hole in the part beneath the paper, below the hairs, completely filling the spatula, from the large rim to the small; then pull out one filament, and put a small tent of cotton and linen on top of the paper under where the figure is drawn, as the thorn of the myrtle; and it is necessary that the figure is according to the quantity which you wish to raise the paper that has been designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if it is necessary to apply a large quantity of the paper according to the softness of the paper; then make a hole in the entire spatula along the two lines that you have drawn, and start from the large rim to the small; and let one of the slits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the awl into one of the corners of the keyhole, then scrape it all; then sew together the two lips with a needle at one filament of fine linen, and squeeze out the blood, and make the superfluous filaments adhere to the two scissors with anything sticky, if you wish to do this; and if not, do not care about it, then leave the sewing and the filaments for 2-4 days; then treat the wound without sewing with drying and constricting substances, because the paper revives at the edge of the wound and gathers it, but the sewing is rotten (as the ancients say), and this is laborious work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a figure as the thorn of myrtle, as we have mentioned, at four openings spaced according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then bind that which is above the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you have no power to hold the pincers and the things are not even, take a needle with one thread, and put it in place according to the figure; and put another thread of the large armhole, and the second thread of the small, and assemble the threads equally between your hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift the entire skin over what you have marked, as we have said, then sew the two lips of the wound together by stitching, and let it heal until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar calming balms.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes the hair of the papyrus is transformed: if you need to use what we have said about incision; but sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment for dogs is as follows: First, fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, then make two cords of equal length and width similar to that of the paper and the diameter of a spatula; take the heads of two parts where you hold the strings; next, assemble one and the other subtly on top of the paper with oil, and bind the two cords from the two parts; leave it like this for some days, and the skin that is bound will die, rot, and fall off, leaving a wound.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time or if you need to force it, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and no more hair can be found; this is the form of the two cords that you will make according to the figure and quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the work (ovraiges) is such that you take a fine needle and insert one silk thread of the same size; then assemble the cords (chiés) and align them carefully, and the length of the threads should be about one palm; then arrange another fine silk thread briefly, attach the head of the thread, put the patient's head in your hand; expose it to sunlight so that the work is done under clear conditions, as this work is subtle and small; next, insert the needle into all the hair (chasse) along the root of the hair (ajosteit), and pierce it through the paper quickly until you pull out the natural hair; then draw out the hair up to the head of the thread, and attach that hair to the thread, if there is one or two or three or more hairs; then draw your hand until the hairs come out completely from the paper along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the arrow has been expelled but hairs do not come out with it, draw out the arrow to the end you have ordered, until the arrow comes out from the wound and you see it through the oil vision; then draw out the arrow and the hairs, and let the oil close for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows in its place and the skin forms over it; if the hairs are small, let one long hair of natural origin accompany it, and let it grow along with the one you left, until it is elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	The decay of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "alecrati" or decay comes in the oil, it happens in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It occurs suddenly from a wound, an injury, or a burn, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of work in it is that you cut the joint, separate the ligaments from it, put tent-like strips of flax inside, and let it heal until it is healed; and it should not be used in its treatment with things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, the disease will be worse than the first one; but the work of softening things, such as fenugreek, and the juice of water or oil and flax seeds cooked, and immediately cool down some oil, and wrap a tent around it, and cure with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you do not let it heal in its original form; and this treatment which we have said is not helpful unless addressing the disease in this way so that it does not return to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat coming in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This sickness that is below is truly called "axacrati," and it is both natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things; the way of treatment in it is that you take a needle with one double thread, and pierce it through the flesh, entering from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come out in two cheeks of the flesh; then the flesh is raised above the whole needle, and it is covered with a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should be, that is good; if not, take a rasp and place it in the wound, turn the paper, and make two wounds where the skin is inside the paper; and let the corners of the two wounds be at the angles of the incision that you made, and let it form an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape will be like the letter that has no "greek y," then remove that flesh, according to the thickness that its edges are curved underneath, from where the paper is; then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then treat as we have said for the medicines softening, and tenting, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the sickness comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a shallow cut below the hair on the paper, as described before; then separate between the two leathers of a tent, as I said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters adapt devices with all possible skill to bring the figure back to its natural form; and patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The swollen pain of paper (literal translation)
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When such swelling occurs in the hand of a man as described above, where the paper is swollen with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary then to cut the point of a razor under the paper and lift it upwards; keep it between pliers until you find that which protrudes at the spatula-like part (subtle spatula), which should not be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from a too sharp spatula causing injury to the oil; make your incision, from which you scrape the assembled matter, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal the entire assembled matter, sometimes making the oil sour and adding sweet warm collyrium; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and place damp wool over the oil abundantly with egg; after three days, use the collyrium and other healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	The nail of the oil (literal translation)
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail has two types: one is nerve-like and resembles hard wax, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles frozen white moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot be removed; and both seem to start towards the large root, and grow little by little until they cover the entire view and light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on your healthy hand, then you pull out the nails; and tear off the paper with your hand, then take tweezers to remove the nail, and hold it above; then take a needle, and put a horse hair or ox hair, or strong thread on it, and double the tip of the needle slightly and poke it into the nail, and pierce it all through with the needle, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, and scrape off all the hair from the side of the nail that follows the cuticle and the silk to the hair up to the head, then chip away the remaining in the root of the big toe with a small chisel and fine tools, and leave the natural flesh or big toe as usual; and sometimes the nails are set on the incision only, and along the fillet, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue from where this shape is formed:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the soft tissue does not touch the skin and tear it, and that the cuticle is not pierced; and after incision, drop a little bit of crushed oil in the wound, and let the oil of collyrium made from litargirius remain until the next day; then treat whatever is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot insert the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, many times this appearance of the nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the patient, and take the spatumile lightly pointed according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then gently lift the nail and if you see it does not thin out or reduce in size, apply pressure to it. Then distill from your mouth into the oil of collyrium made from litargyre and red collyrium and pulverized, and anoint the oil until the next day; then repeat the procedure as before until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to it in the oil (as with an abscess), then lait (milk) should be applied and the abscess should be treated hot until it is healed, then continue the procedure as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh near the armpit harms in oil greatly, suspend it at the neck, and cut a part but not too much, so that tears do not come; then distill in the oil collyrium which is made from litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows above the eyeball
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	The eyelids of some men sometimes grow red flesh, and cover the eyeball and press upon the paper and turn it outward, and seem like a rosebud from a balustrade; and the remedy for this is that the patient should place his head in the bowl, then open the eyelids, and remove all the red flesh to the appropriate uncinations (eyebrow areas), and hold it with force; then cut off the first layer of the red flesh, and continue cutting towards the razor until the end, but be careful not to wound the oil during the procedure; and make the incision with a spatula as mentioned in the treatment for the nail and the small bones around the nail, as described by the form after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is cut, apply the oil of seil crushed or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton soaked with egg white on top to ensure proper healing; and if anything remains, and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt whether it is properly healed, leave the oil and heal the wound with things that calm inflammation; then return to your work until it is sound, and do this whenever a wound is treated in this way with oil by this means.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	Nevertheless, you must reduce the treatment of each oil by natural means; and in case of accidental work with iron, do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb can bear that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The first red veins which are covered above the eye, and it reveals its work and weakens the oil every day. Therefore, it is necessary for you to first examine whether the oil, where the red vein is, is healthy or if there is any other disease except the red vein; then instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then press those veins all along their length according to one's wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And there should be two degrees of pressure in one fold according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then press those veins subtly, and squeeze out the blood hour by hour until you see the veins moving away from the oil; and make sure not to prick the oil with the tips of the lancets, and perform this procedure at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not spoil the veins; and when you have completed this, if it distills green and red oils, it will correct those who are affected by the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot bind all of it in that hour, apply a plaster on oil of calming things to the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of healing, then resume as before according to this method until it is healed; and this is the form of forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The sore called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is a trick in it that you should cut open the abscess where it must rot, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness; if it needs to be scraped with all the tools mentioned here, it is called a "rough head," and should be scraped circularly once with a tool shaped like a chisel and pointed like a limer.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the level over the bone corruption, then turn it between your hands and press your hand slightly so that you feel that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the level of healing balms.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joint is sutured and char comes out, and the bone of the bow is sutured and remains so for 40 days without reverting or becoming abscessed, and no evil accident occurs (knowing that it is healthy); if this does not happen, there is no other remedy but to return the fistula to the point of the navel according to this form: you must expose the bone a second time with iron, and with healing medicines, and when it is exposed, take one awl according to this form, and make the head of the awl at four angles, and let the shaft be attenuated up to the tip as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put it on the dislocated bone of the elbow, and move your hand away from the oil (ointment). Then turn the whole instrument all the way until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on the affected area; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows and hardens, the matter goes to the affected area; it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the dislocation
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open in all places and do not move at all, there is no need to bind it (the patient); then clean it, then put on poultices or hot irons for healing, then apply oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and saracocolla, and hold the oil, and anoint it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and put one on top of another according to the size that the eyes require; then bind them with a strong bandage, and repeat the poultices for healing without injuring it; then remove the poultices and leave the oil held tight day and night, and if the liniment becomes soft, you must bind it tightly; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eyes heal, that is good; if not, repeat the anointing and the cloths and the liniment until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the bursting of a water bladder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When rupture occurs in the water bladder, it bursts and paper-like matter comes out like a grain of resin, and is very frightening to see; then if you cover it, the treatment is such that you push an awl into the root of the affected part all the way up to its top, then push another awl or double-filed needle from the edge of the bladder area; and make it pierce through, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then bind the end of the double filament with a piece of linen and tighten, then remove the awl and put moistened flax oil on it; and leave it until the filaments stick with the bladder, then treat the oil with healing substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is kept closed by the bladder on each side of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes seem to be large in appearance, pierce them with a thin spatula that comes from oil and cure the moisture and pus, then insert some immediately; then remove it when healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the bone of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by anything other than the bone in the oil assembly resembling an ulcer and it is not an ulcer; its appearance during surgery looks like a seated patient. Then you should take hold of his head with both hands, make him move so that you see the bone come up to your eyes. Then it should be fixed, and let the light shine through and let the patient see things as he usually does. If it does not discharge below, know that it is an ulcer, and if the discharge from the bone is not properly arranged as we have said. Place the seated patient in your hands, then take the thin spatula and place it under the corneal sheet and the crown, along the continuous junction with the corneal sheet and the crown, until the bone protrudes. When it is issued, it will distill into hot oil mixed with honey or ulcer-healing herbs boiled together with honey, and then it should be treated with another remedy until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters in the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearance of the artery in division, and that which is required to pierce; proceed according to health. You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light due to the sun, and hold the oil clean and press it very firmly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or your left hand, if they are on the right; then place the point of the instrument near the corona through the thickness of a nail in that part of the oil where the minor tear is, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and hold your hand as long as it pierces the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place; and it must be that the measure of the path of almagda should be at the full depth of the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the nose; and this is the corona of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneous cloth, and then place the instrument up to where the artery is, then press it down a path after another. If the artery is still there, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, and if the artery rises again in the second way, apply the force with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise anymore, gently turn almagda around your thumb; then place another small amount of gemmed oil on it, and squeeze out this oil from within. Then put damp cloth or moistened linen soaked in rose oil and abundant egg yolk, and bind with the clean oil. We, and those of our time, put on top a layer of crushed matter with an abundance of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness because some people have too hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore, pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make one shallow incision, then apply alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare a draught for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark room; be attentive to all movements, and give light foods, and let him not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him as necessary until the third day; then untie him in the same dark room, test his vision, and let him see some things, and then rebind him for seven days; do not perform this, however, during the time of the cure or immediately after the incision, but you should alleviate it, because the pain increases quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess comes, you should untie the oil before the seventh day and direct it towards that which soothes abscesses; and when it is soothed, then you should untie the eye and put on it one eyelet to cover for any length of time, and stay in that dark room. Then slowly leave the house a little at a time, and turn to his case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iria, who told us that in his land they pierce alum, so that the pain subsides, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of amalgam, because those who do not recognize them will see them; and they are properly of arsenic:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of these are of the same subtlety, and the bases at four angles intersect:
de la char sor le neis	of the skin over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There are never born or nasal skin growths that appear different, of which there are some that resemble scorpions with many legs; and if it has a swollen char of such color, and a soft char of good color. In the case of these chars that are soft, but not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands in the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice over those growths, and pull them out; then hold what can be supported with a spatula thin and sharp from one side, until you know that the char is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any thing remains that cannot be covered, you shall open it all with subtle and light instruments, so that there is nothing left; and if there is no abscess, or the abscess is closed, help as needed; and if the abscesses are malicious, hurry and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, water, or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the opening does not work, and moisture comes up to the palace (meaning head), know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as needed, know that there is charred matter in the bone above, which the instruments do not come to cut: then you shall take a large linen thread, about two fingers' width apart; and insert the threads into the patient's nostrils up to their power, and pull out smelling it until pus comes from the nose into the mouth; and many times children in school do this, and it is easy for those who wish to do so; then hold one head coming from the nose with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and know each other's turn as we are the ones holding the threads. Do this until you know that the threads have rotten the char; then pull out the thread, let the blood flow, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for four days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything remaining of the char; and then put a reed of plaster in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines in the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it shall be made of silver or tin, resembling a lamp with a handle, like a cane, and guide it so; and if you see, make a closed cane, and the instrument shall be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	About the skin near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises near the nose, which grows and becomes large when seen; therefore, it is necessary to treat it at the beginning and completely excise it, then apply heat or burning medicine to it; if it is delayed until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, dark in color, insensitive: do not touch it with iron because it is a swollen abscess, for when it is touched once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess has soft contact and is not discolored, you can completely cover it, the patient must be warned and treated with dry remedies and binding substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sutured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when a solution of continuation comes to one of these cartilages, it is of little use, unless in some men. Therefore, if such a situation occurs in anyone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together into a stitch, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips have already separated from both sides, you must scrape all the parts of them until they heal, then bring the two lips together into a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood powder on top, and incense pulverized; and place some plaster of strong or other plaster over the powders, and leave it until it dries, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is that you gather the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the abdomen stitching; or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	To the hands of men happens an abscess hard within the lips, resembling grains of various sizes, both small and large; then you must turn the lips, and cut on each side, and take it with the forceps and crush it in every part; then apply the leeches after the incision of vitriol powder, until the wound is cauterized; and then cleanse the wound with ashes, and cure the wound with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	From the jawbone
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times an abscess arises on the jawbone that the ancients called "albulus"; then you must hold it with the forceps and crush it at its root, and let the pus flow out; then apply vitriol powder or other powders restrictive and drying to the wound; if that abscess returns after the incision, and repeatedly occurs, crush it again and cauterize it; it will not return after cauterization; these are the shapes of the instruments for covering (it).
des sordens	From the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, sores are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scales that are ugly; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and curved, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must make the patient sit between your hands, with his head in your lap, and remove the sores or scales that are visible, as long as nothing remains; and in the same way do for the blackness and greenness, and yellowish and other spots, until they are removed; and if you remove what is there at the first reason, it is good; if not, start again on the second or third day and let him have everything removed; and know that the teeth require different types of instruments to be cleaned, according to what the worker demonstrates, because the tool used to clean the teeth has other forms than that used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	You should wait as long as possible when extracting a tooth for its pain, because it must not be done immediately; because this is a high substance up to which there is no excuse for shaving.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then, when the patient is constrained to extract a tooth, it is necessary that you are certain about which one to pull. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it is a good tooth, and pulls out the bad one; however, the pain does not go away until the bad one is removed, as we have seen in the past; and when you are certain about which tooth to pull, you must scorch around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then grasp it with your fingers or delicate pliers at the very root, and gently rock it back and forth until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the pliers; and keep the patient's chin in your saint (or hand) between your knees, and hold it still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After pulling the tooth properly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it is necessary to fill it with cloth, where the rotten parts are; then carefully pull it out with pliers so that it does not break while being pulled; and work very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, causing the patient greater pain from the root. Be careful that you do not act like ignorant lords who sometimes break the cart by their haste and recklessness, and do not bring about what we have mentioned; but they sometimes bring about disease through the roots that remain or the cart that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, with which one mutes (silences) the teeth first, should be of long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	They should be of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling (extracting), and they should be of good iron and toothed for holding (clamping).
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains drawn out, you must put on it soft cotton wool in butter for 1 day or 2, until the wound heals, then insert the tongs called "algefri", which resemble the beak of a tweezers; and inside them should be made like a chisel and that is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and use the instrument called "althali", which is known as a plaster, in this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through them, that is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument which has two prongs, here is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron pincers which are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large tongs, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Let this instrument be made such that it cannot break, and know that many iron pincers are needed; and also other instruments, which are not counted here; and the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their work and the illness requires, for there are such diseases where the ancient did not teach an instrument due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or any other bone, where it could have helped, then let him seek the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and help with movements, whose shape is as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and firm to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the joint with the appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, which is small, use this instrument to clean it all:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to natural form and the shape is ugly, especially in girls, if you know that the tooth has not yet grown after the dent, and it is not properly aligned, and cannot be filed or trimmed: remove it; and if it is near the gum with the tooth, take this instrument with the shape of a small beak, and made of sharp iron on the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the sharp-pointed instrument is used for many hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a flat file shaped like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And so it is like the lime with which they make needles; and in the lime, the tooth little by little wears down gently, so that it does not move until it wears away completely; then the flat surface is smoothed out with any file, and if the dent is too sharp and pierces the tongue, it is necessary to smooth the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not pierce the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth become loose, either from percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot chew food without it falling out, and you treat them with tightening medicines, it is not effective; rather, they should be tightened with a gold thread. Silver threads become green and moldy, but gold does not change. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth. If you want to align the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the loose teeth in between the healthy ones, whether there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then, continue covering up as far as you started, and hold your hand delicately and skillfully, so that they do not move. Your knot should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then, take the loose teeth with tweezers, assemble them, and place them back between the healthy teeth, ensuring they do not pierce the tongue. Leave them in this position for as long as possible, and if they slip or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread; if it lasts and serves for a while, it is the form of the tooth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the loose teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, if one puts it back in its place, freshly, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a bone fragment of an animal's tooth is shaped to fit, and one places it at the site where it is missing, and holds it in place as we have said, and lets it stay for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes there arises under the tongue or nearby, a ligament that is not naturally present; or by accident due to a sealed wound. The work involves opening the mouth of the patient and holding his head straight, then lifting the tongue. Next, you should separate the nerve-like ligament widely enough for the tongue to be dislocated from its place, and if it is tough or hard, and caused by a sudden wound, push in the uncinate bone and tie it off widely. Make sure the cut is not too deep, as there is an artery underneath. Once you have done that, lift the swollen area with rose water and a soft cloth, then put a linen tent under the tongue. The patient should bite on it each night to prevent it from healing. If there is discharge of blood, apply vitriol powder; if the wound breaks open, cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery (which is good for this). Then treat it with another remedy until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the swelling appears dark or hard to the sight of the sick person, do not touch it because it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards decay, and there is moisture, throw onion juice over it, and pierce it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if it resists your work, place powdered vitriol above it until it becomes dry; then remove the lees and the pus, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	for abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes there come into the throat boils called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron for fear of bleeding; but let it remain until it softens, and then you will cut it open, or it will burst by itself; and if it is white in color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check that the abscess is calm and pacified. Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his cheeks should be in your hand, and he opens his mouth and you take the servant between his hands, and press the tongue under the entire instrument, as follows; and it should be made of silver or thin brass like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with this instrument and observe the abscess? If so, take the awl and poke it into the abscess and draw it up above as much as possible; do not bring anything from the linen with it, then strike it with the instrument in the shape of a cross or a forceps; even though the head is bent, and one part is against another, and they are sharp, they are made of iron or bone.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, strike it with pliers, in the shape of which is a cross or forceps.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it should be cut through on one side and named on the other; and when you have struck one of the abscesses, strike the other in the same way, and after the incision gargarize (cleanse) the patient with hot, sharp, and acidic material, and if bleeding occurs, gargarize the patient again or use scorched pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves, and similar things until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it heals; and at times other abscesses than the two will appear in the throat, strike them in the same way as the two equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I will treat a woman with an abscess inside her throat, meaning a small abscess; it had already been very tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died within a day or two. The abscess was so large that it had filled two hollow spaces through the neck. I made a hole immediately, and pierced once, then pulled it out, and took out a large piece of pus; then I sewed up the other opening in the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterward, I pierced the abscess again, cut off a part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage was unblocked from the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at the abscess for a long time; the abscess grew back again, filled up the space that I had seen, until it became very large; then I tricked it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus the growth stopped; and I left those parts alone, and may God do what he will with them afterwards.
de l’uve	a woman with an abscess
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	1. When the anus retreats into the urethra and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is swollen and round, it is called "urethra". When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, and you see that the large abscesses are subsiding, and it is subtle, you must cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and it is red or of a dark color or black, you must avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the method that I have said, of its shape and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier in this treatise; then pierce the anus, draw it out, and cut it at .i. to .ij. places that I have mentioned in the incision of the two wounds. And you must not cut beyond the natural boundary; for if you do so, it will cause pain and words. After the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two wounds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears to be cut, you must use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate his fear. The method of cauterization is sharp and hot. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses his tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned or chapter of caution, and hold it with hot coals, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have a hair or some medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the anus; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not enter the throat and the bladder; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it on the anus, for the amount of half an hour, until you see it swell and the bites of the medicine are alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and stick the instrument with all the cotton into the sheath above, so that the cotton adheres to the anus; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to start the cauterization of the medicine again, start it again, and after the cauterization, suck out the pus around the anus, with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and wash it with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision, not just cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camphor and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, gather them all or some of these in one pot, and put it all inside, and let it boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot have one hollow instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be of silver or brass, and the one end should be inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the tube until the eye is deadened; afterwards repeat often, until the eye dries up, and make sure not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's hot stage, because many things may happen; and do not do it if there is no hollow instrument present. If this instrument is not available, take a tube and place an eggshell crack within the patient's mouth so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell will not let the vapor weigh on the mouth, and it is good cure combined with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is necessary to insert into the throat a bone or fish spine, or any other object; therefore you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in the object; and if it does not open up and remains lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance, this may expel the object through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread. Tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it. When it reaches the place, it will adhere, and you will pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take one plunger in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the top so it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, for it should not come loose or push the bone inside; it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because they are able to move or the thing is already moved; if it goes down, or you pull it out all the way to the instrument equally, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the throat incision
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Sometimes medicine is used on the throat, as I said in the division, by means of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, afterwards press the tongue with the instrument I told you about. If you see the throat, cut it open with a small knife or thin pliers that are suitable for this purpose. If this is not effective, take a hair-covered string, and put it into the throat of the patient, then push or turn a heated iron on the end of the string frequently. And anoint the patient with cold water all day. Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it into the mouth without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the throat feels the water, it will vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then subdue the patient with asefetide in the instrument that I have mentioned for fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be stubborn. The method of fumigation is that you take one pot or one containing charcoal, and cover the opening of the instrument with a perforated cloth; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient hold the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes only as far as the nose; and the nose will now be affected, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and acidic foods, and drink nothing of water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out under this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument with which one treats the nose, is, when it can be seen, resembling crooked pliers for entering the throat; and having the shape of a syringe, and having an asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	According to the memory that comes afterwards in this book from one and another, many resemble abscesses, and they are diverse in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways, of which one is like itself and depending on whether it holds moisture. And the second way is by the organs or parts where it is located. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the charnut lews are different from those that come in jointures; and each one should have its own judgement in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If one has abscesses, it should not be perforated until the bowel is ripe according to its accomplishment; and if there are those that require perforation when they are hardened, but do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses that come from jointures. For when an abscess comes from jointures, and it is left until it is surrounded by pus, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the jointure become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. Or the abscess is from the principal member, and if you delay perforation too long until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or it is from the foundation, if it is perforated before it is ripe; and it should not be perforated without accomplishment of digestion except for those that are from the foundation, which should not burst out and become long inside, and a fistula should form; and it will not heal in a great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the sign of the perforation of an abscess that is healed according to completion; and this is when pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the diminishing of pain and redness, and the settling and narrowing of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make it sit where the perforation is more dependent on the abscess, and where it has opened out; and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscesses are at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places or where there is no opening.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that close, according to the affected limb. And when abscesses are in fleshy areas, it is best to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, the body will drain out from it, and it will be filled with much pus; and possibly harden the lips and deeply penetrate it. And for any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires. And you should bring forth small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and if it is necessary to cover such abscesses, you should sew them; when they have become as thin as cloth, and are softened, it is necessary to do as with babies: and if there are those that are cut into four angles, and if there are those from which one covers like the myrtle leaf, as abscesses in joints; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other similar incisions and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those without a head, such as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscesses are large, and they have gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain some part of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing crookedly; do this many times gradually, until the pus disappears. This is especially necessary if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or elderly people in decline. For the pus sometimes jumps out with the drainage, which may cause the death of the patient, and you will not be at fault. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a deep wound, bring in strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is much draining, it is necessary that you stick in a strip in each one so that they meet; and if you have sewn part of the skin in the abscess, and covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or woolen cloth without moisture, and bind until the third day; then unbind, and cure with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it, along with a wet cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly. If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and use the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, or the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, you must put hot tents and moistened cloths over them; and if it is summer, and the limbs are fleshy, you must put moistened cloths over them with cold water and oil, or cold water and cold oil, as we have said; and then drain the abscess and the pus and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This also needs to be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have already told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	on ne devra estre en grant doutance a estre en grant paor de mourir; et se il n'est pas bien curez, li malaides moront.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	1. For small abscesses that come on the head are handled in our practice, similar to grapes or blisters from a linseed; there are also those with moisture like pimples, and some are hard and stone-like at the base without any doubt that the artery does not oppose it. And the operations of the neck should be proven with all instruments called "entromissoire", from which the following form comes, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it is to be done above the long one. And when the moisture is drained, scrape skin without leaving any remaining hair, for it returns immediately when left; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and oil, and apply the wound, and leave until the next day; those who are delayed by night will heal. And on the second day, repeat the cotton as before, and on the third, until you know it does not stay by night; then cure the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains one hard nut, squeeze it along this form, with long force; throw your nails into it, scrape it from all sides, and apply all your care to draw out the pus or where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do as I told you before. And do the same for a hard abscess, and treat and heal as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incision on a hard abscess and the one with moisture is lighter because they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and of these I treated an abscess or head of an old woman; I found the abscess as hard as a stone axe, rough and white, could not be broken; and if one had cut it with a knife, it would have made the same wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, unless those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, they should be opened always for the best, to let pus out; and they are to be treated as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Sometimes this abscess appears at the neck, under the chin, and in the groin, and sometimes it occurs elsewhere on the body, and they are large and joined together. And each scrofula is located within its own side, as the notch and the abscess of the neck, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are various. Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not want to obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition for treatment, and it resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all sides and not irritated at the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not inflamed; if necessary, you must cut through the top, and peel off each part, and place the two edges of the knife on the incisions, as we have said in the abscess of the neck; and pull it out slowly, and be sure not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use a probe or lancing that might injure the hand, and look not too far ahead, so you do not injure what should not be.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow closure, put vitriol powder in the wound, or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound closed; and leave it until the abscess is appeased and the wound softened and begins to drain. And when the blood is clotted, return to your work, as you complete it; then observe your indications if there remain small scrofulas at the root of the scrofula, cut them and wash them. If the scrofula has a large vein at its root, do not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and allow it to hang down without harm; then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment and heal the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have excised the entire scrofula, you must gather the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, as there is no need for superfluity due to the largeness of the scrofula. You must understand how to cover the root of it and draw pus, and then stitch as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where there is a hole; and pierce it as the one mentioned above, depending on it, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains from corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment enchanter char until it heals.
de squinance	When there is no movement of the afflicted member due to a dislocation or fracture, tie a bandage around it tightly so that it remains motionless and the pain decreases; but if there is swelling, put a warm poultice on it.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote about the measurement of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinchy throat, the slit in the throat called "epiglote" should be opened; and no help can be given by those, because all veins and the opening of the mouth or throat or two glands are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger of strangulation that comes from the constriction.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglotte, it is necessary that we split it under 4 circles or 3 small slits across, between the 2 circles or by the amount of the split at the tip, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And when the neck is tender at the incision of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that you extend the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cut open the neck until you reach the trachea; and squeeze out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then sew up the opening, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the incision of the trachea that a bone has broken through the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed where there is doubt of strangulation, bring the two lips of the wound together gently, and press it all around the cartilage; then administer medications that produce heat, until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says that it should not be done until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient has been judged dead, and the soul has departed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then tie the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus it is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malignancy of the disease has passed, and it has passed in 3 days or 4.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took one knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to cure him, and I found him as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and saw the blood flowing from it, and I knew that it had not opened nor conducted anything except the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I quickly closed the wound and healed it until it was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	And it did not happen to the lady except that her voice became red [swollen or hoarse], and afterwards she returned to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	Therefore I say that in the case of the epiglottis, have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "gullet hernia," and is a large one with a yellow color, and is much in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	And it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural has no artifice.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	The accident is according to two ways, one of which resembles fatness and the other resembles an abscess that comes from us through arteries;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it should have fear, and no force should be done except in that which is small, and the proof and search should be made in every intrusion:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as hard as a knuckle, and it cannot move in any direction, strike it as one strikes the nose, and pull it entirely off if there is anything attached to it.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And bind it well, and heal it as necessary, until it heals perfectly.
des nous	of the nose
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways of ours are, which I will say all their similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a dislocation and a fracture.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the swelling has passed, and then the pain subsides; afterwards, the fever and the heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a fracture there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains one swelling, which is its own sack and is the same as the body's color, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are of two types, either fatty or moist, and many-colored as I said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the newt, it is necessary that you examine and test first all the instrument called "entromissoire," according to its form or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	The method of the inquiry of the abscesses for us is that you take or more moist place than you find within the abscess and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then straighten the joint (or dislocation), and take care not to let it jump out again.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture turns black (or is infected), as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if after straightening the joint (or dislocation) there is still moisture, know that it is fatty; then make a cross-shaped incision over it and take hold of the edges with the pincers and carefully remove the skin from both sides, and pull out the garment or cloth that covers it so you can remove it cleanly with the thread.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	If there is anything remaining, it comes back to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	If a small amount remains and does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound closed, place soothing hot things on it, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if the wound is large, make two lips of it, and treat the one that bleeds.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the wound swells against you or another thing happens and you are forced to use vitriol powder, leave it for two or three days until the wound heals over, allowing the boil to drain; then cover what remains of the wound with oil.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the instruments for opening, and they come in four types: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three types for encircling abscesses with fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And are also like the needles with which they sew witches, and are made of silver, or iron, or citron rind, and yellow ones are worth more, and those blackened are more experienced for surrounding the swellings of a fistula;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the wounds are much alike, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some wounds have two swellings of four kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And if one has hunchbacks who have three bends and are of four types; and if one has hunchbacks who have two bends, or humpbacks of a single bend and they are also of four types; all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The tips of these [humpbacks] are sharp, and there is no need to cut them from any other side except where the vein or nerve is not to be severed.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these incisions [made for treating an abscess] are tied up with lacerations so that the patient does not tear them open during the treatment of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	And there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	And it should not be used except in charnu (charred) flesh, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar areas.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And sometimes another small instrument similar to fistula scissors is made in this shape, to drain blood; \[...\]
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And set it [the dislocated joint] in its place that heals with the covering of veins, and the arteries, and sometimes it returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to decay, so much that they resemble a woman's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, must do so according to this form of the following line b.j. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat off, apply medicine soothing to the wound, then gather the two lips of the wound together for suturing, and heal it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And if the breast sinks downwards and is flattened due to its large size, as it often happens with women, then make two cuts on top of it, through two similar openings.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is held to the other at the end of each one, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this shape, from this line b to the line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then peel off the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and introduce the aforementioned suturing and powders, as well as whatever is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if the patient is not healthy or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	And leave it until it digests the remaining flesh and fat, then heal it when it is drained.
des apostemes des asselles	abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as cases of hard scrofula with ribs (or sides), and if they contain moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut along this shape from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire cavity in the abscess is emptied, use old cotton to fill the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal with ointment as necessary until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, perform it as we have said in cutting out scrofulas, and if the wound becomes a cavity, apply caution as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is torn and the skin is sealed over it, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with an open vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows this about it [the artery], then the abscesses will be long-lasting;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it with your hands, if it feels dislocated; and if it is due to the vein, it should be reasonably displaced in appearance;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the bones and near angles or neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, the iron cure must be avoided, and so should it be for those with head problems, and in those swollen with an artery, they must be punctured through the skin lengthwise;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then cut open the wound along one edge, and carefully separate the artery from the membranes, until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert an awl under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread for two inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then insert a probe between the two ligaments until it reaches the abscess and separate the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then apply the cure that soaks a beech-wood bowl until the ligament is swollen.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat him with salve until he is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is large, you must apply the salve to the entire skin surrounding it.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle underneath the skin you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one doubled thread ready so that you can pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I told you, or sew it with one of the two halves of the thread between the two shoulders.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the thread has passed through, press another needle underneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four inches;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then press the abscess so that the excess comes out, then cut off the pus and leave what is tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat it with liniments and poultices until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	From the abscesses of the limbs
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in arteries and veins, they come in nerves when injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	This often happens in the shoulders and knees and in all limbs with joints, which is severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it occurs in multiple forms of pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, but it is not throughout the body, but under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it should be immobilized from all sides, neither going forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and one who is in the joints should not be covered by iron: perhaps it would cause contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And if it is on the head or forehead, flatten the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, hold them with forceps and strike at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, suspend it on a hook, peel it off, then drill and stitch the wound closed, and let it heal until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; there are some small ones and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw one man who had two bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had a thin root, and were split open, and moisture flowed out of them continually.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found and weighed eighteen ounces in one, and five pounds in the other. The incisions show that if you look at the patient, they are moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if the wound is deep and wide, and in your presence the fire cautery is needed. For there are often excessive bleeding during slicing, and if it overwhelms you, hasten to use the cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient trembling and afraid of the incision with iron, take a good-made thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then hold it (the affected part), and do not stop applying pressure on the bandage until it feels the pain, and the joint starts to work; and if the roots are large, then be careful when pushing at the same time due to the abdomen, but you can easily push half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not press on the tumor which is of a dark color and poor sensation and liquid discharge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess hardened, and I will come to the treatment of this scrofula later.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the thigh (or leg) is injured
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the wound or cut on the thigh (or leg) is caused by cautery of an injury or incision, and it is above the belly and in some of the thighs, as happens in other routes, or from blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is beforehand, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If it is by the route of cautery and by the exit from the bowel, then the appearance of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the bursting of an intestine, then it is more diverse. When pressure is applied to it with the hands and it collapses, then returns, and in some cases if it is sutured, and greatly swells at the entrance of the wound, and due to heavy work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter, and it opens easily when you press it with your hand, do not force it; and if it is blood, it opens with these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are pierced according to a certain amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	If it is due to windiness, it is suitable for touching. The signs to look for are whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you allow the healing to take place. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the abscess, you should command the patient to strain his anus, and stretch it out straight, then apply heat all around the abscess;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then you command him to lie quietly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	Then go around the joint that you have signed with all the splint.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then spread half of the abscess on top to the entire great spoon.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it with a strong thread or a strong silk cord tightly and let the patient hold it closed.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open half of the abscess spread over the cord, and push your index finger inside and search for the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it tied up with a cord, untie it, and push the intestines out of the abdomen through the incision.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, take hold of it at its thickest part, and squeeze out the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein becomes contracted, go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two fine threads, and insert the needles around what you have made in a cross shape that you make perforated.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then press the abscess four fingers above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it for as long as possible, and let the dead flesh rot away by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you strike when it is softened and breaks, then you treat what is necessary, and cover the wound as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound of what is necessary, and bind it up.
dou chancre	the boil
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likeness of scab, and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid iron cure; and we say that the scab originates in marriage, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when scabs are in a place where it can be shaved like a scab that is on the mamelas, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it should all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not good to approach it, for I never knew anyone to heal it; no one ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him purge if he has evident repletion, then shave the patient.i. one good piece of skin to do the work; then shave the scab or abscess, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts leaving nothing remaining; and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the discharge of blood makes you opposite to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is stopped from bleeding; then cure it with other means until it is healed.
de ydropisie	dropsy (medical condition)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division that the similarities of edema are like idropisie; and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only eclites exposed; and no iron should be used in these two likenesses: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this likeness of edema called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not improve, look to see if the patient is weak or has other disease besides edema, such as an inflamed abdomen and similar things; do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease except edema alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work in this way:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Place the patient right on your lap, and the assistant presses the abdomen from below to bring the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula as shown in this form: And it should be sharp at two ends. But it should not be so deep that it reaches the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce or bruise it:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look to see if the edema is attached towards the intestines: if it is, you must make an incision below the bladder two fingers' breadth straight across from the handle; and if the edema is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the bladder two fingers; and if it is due to a blockage, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie over the incision so that the superfluidities do not run to that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and push it, and place your hand all over the spatula between the skin and the gristle as much as the size of a nail or in which it fits; then pierce the gristle until the spatula comes to the joint which is the joint of the thumb, then pull it out, and put this instrument here that you see: It resembles a thin silver chain, and is made of bronze or light iron, and has a small hole on one side. On three sides, there are four holes; on two sides, two; and on one side, one; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top (of the thumb), there is the nerve. So when the instrument comes to the joint, then you hold it up now on the instrument; then empty either half or a third part of it, because if you see more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient might die from resolution of their spirit due to the weapon, or they fall down unconscious, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to its strength and according to the patient's condition and pulse; then pull the instrument and hold the joint, and it is now held for the cautery that stops the holes on the gristle, of which I have spoken earlier. You pierce in this manner; then you use the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw out a small amount of the joint liquid:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this every day and avoid overeating until it recovers but has a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and leave much water, cure it with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint it with wine; and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Stopping the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	There are never born children who do not have foreskin on their penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place. If this happens immediately, puncture a very thin spatula according to this form: then put a thin piece of cloth under the foreskin and hold it in place for 2 to 4 days until the child wants to urinate, at which point the cloth should be removed, and urination allowed; and by chance, it is not necessary to do so because the urine that comes out does not close the opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	If the bladder of one who has a small stone is treated with a plug of lead as previously mentioned, it will expand. Those who do not have a stone in its place are weakened, because no one is born who has the stone at the head of the penis; therefore, they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up; and they cannot enjoy sex because the matter cannot reach the marris (the opening of the urethra), and it is a harmful disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The manner of work is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the penis and the buttocks positioned as the end of a feather, so that the stone can fall into the bladder where it should be; and beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the wound and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Many times this albathe appears in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of the flesh; among them are malignant and non-malignant. You must take them one by one with a .i. oncine subtil (probably referring to tweezers), and crush and clean them all. Then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it, and treat it with diafinicon ointment until it heals."
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	"If the albathe is malignant, of a putrid color and spreading, it requires cauterization. After you crush it, if the albathe is within the penis and has both internal and external parts, first remove the albathe that is inside. Once removed, treat the outside. Because when treating them together, there is no assurance that the parts of the penis will not be pierced, causing blackness and corruption in its length and breadth; it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted. Then lie it on a plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from the peel of pomegranate rind and other substances, then treat it with other medicines until it heals."
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	"If there is bleeding, apply the lunar cauterization as follows: The cautery should be in two forms together: for bleeding and corruption. If the parts of the penis are corrupted and retreat, it is necessary that you lead or make a canal from the penis and make the patient urinate. When the hairs reach the head of the penis (which happens to those who have not been circumcised), or it happens due to an injury or abscess, then you must shave it with one instrument having teeth, until the ligaments are released, and free the parts of the penis from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a difficult matter to discuss this, you should make an incision with a lancet about one span from the tip of the vein and skin; then press carefully between two fingers, and put a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water on it immediately, so that it does not swell up again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the same as other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own free will and specifically for infants, it is necessary that we make the best and most straightforward work to save them.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	I wanted the largest part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day, and with forces, and in all cases, a newborn; however, the foreskin was too thick, and perhaps it healed over the top and delayed healing below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	If it is covered again, the pain is doubled, and at the healing of the member's tip, it is not assured; and in the trimming of the nail, perhaps the iron slips, ruins the work, and many times it heals so that there is no need for trimming, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the amputation that is made to all the limb of thread I found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally all the time; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and in the first work, it is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not tie the thread around him except for attaching it to the rod only, and then let him play in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then place him straight between your hands and position the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the tools; then press your hand against the rod and blow or cough, and pull it up until the joints of the rod are in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie the wound signet with a double thread, then tie a thread under one piece to another thread; and hold it at the second knot to the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two threads, then remove the core quickly and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood coagulate drop by drop, for it is clotted; and sprinkle powder on top and over the powder put a cloth dampened with a mixture of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil; leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another remedy until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the strength for healing is as follows: the two cheeks should be tender and thin, and the cheeks should be equal in size to a hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in healing is when the intestines are cut during incision; therefore, it must be extended to the fingernail, so that the wound is made deeper; and it should be cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, use pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass more than three days, and that which is below the vein becomes swollen, leave it until the abscess subsides, and gently lance it; cut if you can move it, but avoid the part of the vein; this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the limb with things under swollen wounds using the powders that we have said or mentioned treating, and if you cut too deeply it will go up, but do not worry; heal it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or a swelling, or frozen water, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by a stone in the bladder or urethra, then you must make the patient lean on his knees; put the feet on the back, extend the abdomen from above the lower back, and hold the patient as firmly as possible; and then apply pressure to the bladder area above the stone to expel it.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the equipment called "syringe", whose form is: it should be made of thin, light silver tube, like a bird's quill; and the cavity should be one and a half palm lengths, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method for the discharge of urine is that you take one double thread, tie one end to the head with a piece of linen or cotton, and push the head through the syringe with the thread inside; and fill the excess of the linen up to the head of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and put egg white on the bladder and penis moistened with oil and olive oil and cold water; and make the patient sit on one seat, and rub the bladder and penis with oiled and olive oil and cold water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and make the patient feel as if he is urinating until he fills the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide through which it goes is twisted; then the thread is tied to all the linen piece by piece, and the urine follows the linen, then remove the linen, and correct the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the doctor should repeat the syringe process until the bladder is empty and the patients are relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorchings or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there and you see it distill liquids and medicines, use all the instrument called "clepsydre" and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed with three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the upper part should be shaped so that the medicine can flow freely from the opening, stopping the water if possible, and adding more when needed;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see that your medicines are thrown into the bladder, put the head of the cucurbit in the moisture, and draw out slowly what is inside; if you draw out the moisture from the cucurbit, then push the drawing forcefully in again; the moisture will enter the cucurbit and will come to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	This is the form of a subtle enema, which is used to cleanse the bladder. Here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or lead and has the head raised above one hand or a loop; under this a linen cloth is placed; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture that you intend to use for cleansing the bladder. Then tie the moistened bladder between two hands with a strong double thread, and heat one end of the bladder on fire. Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand above the bladder so that all the moisture goes towards the bladder until the patient feels the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one does a syringe, and put inside it oil, moisture, and water, and tie it in the instrument; do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone implanted in the rain, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work in size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water jump from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; it opens a passageway, increases the pain of the patient greatly, pierces it many times, and then binds it; and much of these jumps cause foundation; and the healing of children is light until they reach the age of 4, but it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is at the middle age for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often blocks the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sinks upwards sometimes with the help of gravity; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his hips, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch it with your hand.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the body, hurry up to cut it above the stone. And if it does not fall down by itself, moisten your left index finger, if the patient is weak or old, or use oil, if the patient is a young man; and push it into its foundation, search for the stone, when you feel it with your finger, push it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and push it out where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the cutting is done; then push the spatula covering it, as it is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make an incision between the scrotum and the foundation, not on the midline but along the left side of the scrotum; and let it be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be at its base or foundation, and let the cut be wide externally and narrow internally according to the size of the stone, not too large:
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance, if the foundation presses it must jump without effort; and know that there is a stone or an angle, edge: it is curved to come out; and if it is soft like a plum and round, whose opening is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	Then make the cut larger if it has angles and margins; and if it does not jump, then you must strain upward with pliers that are like a limer at the head to force the stone to stay in place; or you can push an instrument subtle and curved at the head beneath it. And if you cannot maneuver it so, widen .1 inch with a chisel, and if it is not cut, strain it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there are more than one stone, then push the largest one at the bladder neck first, then hit it, then pull it, and the smaller ones after if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes immediately through where the joints cannot be sealed; but nonetheless, try to extract, or break apart with pliers, as much as you can pull it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, hold it closed, and place a damp linen cloth in oil and wine on it, or in olive oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then raise the patient's head on his neck, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you remove it (the dressing), wash the wound well with oil and water, then apply a healing ointment of diaphinicon and basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	If an abscess or erosion comes in the wound and congelation of blood forms in the bladder and urine is retained in this manner: without delay put your finger in the wound, and draw out the blood, for if it remains, the bladder will corrode and perforate.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then clean the wound of pus and of any dirt and linen, and assist in every possible way that you can while it heals; and it is necessary that you bind the thighs together for her, and apply the medicine on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small and it is led by the rod and driven in, and urine cannot pass; heal it as I tell you now, cut it many times, or excuse yourself from the cutting by this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron fork of this form and sharpened at four angles with one tine:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft of the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently push the awl into the shaft, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl slowly towards your hand in the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes soon, press your hand on that which remains inside the shaft of the stone within the bladder. If it is soon broken, it will jump out with the urine, and the patient will be healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone and another one above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, untie the thread, and clean up the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that a stone is embedded in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a serious matter, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is because it cannot be found a woman who knows well how to uncover herself, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	The third reason is that perhaps it cannot be found a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman's body is deeper than the stone in a man's, therefore it requires a more profound incision, and great fear arises from this.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you must proceed with this, then you should take a skilled midwife, and if one cannot be found easily, do not hesitate to use a chaste and subtle maiden; and present a wise woman of life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to perform what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And pay close attention to whether the woman is a virgin; then you must insert your finger or foundation and search for the stone; and if you find it, you should press it beneath your finger, and advise her to bear down with her hand on the bladder formed.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If you find it, you should make her push it little by little from the bladder entrance to beneath, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the mons pubis, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that place; do not move your finger above or below the stone, and cut it with a small cut.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then push the right hand into the thigh, if you feel the stone, open the wound so that the stone can come out, and know that there are many types of stones: small or large, smooth or rough, long or round, and those with grooves. Know their appearances to recognize them.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the bone protrudes, set vitriol in powder on it and hold for an hour until the bone is cauterized; then return to your work, until the stone is fully expelled, and have instruments as I told you for the extraction of the stone for men to assist you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If the bone protrudes, and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bind with strips and bandages, do not resume work, leave the stone and do not draw it out for fear of killing the patient; then care for the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the wound heals over, then return to your work until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of a flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous hernia is nothing but the accumulation of moisture or pus, which is beneath the cartilage of the belly button, containing the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the navel between the white syfab that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this hernia is due to a weakness that comes from the navel, and the material spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the navel, and this moisture can have many colors: either a reddish-yellow color, or without red, black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is white as we have said, it is an abscess, i.e., a long pouch like the figure of an egg, and its corners do not open because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	If it has moisture in its very covering, it is an abscess with part of the egg, and for this reason they think that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the corners and the white as we have said, one can feel it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, prove it thoroughly in all the wound, so that its form is as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the intrusion, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be anesthetized to our ability and the filling of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing slightly high, and put much linen under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then lie him on his left side, and command the minister to lie on his right, and stretch out the rod to one of the two ribs at the shoulders.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula, hit the skin at the shoulders along its length until the hilt, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the shoulders up to the white of the bone, and peel it off delicately according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the syphax completely full of water at least a large hole, and drain all the water, and then put your fingers in, and close the syphax from above; do not touch the core of the bones, but only the syphax; cut through it completely or in pieces delicately the edge of it, for if you don't cut it properly, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the egg (yolk) jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the syphax operation; then assemble the two bones of the core into a stitch, then heal it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting blood flow; then cut the bone to the entire suspension, and drain the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if a wound has been assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first equally, then squeeze out the blood and put moistened linen soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put other moistened linen in wine and oil, and place it on the two ends, and place woolen blankets over it, and bind it all with cord according to this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two woolen blankets made of coarse linen in this shape and sew them together at the belt of the braces. One of the heads should be placed on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the handle; and the other head at the two corners, and tighten the rest all in the brake loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes medicine is this ramice of cautery in the place of iron cut, and you take one subtle cautery culteller, and press it against the skin, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery in this form, and pierce the abscess once, and scrape it with this subtle hot cauter.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And press in all ways that you can until it is cooked through; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more beneficial; and pay attention to the flow of blood, and take care with incisions.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if no thing happens contrary to you, or abscess swelling or flow of blood or anything else, heal what happens contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horribleness, introduce perforation, as I tell you, and it shall be that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the anus contains water,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Make the patient sit on a raised seat. Then perforate the abscess in the lower part, as wide as a finger's span, and make the perforation long along the body; and let the openings be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on top of it, tie it, and let the remaining moisture drain away, then heal it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the white cloth does not allow the moisture to drain out of the wound's mouth, then you must insert a feather or instrument used for draining abscesses, whose form is as described earlier; widen one or two holes in the wound, check that the pus returns, and collect it for seven months or so, and when it has collected as described earlier, and thus the patient passes his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of an abscess on the cheek
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this procedure, there is fear in many positions, which makes it seem to me that one should move (it).
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds or boils; it happens often in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be understood that it comes from excessive sour and hot fluid spreading to the boils, or from blows;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body; it does not cause pain, and the abscess is severe.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes an abscess is hard and painful, of the same color, and once in a while comes from the artery or inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot swelling of the abscess when you press it with your hands.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and one should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	A person who is swollen from the vein is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch of fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can easily perform surgery on this appearance, and on other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cords of the kidneys, then the egg rises to the top, and the white thread extends down from the yolk, and releases the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already softened with these characters born, then you must draw the egg and cut it,  \]   et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is within the abdomen or in one of its cavities, you must release all the contents and close it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the skin is torn at its base, you must sew it all up and extract the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, treat the wound with damp wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the cheek
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess covered by a swelling resembling a boil, with the softening of the skin.
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient groans loudly when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this disease is as difficult and dangerous as what was previously mentioned.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then push the suspension hoist for the legs towards your hands.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	Extend all the vessels that are near the penis and touch them with your fingers, then stretch them out properly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then take the sharp spatula wide across the vessels, exposing them until they are visible,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then cut each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then insert an awl where there is one thread doubled, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and tie it straight to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then hammer them evenly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as one does with other bowed joints, so that no pus leaks out from either side.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For this reason there is no harm and if pus comes from all the joints, then the abscesses must be drained.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the eye does not lose its moisture due to the incision of veins, it dries out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the fistula (a small abnormal passage or connection between two internal organs or vessels)
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrence of this hernia (a protrusion of an organ or tissue through the wall that contains it) is due to a section (cut or incision), or fistula, or the extension on the abdomen in the area of the groins, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture towards one of the sides.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this dislocation is either simple or extended, and these are the two types of dislocations that come from various causes: either by impact, jump, fall, lift of heavy burden, or similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs that it is of the extended simple dislocation are that they occur gradually over a long period and do not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal up to the depth because the simple dislocation follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of a hernia, which brings about sudden pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appear close to the skin, and this is due to the rupture of the intestine and the body cavity opening due to the hernia.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes, intestines come out of the circles and are held in place, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments that cause fear, therefore one must escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine with their hand inside in the wound, if they can reach it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then hold it by its neck between your hands and lift the thighs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch the belly upwards, and cut all the skin of the buttocks with long strokes.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert the index fingers of your hands into the lower back according to what you need to open the wound and make sure that the intestines can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the scrotum that is under the skin of the testicles, while the white scrotum is hard and exposed from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then insert your index finger into the scrotum, into the area between the white scrotum that is under the skin of the testicle and the second white scrotum;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove what is behind the testicle, and between the second white scrotum; then move your right hand inside the scrotum, and lift the white scrotum up towards your left hand, and raise the testicle along with all the white scrotum towards the stomach.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and order the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and untie what is in front behind the scrotum;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	And if your fingers feel anything wrapped around the intestines or hardened white matter, and you find anything, push it into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Take an awl or a thick needle made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the white matter (after the skin of the cocks), after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads left.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then bind them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the white matter (as we have said that is below the skin of the cocks) with a strong thread of 2 parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the fingers, and tie them together in two parts, so that no servants who nurse them can enter, unless an abscess cloth comes.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	Then make the lacing following the first lacing long for two fingers' breadth of that one, and after these two laces leave a gap of one finger's width beneath the knee.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after that all, according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the knee, as much as necessary, and bend it, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then bring dampened wool in oil and place it on wounds, and apply the cord as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes white areas are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to the fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens often, and leave the cord until it falls off by itself; if it takes too long to fall off, you can remove it with warm water, and apply what has been said, until it falls off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy I have never seen anyone dare to cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients say that it is made like a remedy that consists of vinegar, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put it in the middle and heal the abscess of those who are affected by it, until the vessels bleed; and heal it as we have said before, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	At times rot comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens the joints; and no internal organs are sent to the anus, and if any are, it is little, and repair them every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	Moreover, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or syphac grows, as long as internal organs are expelled.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	This happens due to the spreading of syphilis which is in the groin, as we have said, because it spreads, then the joints are softened and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	And if the treatment is by cautery, as previously stated; sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	The patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swollen place along the length according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	Then extract the pus that is underneath the skin, then take the iron and place it on the visible part of the abscess;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	And press at the lower part of the abdomen, then count the two levels appearing near the navel, and count both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the navel, and do not cover or extend the siphon or any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramie of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it with the treatment for wounds. And when you cover the threads, if the wound heals and the wound is healed;
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The siphon is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are made in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin on the buttocks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the buttocks becomes soft in some men, because the charms within are softened and there is a visible liquid; and it is necessary when one sees it to cure, that you make the patient lie on his back, and strike the softened skin on the natural skin; then bring together the two lips to a stitch, and if you see, sew first the superfluous skin softened to 3 or 4 firm stitches; then strike between the stitches, and the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed, and let the thread seep through.
dou chastrement	The punishment for a crime in this time period was severe and often involved physical pain or torture. In the case of a serious offense, a person might be subjected to various methods of corporal punishment such as flogging, branding, mutilation, or even execution by burning at the stake. Here is the first sentence to translate:
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	1. Know that castrations are mentioned in our law, and I would rather not speak of them in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: the first is that a person should respond when asked about castration and its cure; and the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, pigs, and other animals. I say therefore that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit on hot water until its genitals become soft; then we seize them with our hand, holding them until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are of two kinds in men: the first kind has both openings as a woman, with hair and sometimes urinates through them. The second kind is in women, who have something above the penis like a spear and two openings. The treatment for men and women is to cut around the genitals, and cure them like other wounds; however, in the second kind of man whose urine leaks through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	The evacuation (of blood) occurs from the incision of the artery, (and) from the abscess, (and) in the treatment of wounds, (and) in the extraction of arrows, (and) in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	The tentigene is a wart situated on a natural part, which becomes too ugly to look at; some women have one as large as a hand, and it is a disease. You must dye the superfluous growth of the tentigene with your hand or onions, and strike it lightly; do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with another cure until it heals; and at another wart that grows from the mouth of a woman, and applies, and possibly jumps off, and is similar to a cow's udder, and for this reason they called it the "disease of the cow" by the ancients. You must strike it as we have said with the tentigene, and treat it until it heals.
de erratique	In some cases, a patient may develop an unusual growth or lump that appears suddenly, moves around on its own, and is often painful. This condition was known as "erratique" in Old French. It could be caused by internal injuries or diseases and required careful observation and treatment to prevent worsening of the condition.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	1. The nature of a woman is not discerned or small; it may be inherent or accidental due to illness that comes about; it may be due to adultery, subtle semen from the penis, or thick semen in the vagina, and it occurs either during sexual intercourse, in the thighs, or elsewhere; they should avoid conception, pregnancy, and flowers growing; and the knowledge of this is by looking at the woman's face. If the discharge appears near the hands or the genitals, then place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread open; then form the semen, when it becomes ripe, cover it with linen and oil-soaked cloth, and have the woman rest daily so that it does not stick. And if the semen is subtle and close to the two leves (testicles), hurry and do as follows: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, her legs spread open; then form the semen, when it becomes ripe, cover it with linen and oil-soaked cloth, and have the woman rest daily so that it does not stick. And if the semen is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula resembling a mirto leaf. If the discharge is of blood, suspend it on an onion and cut; have medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with many eggs; then bring a wide cloth bandage, so that the wound does not stick; and in this way let it heal for a long time, and bring a dry linen tent; then cure other ailments until it is healed. And when in marriage there comes discharge of blood, it should be covered as described above, except if it is an inflammation that has been treated with cautery. For the inflammation that has been treated with cautery in the vagina, one should not touch to heal.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. "Emorroydes are openings of veins which without care are usually not noticed, and when emorroidles become old, they swell; and as I have said in the division [of this work], their resemblance and signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment. I say that emorroides and the swelling, when they are fully formed inside the body, cannot be felt by touch, unless cured with iron. Those which are at the mouth of the body can be felt, and these can be treated. Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the swelling with pliers at its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense, etc.; then place her feet exposed for an hour, then immerse it in cold water; and if there is any blood flow, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, apple bark, wild madder root, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice to apply on her back. If it bleeds, that's good. If not, make her wear hot water bottles on her back and under the breasts without piercing them; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or marshmallow with old wine, and apply hot linen at the site. And when the abscess subsides, treat the site with ointment until it heals; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a small rough stone, and it should be covered as I have said for the swelling; and then treat it until it heals."
des apostemes de la marris	openings or abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	There are many types of abscess that may occur in the anus, such as canker sores and hot abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases I have mentioned previously. Therefore, I will explain here the treatment for a hot abscess in the anus, which is not one of those that are filled with pus. And if you want to know the procedure for iron-making, check if the abscess is acute at its onset, and full of heat and fever, and turns red when touched. Then do not hurry to puncture it, but let it mature until the pain subsides; then make the patient sit on one seat, or two small seats so that he can lean, support his back with his hands, and spread his legs apart; his knees should be bent and tied firmly with a strong rope; then apply the instrument used to open the anus, as follows: When you bring this instrument, ensure that it does not enter too deeply into the anus, and does not cause pain or bleeding to the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with fabric so that the instrument does not hurt; and place the mouthpiece on top, and mark the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and it becomes soft in your hand, cover it with a sponge soaked in rose oil or green dry oil; place the sponge inside the wound towards the depth of the anus, and place fabric over the anus and over the handle clean cloth moistened with vinegar or cooked long-rooted herbs such as aristolochia. After two days, apply ointment to it until it heals; sometimes the anus and the wound are cleaned with water and honey, then vinegar or long-rooted herbs are cooked, and then return to the ointment. And if the wound heals back into the anus, be careful not to burn with iron, but treat it as we have said previously.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the natural figure of childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman in labor and desires to urinate; then hasten the birth of the child; know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it issues from below the head, and the second one comes with it; and when you see these signs, gently press the woman's abdomen so that the child comes quickly; for when it descends onto its head, the second one follows with it, and the husband cleans himself of his waste through good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or the body or the head, or the hands, or on the belly or the backside, and it is turned by chance onto its neck, and in other bad figures; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and clever in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes onto its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with great effort, and the strength of her virtue is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then the midwife puts the small spatula between her hands in the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And cut the second bone, and strike its nail so that the moistures which are within come forth; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clisterize the woman with muscillaige of fenugreek with oil of sisament; then make her take and vomit from condysi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus the child will come forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	The issue of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out from its feet, you must push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it gently here and there, until it is equal.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then take one piece and stretch it gently here and there.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it can jump up to the knees, when commanded to seize, and makes it vomit from disgust;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it is gently turned little by little.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, take musk-root juice of height, oil of sage, and melted resin, and grind everything in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	And apply the ointment made of woman's nature upon it.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	Then make her sit in a cold bath until below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she has been softened, make one collar of myrrh, place it beneath her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a chair, then make her cough and hold her mouth and nose, and press gently on the belly, for the infant will soon come out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the birth of the child on its thighs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this way, place the birthing forceps hand by hand.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then rest on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and lie it on one bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	fold its hands hand by hand, and then take hold of the hands above, and push the hips down, until it is aligned below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	And if the child does not jump, take its feet and bend it forward, then bend it upward, then place your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and order the woman to catch the child as it comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the delivery of the child that comes out with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to find a way to bring back the hand;
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If it cannot be returned [to its place], then lift up the woman and walk away.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on a bed and spread out her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then administer the mustard plaster as I have told you;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if it does not give birth [to the dislocation], make her sit on a chair or seat, then study how to reset the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And cause it to give birth according to its natural shape, and make her vomit, and command her to hold on until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the baby's head by its neck, and spread your hands, and turn your face towards the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	You must hold the baby's foot gently, then twist it slowly, and pull it out lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equal [the joint], put above it a strong mustard plaster made with high altitude and oil, as we have said, then command that it moves little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	And when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and command her to take hold of it; then make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way, treat the second [injury].
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When this kind of inflammation comes on in this manner to any other [part of the body], press it with your nail until the moisture is voided.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the infant lies on its face and neck, press down on the belly, so that it is not held back, and the infant dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then push the child inwards, as much as you need to, and command the woman to take care of herself once.
adonques si istra legierement.	gently draw it out.
de l’issue des gemelz	of twin births
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange, and it happens frequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twin births are rare and do not survive very often.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and the sperm that conceives them is linked to filth.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And sometimes it returns to its natural state as a sow gives birth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it emerges violently, as we have said, and the bailiff is skilled, and do quickly and gently what she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do as is appropriate to save life.
de plusors enfans	of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	At times they are formed in the womb: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen; and all of them are fully formed like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	It is necessary that the bailiff knows this, for sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	follow as it is required.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you cure the woman of the dead or unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	you must know if the woman is of pure virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	The woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	And the minister should shave the woman's head in two parts, or tie her down to the bed so that she is not treated in childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the wife's mouth with moist oils mixed with myrrh and musk, and anoint her husband's hands with these oils and these myrrhs.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then push it gently into the socket, then search for one that fits, which is suitable.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care if the bones are broken on top of their head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you pierce the joint with a needle or its neck or mouth or throat or under the chin or in the armpit or near the sides.
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	And if the dislocation is on the feet, push or pierce it and bring the bones together in the middle;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	Then it is necessary to stretch the skin around it with the right hand, and place the curved instrument between the two of the left hand, and push gently with the whole hand, and pierce the skin in any one of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches an empty state;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert [a needle or awl] opposite another one, or the third if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then move it equally from one side to the other, so that they [the extractions] move out, and sharpen the awls so they hold, as shown in the following form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	If there remains a part, press some oil onto the blades of your fingers and apply them to that part, and pull the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it remains not at all, place this splint or higher up the limb, and do so until it goes completely away.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	When one hand is in front of the other, and cannot be returned due to strain.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	you should wrap it with one cloth, until it goes completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then press on the joint of the sole or at the heel, and you must do this with the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's thigh is large and swollen at the outlet or has a hard head assembled.
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, and press and extract the sharp one (arrow/stone).
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you grind it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And do the same with infants naturally born with large heads;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	Then draw out the bones with forceps;
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	And if the head leaps out and is pulled by force, it must be cut open to let out the moisture that is causing the problem.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	If it cannot come out, break it into smaller pieces where you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if it [the patient] is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If the swelling is on [the patient's] feet, the reduction will be easy and the alignment towards the mouth of the bladder will be easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it [the swelling] is narrow in the belly or thigh, then you must draw it out with one cloth wrap around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut open the belly or thigh, until the moisture that is there flows.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	And if other members are dislocated, and the head remains.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the nail of the thumb is struck deep into the wound of the wife, and it is pulled out until it reaches her mouth.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then insert one or two fingers, and pull forth.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	And if the wife's mouth is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come, it is not necessary to force it.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	It is necessary to administer moist and fatty things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And apply plasters, and soften it in warm water and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the bone is on its surface, and you can make it even, apply what we have said in the previous step.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if there is no ability to do so, break it into pieces and leave nothing of the remaining tissue.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring him what we said in the dressing of abscesses that come to the marriage;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, let it be stopped with binding, and bring other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whom the fetus had died, then another was consulted on that case, and the death of the other fetus was prevented.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I make the wound, and into it I insert bones, until the woman is better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman stays long in such a state, and then a little pus comes out from the place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have never heard this chapter except because, when the master finds something strange, he knows what to do about it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the husband back to his place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the shape of the lever, to which books are applied; and at two turns, the heads of the two links.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	The horns should be thinner than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the barrel of the pipe should be one finger's width wide, and the edges of the arms one finger-width, and of long a half palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two limbs should be two joints of the same bone, which are tightly joined in one and the other, half a palm length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	And this pair of joints are pushed into the mouth of the jaw to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pliers.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	And say to the two shoulders, as you see, of one span in length, and two fingers in width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	And when you see to open the wife with all the tools, make her sit on one bed, her feet hanging and legs apart;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then push the two shoulders together in the woman, and hold the head of the tool beneath her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with all the tools, just as you have done with pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the anvil, until the bail makes what it desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These tools are all covered and have similar shapes; and when the smiths have equipped them, they work more quickly, and at a greater height for men because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disdain the tool that you have not equipped, as its necessity is not easily excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is held back during birth, you must instruct the woman to retain her breath, and then make her vomit with discomfort, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If she jumps because of this, it is good (or correct).
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it is not so, take a small pot and make a poutice or cover and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a tube or pierced pot lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the patient.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	And hold the plaster until the vapor enters the patient's mouth; then make him vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one suddenly moves quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	If it remains after this treatment and does not heal as expected, command the woman to moisten her left hand with oil of cumin or mustard plaster, and then put it on naturally.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And she seeks the second joint; and when she has found it, if she takes it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the husband does not resist during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes and dislocates itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the husband's mouth is opened wide, we have said the cure of emptying and fumigating with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if there is no such thing as we have said, make sure you do not pull too much.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the woman's womb, you tie him to the woman's thigh, then apply a clisterium ointment four-fold.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it is possible to retrieve and replace [the object], it will pass; but nonetheless, when she can do so, if a bad smell comes from the stomach and the head, it will poison the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, necessary are suitable fumigations for this [case]: no ancient has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain flowers and secondary ones, is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles glass in shape, with the head being thin in the nature and the large sides over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be over the coals, and let the tinder burn until it is consumed, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to bore through the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by some subtle means.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Then you must have the obstruction pierced with the correct tool, and not with a sharp splint, and ensure that it does not touch the flesh.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put moist linen soaked in wine and oil on top of it, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not come out again, place a plug of wood and leave it for several hours, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed in the room.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it must be covered. If it is inflamed, as we have said, the bandage of cloth should be used.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from below the base are swellings, and those that come out of the sides of it, or in between the two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If it has a fistula or more than one; and when the swelling is old, if it opens up, then add moisture to make it white or thin pus.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by those who have them or an evacuation or windy passage when the patient has an evacuation, and accidentally urinate in it.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas pierce up to the bladder and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the knee joint and the nut of the thigh.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the fistula piercing through to its foundation, and not piercing entirely through:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	it is that you insert your index finger or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if it has twisting, then insert a thin linen or horsehair tent, or hair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger:
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	And if you do not feel it, neither pus nor putrid matter nor worm comes out, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	(Note: This line is a continuation of the previous one and I am translating both lines together in one English translation)
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	If the fistula is open all the way to the bladder or the conduit of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced all the way to the knee joint, then the tendon comes to the surface:   (Note: I have combined two lines into one translation as they are related)
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If it is not twisted and the source of pain is around, then it is indeed broken, and no medicine or ointment has any effect on it.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	In these Persian fistulas there is no cure but pain and futility of foolish physicians who interfere with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not Persian and not old, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced,
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his stomach.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert a tent of arrows, or of planks if there is curvature, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you insert your finger to indicate.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then you will know that the tent has penetrated; and it should be discovered where your finger feels the sore or the flesh, then you will know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it is not worked, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should say, however, that one can heal some, but it happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and help is given, if it is heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and put everything hot in the fistula until it reaches the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as long as you know that these charred fibers should be burned, which are similar to a feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	And then, cure the swollen tents with butter, until the heat subsides, then apply a soothing and healing ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it heals like this, that is good. But if it cannot be healed in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters but does not penetrate to the base, and between your finger and the tent, place a thick covering of fat or sycamore, and you see the fistula beneath the cover with care;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If the edge of the fistula begins, push it forward towards the opening, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the opening.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	When the opening is released and closed again, find those charred pieces that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh grows over it, cut between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal herbs.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cauteries have two good effects: firstly, the removal of charred tissue around the wound, and secondly, stopping the flow of blood and drying up moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then heal the tents of wet cloths in butter or in boiled cheese, until the wounds are closed, and let the charred parts burn in the butter/cheese.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then heal the wound with hard charred medicine, and these are dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes to the full extent of its foundation and is removed from the body, push your thumb or finger into it and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension and between two is the cloth or the linen or leather, or it is close to being pierced, there should not be any other way than a faith and hope-giving method through the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if you boil it, then treat it as we have described before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep that you cover the holding element for the foundation, let the effusions come out through it voluntarily.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then heal (it), as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	In case it becomes healthy (the wound), then remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the base, either by tenting or using another instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then disinfect the charred flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then study to heal the wound and to retain the fistula on the side farther from the base; it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you bite the tip into the fistula, and it is where it touches the foundation beneath the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and take a piece of parchment pierced at its head in this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and put one twisted thread through two, and push the parchment along with the whole thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it [the joint] is dislocated at the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that one, so you pierce your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two shoulder blades, and hold one against the other, and leave it for 1 or 2 days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and keep it immobile until the threads meet the bones that are between them, and become joined.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce itself, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For you should not treat the fistula too deeply by cauterizing it, and then heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spur-like spathulum used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and slices.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, not because one should not strike what one should not copy, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are within the foundation, like a piece of resin, and there are both small and large ones; and in the skin, blood flows out immediately.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more of them, they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And always or a little of sour lemon juice or a little blood, and it has the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those with it within their foundations, since you instruct the patient to strain for urination in rooms, until the foundations pass, and this appears in the sons.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	hasten it, and pierce it with pincers or hold it with your nail, then strike at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the hinges cannot be held by their moisture, take a small cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	And draw them to your hands, then strike them, and pour some hot powders upon them that serve as a substitute for cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as described in the "cautery" chapter, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot be removed, clisterize the patient with biting and harsh cleansers to cleanse the area where the foundation is located, so that it can come out easily.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	If the patient applies oil to himself, and his hairs are deeply rooted in the foundation, then the treatment is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And it is that you grasp them with your nail or tweezers, strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	You should make the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two threads below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is wide, make the stitch tight, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one for the blood flow.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation, and place it, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it drain until it stops, and when it is dried, heal it with ointment and other treatment, until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	With the fire or foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying of feces in the intestines due to natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medicine is not helpful.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary for you to peel the skin at the tip of a splinter or your fingernail, so that it does not get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it until it heals as required;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving more forcefully until it heals, and be peeled;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	The trembling (or shuddering)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Louse is a small pustule appearing before the body, and it travels throughout;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And sometimes the troutworm freezes (or paralyzes), and it is felt like death trembling throughout the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the remedy is that you take a cane from an ostrich feather or a strong goose feather and place it on the trembling (patient), until the circles contract the trembling completely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand along the entire cane until you cover the trembling entirely and push it into completely, and strengthen the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a cane of iron or steel following this form and be subtle underneath and train above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce [the area], for it should be held by the thumb, and it should be pressed. And if you wish, cauterize the trembling, as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	The form of the clyster (enema) is   ...
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is an enema made with silver or iron, or melted tallow or resin; and at times, small and large instruments are made according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those whom one treats in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cupping glass is both small and large, or the belly is tied in this manner:   (This seems to describe a tool used for cupping therapy.)
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an opening or the belly is tied, as you see, and the cheeks are pierced within; and at one side there are two holes, and in the other one.  (This seems to describe a design for the cupping glass.)
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	And let the stomach or man put the medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And at each hole there should be space of one inch, then push in each hole a strong thread of twisted cord in ten or fewer, and bind the stomach like a goat's pouch.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then smear (clisterize). This is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the ministers stretch out the patient's two hands together while he is completely visible, then remove the cloth, and wash the patient's legs at the surface.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	If the medication seems to come out, squeeze it as much as possible; and if it does not go away all at once, letting it stay for an entire night increases its benefit.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you treat the patient with a cloth for the disease of abdominal distention, and the medication seems to come out quickly, continue it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are fleshy or abscessed, it should be cleansed as gently as for an infant;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the gentle cleanse where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment for wounds; now we will tell you about hand treatments and medicines, according to their completion.  --> We have already mentioned the cure for wounds in the previous division; now we will tell you about hand treatments and medicines according to the process or method.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what kind they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that cause wounds are by piercing with a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or lance, mace or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, chest, abdomen, liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for every wound, and I shall begin with the simple wounds of the head, because it will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	And if it is a simple wound of the head and the bone is not broken, be careful that it is from an arrow or similar things, and the skin is torn all the way through and the wound is large.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt raising an abscess hot: if you do so immediately, clean the head wound itself whether it comes a little blood from the wound or opposite of the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	And the patient should evacuate himself of wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	If he does not want to purge (sainier), his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	And apply on the wound, if an abscess comes out, cotton wool soaked in rose oil or in vinegar steeped.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	If there is no abscess, then apply on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, here is a little powder that I will say later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the arrow has moved it, then apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	If the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressure, then stitch it up, as I will say for belly wounds, with sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound exposes the bone and pus, but only holds together by a little, press it; then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as boiled heads (testes) and wheat, also including peas and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or suspect rotten flesh not on the bone, press it all and throw away the pus, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a cord, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie it, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: you put in this powder which hardens as soon as the astringent has set it;
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of quicklime, and grind them finely together,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	apply the wound, and press it firmly until it drains well and joins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it tightly and leave it to heal, if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes this is done with quicklime only when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the sore has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved, most certainly do not put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but place some digested herbs or wheat flour made with water and honey on it until it swells.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	and if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it using fine pliers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And I will tell you after this about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	about the wound of the neck   (neck injury)
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs in the neck and it is simple, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve or the artery is cut.  (neck injury with damage to nerves/artery)
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, there is no other remedy than to let it heal and not put anything binding, for it harms nerves and makes them shrink;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed with mild soap, and mixed with rose oil, and also cooked in warm water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of similar manner, and always moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it with a bandage, then treat until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and swollen with pus, pierce or dig lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the arteries are cut and bleeding occurs, stop it, ligate it, and cauterize as needed;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut or the veins are severed, keep them closed so that the meat remains.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	tie up the vein above the throat of the neck, and do not touch the throat but place it back in its natural position;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then apply the traction method, and leave it for some days, then cure it with hot compresses until it heals.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	If the wound presses on the bone, break it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	If there are pieces of bone, pull them out if you can, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound festers.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	And let the joint be dislocated and aligned.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then cure it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if bubbles rise from the wound; therefore, know that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour or bind it for the blood that causes it to swell.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	return to the patient's heart and kill him;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	But apply an attracting ointment, and let it lie for two times per day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	And if you don't have ointment, put in the wound old cotton to draw out moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart, nor drawing of bowels with entrail does not occur;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see the good positioning, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with poultices and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	If it cannot heal, then open it, know that there is a fistula; cure it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple (not complex), then cure the part that is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has been pressed into the bone, take away pieces of it, be it a wound, and pull out the threads if they are drawn.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not drawn, let the wound fester, align the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, it is the judgement as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The breakage of the stomach
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the stomach is great, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	A large wound makes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude once in a while through it.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth more than a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because when one puts more points in (the body), if one does not put them in from end to end;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell soon enough that they feel the cold, if they are pushed more inwards,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And because it is more important to heal the midline wounds, because one rearranges the intestines back into their place for them rather than for others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the wound of the belly is in four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The two common wounds occur in the abdominal wound,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	And the suturing of other wounds on the body, as well as two other specific suturings, are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Moreover, they are more appropriate with the suturing of the belly, and I will explain one and then the other.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines is protruding,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	And a third thing is about resetting, which can be done in one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	For the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it up in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak a sponge or a piece of fine linen in warm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Or you cook in hot water with squill (squinant) and cypress (cipre) and thorn (spike).
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And soften the intestine until the inflammation is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And sometimes make this wine restraining, and it's good to soothe what swells for reduction of inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation spreading, if there is a raw intestine or a bad intestine that has been cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	Because this narrows the entrance to little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used for hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first cure is to grind the root;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	we should not cut it unnecessarily.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	And this is the instrument to split:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	slice within along the curvature and do not bend it, and observe its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is widened, and the intestines escape:
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you have the power, for it is necessary. (Note: The "car" here implies that the action of resetting is necessary, but not that the patient or someone else has the ability to do so.)
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	you must make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	And raise his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	If it is in the part beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	If he raises his head and his feet higher than the parts beneath:
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts:
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	If the broken part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And thus it is necessary to treat as I say in large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	In small wounds, use what is appropriate.
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then place a skilled and compassionate minister between your hands who will treat the entire wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	And gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of suturing.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you take one needle or more, according to the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	Then leave one inch of space from the edge of the wound and stitch with a needle having one strong thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	And pierce the two shoulders with the two sharp bones (of a splint or instrument).
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, as far as you make it penetrate that part.
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the two shoulders of the splint in four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then draw a double thread around the needle of two parts (i.e., twice),
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	Then assemble the two shoulders of the wound properly.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	And leave one finger space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did for the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you have need of the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is constricted;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles pierce all the flesh, while very thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Because they should be cut open;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not advisable to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not open and cut the wound before the joint;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	then pierce the head of the needles, so that it does not hurt the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	And place bands or cloths on the head of the arrows to keep them still,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them remain until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of stitching arrows is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it takes one or two arrows to do it.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common.
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you assemble the two shoulders of the hide and the two shoulders of the sack together with a needle having one strong, medium thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have sewn these four pieces together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you unravel the needle at the part where you began, in the way that cloaks are sewn.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And place a distance between each stitch the thickness of a small egg.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching should be for the man.
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sew a wound on the belly of a man.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound is more than one palm long,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and protrudes from the abdomen about two palms in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and was located within the belly,
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back the intestines when it had been twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had judged him that he would die, but this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure it with medicine, because at that time there was none available nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And apply old cotton above the wound twice a day, and wash it with honey water until it heals.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and thread from the outside to the inside part.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has passed through the core straight, if you find that the knot or stitch where you put the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	And make it pierce from the other side through the inner part up to where it protrudes.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the pilgrims sew fur,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave the seam once on one side, and take it up from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is as anyone does who joins two parts naturally together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the ends of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert an awl or the nearest thread end and pierce only that spot,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	And let the two cheeks (or sides) remain open;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part to the inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	with both cheeks (or sides) open;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inside, in two other cheeks (or sides) that are opposite each other.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the common method of stitching (or sewing).
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen said this word, and no one denies it.
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	One should sew the stomach with two needles, each having thread in it.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one should thrust one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	And know that when the hernia is within the abdomen,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	is the stitching more severe than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments for the wound are as follows for other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	And it is when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as soon as the arrows have moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then insert the arrow and tie it; then put powder rejuvenating flesh on top.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	if the arrow has moved it, then put some ointment on it that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and sew the flesh with thread, and bind the strips of linen cloth;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat the wound as others, while it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, put on it (the wound) as soon as it starts to discharge pus, old cotton.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it two times a day while it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need for other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	And if you doubt whether the wound will infect the main limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then wet a thin cloth lightly in warm oil or rose oil.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	then wrap it around the joints, and beneath the bones;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if pain or swelling occurs in the belly, and it often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if the clysters of black wine make it hot, and particularly when the swelling reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	And it is due to the planting of veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the worm jumps out from the wound, return it back like the intestines, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has turned into or black, you must cauterize the blackened part where blood does not flow from it.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	Then grip what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two shoulders hanging from the part below the wound towards the side to align the extraction when the arrow falls out, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	of the boil's rupture
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some men,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen a man pierced or gutted by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	And it became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, and from this came the discharge and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied remedy according to what I know, and did not stop refining it until it was healed, and the wounds sealed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw the wound sealing, I feared that the patient had something wrong in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	but he was not ill, but remained in better condition, and diet and drink;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	And they said to any experimenters that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take large thongs, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thongs have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it stretches its mouth above;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	And then grip the head (of the patient), and hold it so that it cannot dislocate.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	Then put another force after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely grasped;
et cout la plaie.	and stitch the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head (abscess) abscesses in the intestines, it causes no harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	And it can be tied with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal.
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this thread made of intestine which should be quite thin.
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	then tie the head of this thread (the intestine thread) with a fine linen cord twisted around it.
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine, and reset it in the wound.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	And this way of suturing wounds is not beyond faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no remedy or healing, except through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or...
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called "fistula."
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and likewise when it is closed and healed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the truth, a swelling lasting long and white, where there is no pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is as swollen as the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	And sometimes in a clear jump, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	Sometimes shallow, and other times deep;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is not only due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	It means, "This is to know, by the smallness of blood or heart;"
ou por sa malice;	And by its badness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or because there is hard flesh within, under the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too much pus;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	If the loosened joint is of bad quality matter, then [the following action is advised]:
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	and the medicine is not good in treating it;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	because corruption is a type of pestilence.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Because the property in that region causes slow digestion, and slows health, and naturally decays by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	There are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the divisions:
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And I will tell you how to treat a fistula made by manual work:
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Recall that fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are made in this way are difficult healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is any fistula that does not reach the level I have said, and you are confident of its cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And you shall recognize it (the dislocation), if you take a tent of beeswax or iron, if the fistula is straight, then insert it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a slender tent reed.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because reeds bend easily due to twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula is crushed in many places and you cannot search for it well with reeds,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	If the clisterization is performed by one of the wounds,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture cuts from one wound to another, and it purifies.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you shall cauterize it as best you can, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and it is filled up to the full.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	And when you truly know the place where it is located, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, if it is turned as I have said,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and cut open the cavity and the rotten and corrupt matter within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then heal it until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is properly deepened correctly, then you must stop it up, as much as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	Then put moistened tents in healing balm and push them into the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then put salves with healing balm on it until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	If not healed by this means, then cauterize as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, crush it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or nerve does not trouble you or main limbs as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, leave it to fester until all the corruption is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal with healing herbs until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if not healed, then let it swell as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not to wait until the fountain (source of water).
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you dig deep and wish to be at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all corruption, then return it to its place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is in such a state, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, you cannot reach it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy but to rest with natural means;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if a small bone is corrupt, and you can draw it out with pliers;
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If it needs to be extracted using one instrument;
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	if there are many bones, extract them all, not leaving any one behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture opposes it and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it softens and moisten the bone and releases the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put on the wound something stimulating purgative.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it remain until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And then if they have more easily movable bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone like the thigh or shin:
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	only remove the corruption until all the blackness is removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of corruption reaching to the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	It must be covered completely up to the corruption and then be healed until it is closed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	A young man of about 30 years had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until substances came to the leg, and there developed a large abscess without any cause for opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but they opened it further due to their foolishness, opening more abscesses.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	And it becomes full of matter, and a fistula forms, and much pus comes out that all are going bowel and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	And they put many remedies around it for two years, but there was no experienced person in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was there, and I saw her leg and the medicines with which she was treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that was coming out through the sores with great effort.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	And the youth's body becomes red, and has a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent in one of the wounds, then I searched all the wounds.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that one wound was coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	Then I hurried up and cut into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	And I found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I seemed to see the bone as corrupt, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I left;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to dress the wound with medicinal salves for a long time, but it could not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I dressed it again and discovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	I found continuous corruption in the bone, I cured it, and then I extracted it, and I considered how to set it;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not manage to hold a palm's breadth of the bone, and I pulled it apart with all its marrow;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicine; and it became healed and set quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	And it is not necessary to start the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and due to the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For there was often bleeding, but he recovered completely.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	And a hard cyst grew on the bone and he had a good disposition without any harm or side effects, neither in the air nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be set thus:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take one splint and hold it at the open end of the broken bone,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command anyone to extend it upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another larger splint of linen over the flesh that is torn from the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	And you draw out the corrupt flesh beneath the skin of the head,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh on the spot where you wish to be, that it does not burn the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a splint or a flat piece of wood under the bone to protect the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it must be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and also again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupt but does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	un iron rod beneath it; then press.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and press the cloth from one part of the corruption to another, and let the iron rod be as long as the length of the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	if the corruption is in the joint, then strike the dislocated joint and hold the bone that contains it from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	And if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than covering [it].
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if corruption is at the tip of the hand or the foot, it is a very grave matter.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nevertheless, you must inquire about this corruption, how it has opened up.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And purify it in all ways as you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that the incision and stitches for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and the appearance of them.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness, their fineness, their largeness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, the tool must be adapted to each type of work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And know that the work will show you the instrument needed, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think about the instrument needed according to what is necessary.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder may dislocate either from within or from outside.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have administered this corrosive treatment by means of medicine, it does not benefit at all.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	it is necessary to cover that limb up to the level where the corrosion occurs,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient becomes weakened by death or by the greater wickedness of the limb's defect;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	And the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	And then comes the spreading of darkness, then follows the corruption of member to member.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	It takes all over the body; if you hurry to cover it.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	If it is from the sting of some poisonous animals, such as sea scorpions, vipers and similar.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the corruption is at the head of the tooth, strike it, but give it no space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the wrist, strike it at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it reaches the arm, strike at the neck; and if it passes the neck, that is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	And no remedy is of any use but the amount of its potency;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And thus one does when the corruption comes or the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then strike after the next joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	If it comes at the foot, then strike the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it reaches the leg, then strike at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	If it rises above the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient but death;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	And the method for covering or dressing the limb is such that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	Extend one minister to the lower ligament and another minister to the upper ligament,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And you separate the cartilage that is between the two ligaments by about one span wide, so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then cover or dress it (the limb), and put on each side a linen cloth, so that the dressing does not touch healthy tissue,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And the patient comes with another injury and abscesses growing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And bleeding comes when you work on it, so cauterize the wound quickly,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put some restricting powders on it; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and let it heal until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a man in the foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	a man had a blackness that resembled burnt by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	the corruption began first in his toe of the foot, spreading through it all;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the wounds see corruption, he pierces them with copper [instruments] and they become healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	For a long time after the corruption returns or comes back with the hand, it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And I put him on things that stimulated recovery after the body's cleansing, but the corruption could not stop;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And you command me to cut off his hand, and I don't wish, unless I have hope of repelling the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and doubted also if by cutting his hand, it would not cause death.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the man's strength was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	if he were struck with a sword to cut off his hand, and he would be healthy.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And I have not considered this except for when other options are needed, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	An abscess occurs in the shin bone, and remains for such a long time that it causes a great swelling of the leg.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	Then they run and pierce through, causing the leg to jump, and the bones remain visible, as if a knight's.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	And the skin that is above is also as thin as a linen cloth torn.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and it will not run up to the bone nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "putrid".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes all the way to the bone in depth, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	And the cook should be such that you wrap it completely, and equally when it is subtle, as a cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and not to become corrupt.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you suspect that the meat will rot and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And the skin is thick with fat, if you cure it with a plaster like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look to see if the breasts are large and swollen, and if they smell foul,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then use this Egyptian plaster made in this way:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take asafetida, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them together in one pot on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	As long as the medicine is red and thickens like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from this according to your need, and make it into water and honey.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and anoint the breast, and bind the wound;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then take it out straining;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Make this procedure as many times as necessary, until the breast is drained; and remove the pus.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and occasionally cleanse with water of ashes.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash and pour water over it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then bleed and apply poultice until you know that the breast is well healed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, do not use the Egyptian medicine or water with ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if the poultice is with water and honey or it has a little bit of crushed litharge;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you may apply poultice with honey and sweet wine, which has the property of purifying and washing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	And the wine makes the blood congeal
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the enemas given causes the flesh to be produced in him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And you take a plaster of definite size, and make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	and you anoint it with some medications and unguents, whose properties or treating the unguents I have mentioned.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	if the wound on the breast is small, and the cloth plaster cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If a wound from a small iron is opened, place an Egyptian bandage on it.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Basilicon ointment, as long as it is opened wide;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, leave it at least one league or the size that can be reached by a clyster.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the hernia that throws out the belly is above, lower it or even more below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bone is fully set, do not let any cartilage grow on it.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	arrange it in such a way that the bone is set at its lowest point.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bone is fully set, do not let any cartilage grow on it.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the chest beneath as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	Then proceed in this manner: let the intestines move gently downward and do not leave anything of the intestines.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to place on the chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stretch a linen cloth over the entire chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then press with force on the breast, i.e., slightly larger than the first [pressure point].
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then anoint gently on top of it, i.e., another cloth according to the size of the pressure point.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the breast pressure point to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and the one who is on the breast pressure point, remove often to remove the bone,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And know what runs from the wound, whether it is poison or pus, or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and pay attention if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been applied in such a manner and you see that the pus rises above the wound's edge,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that breasts harden [or become firm], approach them with health.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	And then unbind it in the morning or afternoon, and when you are unbinding the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If you change one [piece of] clothing and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts fall out improperly after many days, know that breasts do not harden [or become firm].
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons creep up after a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for the health approaches. For there are people whose wounds swell up slowly in their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the stomach bloats too quickly after many days, know that the breast does not become sour.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts take a long time to dry out and are swollen, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	As an egg is defined, for it contains much vitriol, and it is the last of medicines;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take an egg white, define it with rose oil and stir equal parts of old wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; this method makes it more cooked and thickened.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When the diaphysis (long cylindrical part of a long bone) is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them together, and sprinkle the powder over the honey when it is on the fire.
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then dip one cloth, and lay it on the breast, and sometimes administer an Aristotle-long liniment,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily (an ancient medicinal herb), which is like flour made from peas and quince.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	And in using simple or compound substances: grind them up, make it into powder, and put it on the honey as I said, and apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the patient is ill for a long time and is not cured by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then understand that the corruption has entered completely, and causes pressure on the bone or hard tissue, or ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the patient is cured by the treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panaric is an abscess that arises under the nail at the base of the hand.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or at the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	And when it (the wound) becomes inflamed and no care is taken, an abscess may form.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And cut and pull out the nail until it reaches the root, and by chance you may cut through it completely.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	The corruption reaches the bone, causing a stinking pain, and the shoulder is large and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you follow the treatment as we have described in the previous section, but it does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	It is necessary that you cut off all the superfluidity which has accumulated on the nail.
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are very great aid if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and when the nail after the flesh adheres, and it starts to thicken and swell,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	It is necessary that you place the rod under the nail so as not to touch it.
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and push it upwards, and strike the soft tissue gently and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and place on top of the remaining soft tissue medical substances that are burning and corrosive to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, strike it and draw it out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the tooth decayed, strike it with one of these tools as said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wounded and boiled, and feels great pain, it is necessary that you drain it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	Then pierce the angle of the spur with a pointed spatula while cutting across it.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	And ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, place something over it to ease the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the thumb joint of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The patient who is born with tumors on their hands by chance, are entirely fleshy.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance it has bone or nail, and sometimes it has a nail.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born at the root of the joint, but rather in some of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	The one who is born in any knuckle of the finger does not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And the one born at the joint of the thumb, by chance becomes mute;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one who is fat is light, in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The size of it at its root is as wide as a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born or about to die, it is necessary that you cut round the cartilage up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, then heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Simultaneously, swelling comes at the joints due to birth, or from an injury, or burn, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cut this swelling so that it can heal according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then put between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	And you place between two thin planks, until the limbs are fixed as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to any of its joints with the palm, then strike that bond as required.
Des vils	Poor people
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are large, swollen, filled with melancholic excesses that come into various members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens in legs more often in those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must occasionally administer purge of the gall and then cleanse the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The iron cure is in two ways: one is to strike it, and draw out black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	And another way is to open a vein, and draw all its blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision method is as follows: first cut deeply into the leg with hot sharp steel until the flesh becomes soft,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then hold the leg of the patient above the knee to the part below the thigh;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then open the vein in one, two or three places, of a large size,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then slit and draw out the black blood from the arm to the hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can withstand;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it up, and command him to bind himself with meat that makes black bile disappear.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And recommence the evacuation and the purge when the veins are full, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevation of it is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in water and heat the leg with warm, hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	And if you have no other remedy, heat it with fire, and then strike it towards the vein near the top of the thigh, or in the part below the knee.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	Then scrape the skin with the knife and peel back the vein from both sides, as far as it appears when felt.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then push the thigh bone downwards until it is raised to the skin, and then bend it slightly at the angle.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then break the arm into another place four fingers' breadth below; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then tie up the thigh bone, as you did before, and bend it to another angle, as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then break a different size (or multiple sizes if necessary), tie it up, and bend it to the thigh bone.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then draw and extract up to the second joint; then remove joint by joint until it comes out entirely, then strike (the dislocation).
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot draw and lift it, push an awl with very thick double thread through it.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and draw and lift it (the dislocated joint), and you push a splint under one rib, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And keep it from bursting, for if it bursts, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it harms the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have treated it all, place linen soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site; and care for it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vision is constricted, twisted, and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	Therefore, you must cut it forcefully but do not cover it; drag it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron used to pierce the bladder does not bend and does not cut, but it should pierce the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is large-curved, for if it is thin, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and on land with no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And by chance, a boil arises somewhere other than in legs, and this happens from the corruption that comes beneath the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	When it comes within the body like a snake and spreads, incise between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there is a very large inflammation in the leg.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then the joint changes (dislocates), and the vein begins to forcefully come out, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood from 6 to 8 inches long and tie it.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the wood (plank) at the leg, and every time it (the shoulder) slips out, you wrap it around the plank and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, take a part of it, roll up the rest, and do not cover it at its root until it is all out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it goes back into the flesh, causes an abscess and pus or a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	therefore, it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing is left on the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	And sometimes this vein is about five or ten fingers in length.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	And a man came to me whose length was ten fingers, and when you sew it, push one bean or pea through it and pierce it all the way through.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	So that everything comes out; empty the matter within it, and bring medicine to the place, allowing it to decay for any length of time, then heal it as one heals an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes in this vein there are more rain-like substances, and similarly when it opens at the joint of the finger or toe.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And it comes much from wounds, and from which it jumps out; treat it then as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From the worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often happens to cows.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels through the whole body expanding and contracting,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	And it feels very painful to move from one limb to another, until it rips the skin or jumps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And it is infested by purulent humors, like worms and snakes and roundworms or belly lice.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the eye.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it to cure and draw, one can force it only when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	then you must lie the limb above and below with a strong rope tightly.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then strike on top and pull forcefully, and if the limb is fully inserted into the flesh, do not pull it back,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize it with fire, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	And the greatest harm it does is that it runs the oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold the sorcerer beneath it in form, then strike above, and pull it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	And it is necessary for the patient to use body purification with medicines that dissolve bad humors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	And let them eat boiled meat that has been purified.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called on our land "wind-disease," and it is a pain that comes in some limbs.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	And it moves from limb to limb; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was summoned to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	And after that, it started swelling as if a worm were climbing towards the shoulder.
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more rapidly than any other thing, just like living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain moved away from that place and pierced into the shoulder.
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	And a little while later, it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I found that it keeps turning around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much how it moves from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had often heard that the pain moves from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I did not want it at all, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed.
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and this is where that constricted wind appears.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear according to this reasoning to those who are luxurious and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you wish to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	then press above and below forcefully, and then press firmly until those windings are forced back to their place.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those that push out the windings, like corrupted pills and pills of snakeroot, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various forms, depending on their appearances and the places in the body they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The differences between them are that some have large points, small ones, pointed and flat-tipped;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have two points, those with barbs, and those that have splinters.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and a dislocation occurring in any member occurs in two ways: either in the main member (head),
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in secondary members such as the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it (the dislocation) occurs in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	Therefore, you must be careful in the extraction of this arrow, for death may come after in many situations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not become apparent, and the arrow is not completely in, pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And when the arrowhead pierces the skull bone and the piece of bone splinters off above the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	It is when the eyesight darkens and swells, and reddening and pain in the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	And by chance, without force from the nostrils, or ears; and by chance, loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	Jumps out of the wound white matter like cheese, and also jumps as if burned by hot iron;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	If this sign appears, refrain from treatment and pull out the arrow if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces, is that it is near the left breast and feels like it has been driven into something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	And by chance, the patient may fall silent like the hairs, and black cold blood appears, and chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting occur.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, the patient senses doubt that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that never pierced the flesh is that without pus gushing from the wound, the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, he breathes heavily and seeks fresh air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow falls on the blanket of the bed, it is lodged in the ribs; and it expels a large pus, great pain, and heavy breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach falls out from the wound, by chance, anything of undigested meat may jump out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach falls in (the wound), and anything of excrement jumps out through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If an arrow falls in the bladder and urine jumps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain; know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and legs, neck, shoulders, hips, buttocks, spine of the back, ribs, and feet; and similar members are safe according to several conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, do this instead.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow pierced or wounded the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I pulled it, and drew it out beneath the fat of the ear, and it was saved without damage.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And pulled out an arrow that had pierced the oil gland beneath the paper-like membrane.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	And the arrow was inserted, and it could not reach further than the tip towards the flesh,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, with a light iron point shaped like ears; it pierced through, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And the arrow passed through the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was an Arabic one with ears,
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I was a bearded man, and became subtle enough to pass through, and the Christian was unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And draw an arrow out of a man who was shot or wounded, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut above the arrow, trapped it, drew it out, and there was no bad incident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to treat a man who has an arrow lodged or stuck into his back, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its position naturally,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor can it be found in any of his natural movements.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you want to treat another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And it remains in such a way, enduring great pain; many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	Take an arrow out of one of the princes' king, who was pierced in the neck,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly leaning towards the right side; the arrow was completely straightened.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was summoned to the treatment after she had fallen ill for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried to probe it with a subtle instrument but felt nothing.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and it felt pointed and pain beneath her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrowhead.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I apply the plaster soothing and digestive to the joint, as it does not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	And the arrowhead appeared at the joint.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the plaster for many days, and straightened the wound directly, and the patient remained healthy for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrowhead in his intestines for one day; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I apply corrosive medicine to the wound by hand for several days until it is drained.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and pull, and feel the head of the arrowhead which protrudes from its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I pierced the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	And he passed beyond the limits in four months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Then I will lance the wound that I have pierced with the forceps and split it open from both sides, but it could not heal.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I continued to refine and invent various methods of instruments, until I made the forceps well for one day.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to its shape that will come at the end of this chapter, I will keep it until its end and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physicians judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	Then I will restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	I have told you about the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	If you apply your remedy to this (condition), I do not say to which specifically, for books cannot fully grasp everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters understand well about a little thing and about that which is failing and in need.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	true nine works, and nine tools, at the end of things strange that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not enter members where they are inserted except according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the side where they enter, or by some other way;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which flies out from there where it enters is an arrow entering the flesh, and occasionally flies away at some point.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	If it does not fly away immediately, leave it until the flesh heals around it, and let the opening heal;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is embedded in bone and cannot be removed, leave it for several days and try to extract it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce it all around with a sharp tool, as long as the area around is widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	If the arrow is driven into the skull bone and goes to one of the brain ventricles,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	And some of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: do not draw it out immediately, but let it heal evenly after several days.
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow reaches thus far, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is only pierced in the bone but does not reach thus far,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And the patient remains for some days with bad accidents if he cannot draw the bow.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply pierced and cannot come out by itself, then administer tourniquets around it as I have told you; then cure the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is put back into place within the body so that it cannot be seen, pull on it firmly;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, pull it with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow prevent you from pulling it out,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	And there is no bone, nerve, or vein, if the wound is large enough.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if possible, and if it has ears in the arrow as they are,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you can remove the bone that has been impaled by two parts in the muscles.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or fold the arrow's ears (barbs) as much as possible so you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And be careful not to break the arrowhead, but rather pull it out more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it at once, push the lance to the bone and then pull, for extraction will be easier in this case.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	If the flow of blood obstructs you, bring to hand what we have said about the cure in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	And beware of cutting the nerve and vein, and use tools as you can safely pull out the arrow without risk.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	Either quickly or slowly, either firmly or gently; place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot do it, place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, if it opens anything of it, or the skin is swollen in that spot as one can see or feel:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	then cut along that spot, as long as the scissors can grasp it, and then pull it out; if it does not come out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and turn it until it enters the bone, expand the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, let it stay for a while, and then continue the extraction until it comes out completely.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it were of an arrow shaft, push it all the way through.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it had fallen and you see that it requires a pointed instrument, use a pointed instrument to remove it.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; then push forcefully,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is stuck in the instrument's hair, use the instrument with its pointed end entering it to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, you must cut around the affected area where the poison is, if possible,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if an arrow falls or pierces the belly, bladder, side, or kidney, and it is near, and you can cover over it, then do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, then stitch the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	heal it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used for removing arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape at the tip of the hair is also like the feather of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to stick the point of the arrow, as its shape is:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for sticking and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Openings of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Openings of veins from which one drains are 31, of which there are 16 heads
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This means: two veins that are behind the ears, which are called "doubs 'herbech'"
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	And the two arteries which are in the two temples appear;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	And the two veins that are in the two eyes of the eyelids, which are called "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the neck;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	And the two glands which are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly known to be five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	The first one is cephalic, located on the left side of the chest, and lay people call it "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	The second one is called "fistula," and is composed of the cephalic and basilic.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And lay people call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic is located on the right side of the chest.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	And lay people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the abdomen.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And this [refers to] the one who is healed, whose wound clearly opens above the pocket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	The vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it has two joints.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and foot there are four veins: one is beneath the calf of the left,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	And the second tendon which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nasse," which is in the left ankle.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	In the other leg there are three veins beneath these (veins).
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The venous sinus after the ears assists in ancient catarrhs and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	The quality of the vein as I tell you is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	And rub the joint or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then take hold of it (the pulse), and where you feel the throbbing under your hand, press down on it firmly.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance and thrust it through the vein up to the bone, then move your hand up along the whole vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	And make two incisions through the skin and vein well with a knife, and draw out the blood until it stops.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and tie it until it heals;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, it is worth using emigraine for older people.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and sodium, and ophthalmia treated, and at the eyes sore with tears.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the healer are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient extends his neck, until the two veins appear openly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your thumb, then press gently.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then, lift the key on the vein at its top, indicated by your finger, and push the lance beneath.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein at its top, and prick (it), just as you have done in two other veins, and make an incision for the blood according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then undo the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then close (the vein) forming it, and let it heal until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their dressing and extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein at the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, and it has migrated and turned red;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	And its characteristic is that the patient extends his neck while twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press down from your hand, or something else, and let the blood come out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein when it is healthy, without ever using a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and take care to pierce through the side because the bone is near, and by accident break the flames when they are fine.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The piercing of the two veins that are in the two armpits helps the eyes, the thigh, the groin, and the wound in the oil, and the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	And the quality of their blood is such that the patient twists their neck in turning it with some cord, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the blood, and let the vein be crossed, a little long by the flame a little wide, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the iron is fine and breaks, then make a suture of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The sanity of the vein from the neck is beneficial against ague, and against smallpox, and diseases of the face.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	like emigraine (migraines) and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the qualities of the sanity are that the patients compress their neck, then squeeze their nose with your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	And take the subtle flame long, and thrust it into the gap between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein does not open well in that manner, and the wound will begin to heal now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	do not go too deep, and let the blood flow as needed, then bind it for a night, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The first joint of the two fingers helps in the stiffness of the elbow, at the beginning of swelling, and in many diseases, abscesses, corrosions, herpes, and inflammations.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the qualities of the joint are such that the patient straightens his neck from under one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient lie on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then, open the vein lengthwise a little widely, then drain the blood gently, as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	Then repair the other side of the vein, then untie the ligature, and tighten all the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Do not strangle the patients; let them be until morning so that the wounds heal.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the treatment of livestock (or animals)
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of wounds of the upper lip helps with swelling in the mouth, decay of gums, and cuts or splits in the lips, as well as teeth problems and around them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the treatment are to make the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the upper lip, and look at the two places: one is on the right upper lip, and the other is on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	And they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Take hold of both of them then, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt about it.
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	grasp the largest one of each pair, and also do the same for the two veins above and below, because it is done in the same way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From beneath the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The evacuation of veins that are below the tongue helps after the head injury, and it is at the incision of the neck, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of bleeding is that the patient should squeeze between your hands before the sun, lift the tongue, and look at every side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the cost are commonly healed according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or when pricking at any one spot with large mirrhin or olive oil of subtle kind as you cut through it, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are broad and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mirrhin flame is very renowned and is broad as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the swollen veins that contain thick blood and are troubled.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is pointed more finely, and it is for thinning subtle veins that contain thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The sanitation of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the lord [physician] to drain the blood well, and to pierce the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and bleeding comes out, it needs to be stopped, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And the flame should not be pressed, but rather sliced like an incense stick.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you must force it open and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you wish to have no pain in it, or you open the vein in its place with the arm: it opens manifestly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the copper to the fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you pull on the arm, and you touch until you find the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the place with a cross, then tie the arm, and burn the vein with fire.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And beware not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is an artery; avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	If you see it swelling up high like the urine of a child and it is red and thin, know that it is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Then hasten yourself, put your finger on it for a long time, then cut off your finger if the blood does not stop flowing, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	The patient should keep his arm still, and let it be like that, the sick person does not move it; he should be in fear, and not move it until it is healthy again.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not staunched, and it bleeds, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, because the head of it recedes; stop the bleeding from the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of the outer bark of the willow, cut it, and take one half and apply it well until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it does not stop bleeding, that is good; if it does not, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stopping of bleeding is not necessary in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the ligament of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above, and from the body below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	Because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalica, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the lord should pierce through to the nerve that is beneath, and if it pricks too deep, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the patient becomes sickly and grey, and by chance cannot be cured;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens up frequently, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the instrument anesthetic; and cut off the nerve to your ability.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein of the head, if it draws blood from the head, helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	It is necessary to vein with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Therefore, one must seek the lighter joint, and not to worry if it is necessary for the first time, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	If the joints swell in some men, when it is necessary for the first time, but he does not worry about it.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that bleeding is not performed for any other purpose than to preserve health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	And to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	And the incision shall be made in one of the four veins that are named: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be incised at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of filling appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	And it should be bled for the first or third day, after 2 hours or 3 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding given to diseases has no fixed hour, but when there is a need for day or night, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it should not be bled children under 14 years old, nor women in the fourth month of pregnancy up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor elderly people who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wishes to heal themselves, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that they empty their intestines with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not carry away the superfluidities harmful to the main limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	he who is excessively salted with meats, or drunk, until he recovers from that state, or watery.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	And if there is wounding after the passion of colic, vomiting, loosening of the belly, multiplication of abscesses in a woman, and work, watchfulness, and labor, and whatever the virtue of the body or the weapon,
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then thin the fluids, if he does not have a thick constitution, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have that power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then immerse or bathe him, if nothing hinders, to thin the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	And heal the vein with the plaster as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	Keep yourself on that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be lying down and joyful, and let the healer raise himself higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then draw the thread moderately, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot cure him;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the joint with your hands until the veins swell, and feel for them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then wet the linen cloth with a little bit of old oil, then place your fingertip of your left hand on that vein beneath the joint where you want to cauterize.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not burst when pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run like cords in a sieve, and some of them are filled with windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	if you put fire upon it, the flame retreats and cannot open the vein, and thus it is one of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore the sieve-makers must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again slightly under that place or quickly above, if the places are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the places are swollen, and the patient is afraid, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	In case there comes an abscess, let it not enter bathing; then begin the healing if it pleases the patient:
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	If the hole is small or you doubt whether it does not emit as much blood as you see, then apply heat directly to that hole:
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And the wound is opened slightly, so that the area swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swollen, do not start draining immediately, but put some oil on it, for it will heal the body of blood and make the oil spread in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and administer the oil in each wound that you drain, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And this same thing happens with triceps and biceps when set in place; if they are too subtle (small) and split apart when they are too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	If there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hurry, put wet sponge (sponge soaked in warm water and oil) on it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days without any blackness or greenness, that does not harm it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh in its lower part, under the wound, as a mark, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there appears an abscess and signs at the wound of the basilica; therefore place your hand over it, and if you find it soft when compressed by the hand, then that is the bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not place anything of what has been said, for by chance without the artery; but make one dry compress to harden the place, then cure it with another remedy until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is wounded and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger incision, and let the veins be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let him bleed little by little, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bloodletting is safe from discharge and paralysis of nerves, and it is better than the long bloodletting or the wide one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for the body which needs bloodletting, it is necessary to give bread soaked in apple pulp; if he is heated, let him bleed 4 or 6 times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold complexion, let it eat soft bread soaked in sweet syrup, or sweet scented syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sesame, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it swells at the wound after bleeding, you must give him broth of cooked meat and fragrant subtle syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If you want to dislocate someone's arm and heal it again, if necessary, when it has been weakened by prolonged healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	If you want to dislocate someone's arm after the first healing, and it has healed in seven hours after the first healing or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	If you want to heal from another part, it should heal on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and it brings fever; therefore a large amount should be drained, and the opening widened until it gushes out in a pan.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you treat all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the toes when they heal, so that death does not come in the place of a pan.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not good that when you dislocate the arm and draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is bent, extend the arm as much as possible, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but leave it until blood flows out again; or you will prick it with the tip of the flame, causing the coagulated blood in the vein to flow out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put .1 piece of fresh linen on top and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, do not tie it or squeeze it until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or another vein or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are not found in the neck because they are composed of something else.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of bloodletting is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the veins are red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it shall be tied moderately, so that the vein appears clearly, then press gently across, neither too wide nor too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and the wounds shall be cut open wide, and press firmly near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot heal, place the hand in hot water and let the blood flow out into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is on the inside (of the chest), do not push the hand into hot water, for it puts it more in winter than summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the vein of this vessel is safer than all other vessels, as there are neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the right arm's savings vein is valuable for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Press the arm and apply hot cupping, until the vein is full, if you see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein runs transversely (crosswise), and you apply cupping all over it, there will be no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all exposed bare beneath.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Then place the hand in hot water, if it freezes in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as necessary, place oil and linen over the vein to heal it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purgation of pus from the hand on the left side has the same effect as the disease of the mice, and do it exactly as I told you regarding the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The purge of the spine has the same effect for all the diseases that are beneath the chest,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as the disease of marriage (syphilis), retention of urine, sciatica, and diseases of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its purge is that the patient should put their foot in hot water and rub on the vein until it perishes,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	And lay [something] above the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot it goes much [further].
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Cut it then along a healthy artery or one that is larger at the ankle, as it has more value.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut above the foot, beware of nerves that are below, and cut through it as when sharpening; let the flames be annihilated.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the bone cannot come out, put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the blisters need to be lanced for the first time, start the second one a little above, because the skin is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphena of the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and its lancing is worth pain relief from the hamstring, when it's for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the qualities of his health are such that the patient bathes or immerses and stretches the leg above the ankle four times in twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and by crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	it is better that you crush it, for the wound is hollow and it responds well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not pierce it, there is no healing for the pain in the hip or back, and towards the small of the back, keep away from nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	Then make such a cut to let the blood out as you see fit, then unbind the ligament and place cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Wounds caused by cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bone, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this cauterization, which is to wound, has two ways: either it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and this cauterization that is made by wounding and extraction of blood is done in twelve parts of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	because one is entirely in the head, and others are in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others on each side of the neck; and the cauterization under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	And the boils on both shoulders; and the boils on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	And the boils on both arms; and the boils on both legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the boils on both ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood, but only small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason, it should not be avoided at all, as is done with blood-letting from the vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And it should not be administered at all; neither with fire nor hot fire, in any disease arising from congestion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	If it is necessary for diseases to ventose (use cupping glass), or by habit, then we shall administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and each time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they need to ventose, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, in their head, and at the neck, and darkness of the eyes:
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And for those who find a pool of blood in their mouth, with their tongue swollen and bleeding:
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if there are such people who think, see black bile and have fevers and similar symptoms:
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the month, we command them to be bled after four hours of the day:
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The purgation of the mouth helps with the swelling of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation is in place of the purgation of the headache,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it should not be used by those with cold complexion or who have constipation, for it causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and it should also not be used by the watchmen, nor those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who recovers often becomes oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetting.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping at the neck is in place for healing the head and basilica, and therefore it is beneficial for the fracture.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to split the channel of the arm, and immediately, and to fill it up.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it must be pushed gently, for if it holds too tightly, it induces forgetfulness or stomach and heart trouble.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventosations at the 2 costal bones of the neck are worth the pains in the head, and migraines, and strangulations, and the pain in the roots of the teeth,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is in the position of the artery in the basilica; and you must instruct the lord to press his hand when inserting it, not to touch the artery, and not let there be any bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventosations below the chin are worth oral disease and tooth decay, and similar illnesses in the mouth; and they are found near the arteries of the 2 lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The dislocations of the shoulders are harmful to the patient who comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The dislocations of the ribs are as bad as four veins in the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the Lord not to be too deep, for the flesh is bare and knows beneath black and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling that is on the rump is useful for drawing out the hemorrhoids from their foundation and diseases beneath, and it should be large and made of a linen cloth that needs to be well pulled; and by chance, if it is too thin, it will break; and this causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings of the legs open widely, as they draw blood from all over the body, and are useful for ancient pain in the loins, the back, and the bladder, and remove flowers; and they are located at the elbows and knees, but weaken the body after long use, and bring pus in various dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of placing the swelling is that you place it first empty, and squeeze gently and quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the location becoming red and swollen, and the blood appearing red; then press firmly, and remove the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, as there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: it is necessary to make a single incision, and to make large and deep wounds, and a little shallowly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it should be cut twice: the first time to make a way for thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it should be cut three times; and when we want to draw out little by little blood drops, we only have to prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	If we want a lot of blood, we encourage it to flow more frequently; and if the wound is deep, we should make an incision all the way through, and when we pierce the heart, it should be done quickly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And for those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, you should anoint the joints of the affected areas with penetrating and soluble oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is oil of violets, sweet almond oil, or oil of the seeds of pumpkin,
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is vinegar, oil of watercress, lily oil, chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amatina, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	If the person to be treated has tender flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to use oil,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash after the dislocation with rose water, or cold water, or water of marshmallow, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or another similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if the patient has much moisture, he should rise from ashes of nettles, or marsh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of vinegar, or a decoction of dais or chamomile, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	And it is not advisable to apply a cupping glass before bathing or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And it is necessary that he wash, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard the one who is cupping (the patient) is bilious, and him without is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he take cool things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce leaves, etc.;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And cooked peas, meat broth, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold constitution, let him take honey syrup and fragrant diluted wine, which is between old and new, and eat peas, cabbage, and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he will purge himself, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	It is necessary to give certain men sometimes triacle or muscatel before purge, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And let the wine be made subtle, but it is not suitable for those who drink hot liquids.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The blisters placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, belly, buttock, and thighs, for these members cannot bear to be wounded under the blisters.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it should not be done to draw blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	As we place the bandages on the limbs when they swell; to remove the viscosity from the member, as we apply leeches on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce it.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain when there is an abscess or arrow, remove it by attracting its position through its virtue accidentally or dislodge the arrow from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and in this way, it is done when it is placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained windiness,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	And these blisters are applied empty to be sucked only; and sometimes they are applied along with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of the lungs, and in such manner one fills the bladder with hot water or water in which cooked herbs suitable for this purpose have been steeped.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the bladder applied to fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should have two holes of about half a palm's width and depth, and it should have one small hole around the middle, just like pushing an awl.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and made of iron, soft before so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have a rod of iron or steel through its middle to insert a handle.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the boils of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And this boil should be placed upon the member thusly:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the beeswax candle or linen thread and insert it through the boil to the member beneath it,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light is inside the boil so as not to burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be above the opening that we have mentioned, so when one wants to see, if steam is coming out, remove the blister.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	Wrap it in linen thread as previously described, and repeat the process often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the blister that is administered in case of pleurisy, it should not have a hole or opening, and it should only be applied when it is full of liquid.
et c’est li forme:	And this is its shape: [In this context, 'it' refers to the dislocation mentioned earlier]
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Sinews are not tied up unless in members where no bandages can be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in naked flesh areas, such as the elbow or ankle, and other similar locations;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find sinews in clear, clean waters, without any pollution, you should take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	And put them in a warm mild broth until they are tender and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	Then let it be drained of blood and pus, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply sulphur;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they swell up and become hot, if it is a place where a poultice can be applied, apply one, for it is very beneficial;
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If it is not so, lift the joint gently, then with water, very well, and then press on it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the joint becomes too much swollen after the body, moisten a linen cloth with cold water and put it on until the swelling subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the swelling is increased, apply powdered vitriol or other similar things until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or place half-peeled beans on the joint and leave them until they harden onto the joint, which will cause it to subside now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you need more lances (or instruments), take others as well.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the instruments are not to be taken, rub fresh blood on the place, and insert a needle until it comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then, lay them down and as soon as they feel the blood, they heal themselves.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are dripping, sprinkle a little of powdered aloe and crushed seeds, or ash on them, they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here comes the book of breaks (or fractures)
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and it is about restoration of a break and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Instruct the dear son that the foolish man should abandon this chapter, as he will never see any old books or read letters from them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And because of this, knowledge in our land is strange, as I have never found anyone good at it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing about it, except for the knowledge from old books, which I have studied extensively and applied through experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described it in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are brought in, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the sum of the word and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and remain on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	When fracture or dislocation or twisting or distortion comes to anyone, it is necessary that you treat the patient from both sides, unless something prevents you, such as frailty of body, infancy, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say cold meats, and chicken and beef, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of abscess heat or spreading of matter in the member; then the patient will recover again under his first regular government as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with thick foods that make large stools, or he must have viscosity, as cooked wheat in water and peas, and meats like beef, pork, mutton, veal, fish, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this thick feeding speeds up the healing of the bones.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	Know that the broken bones of the old and weak cannot be well healed or mended according to their nature due to the weakness of the members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But has no cure, reset above the broken bone, i.e., large tendons that straighten and join the limb together, until it heals as it was before; and not to touch it at all, and for this reason, it is necessary to feed it with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is other than the fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For it is a fracture that grows toward the ear, and another one lengthens like the quill of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is also a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each kind has its tool, and appropriate device for restoration, as memory recalls in its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And it is known as the break of the bone when the joint is twisted, and wide open by displacement, and sounds under pressure from the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no break.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can have a twist, a fracture, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand, but place the remedies that come after here, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fractures going to the branch, and are the two parts disjoined, it is necessary now to set them equally aligned, so that abscesses grow not there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come there, let it be left for any day, until the abscess is calmed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it equal to the muscle that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are fragments; then tighten, as necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is less than two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or with your hand if it is one of the small members, or if it is two ropes, or one rope and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	align the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member are dislocated they are realigned with all means available, and ensure that through your work there is no injury or pain for the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels well to the touch if it seems not good: straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it by their work abscesses hot and contractions to the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is healed, correct the patient so that they do not move it, neither by watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and watch carefully that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not broken, and it must be set in such a way that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep it straight so that crookedness does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are various in smallness, great size, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as arms and fingers, etc.: it is necessary to wrap linen cloths soft and fine.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are thick, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a large and hard rope, because the large ropes embrace the whole large member evenly, and they press from all sides equally, so there is no bruise.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie light tourniquets around it, three or four turns according to the member, and hold your hand a little on the rope, then go above the break and tighten less than the break, then move away from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy joint, then take another ligament and turn it around reversely over the broken joint.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the break and hold it moderately, not too hard nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place padding of linen or fabric between the ligaments until they are all even, then tie it all up with a bandage, and then place your well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, put on top something soothing for the abscess and one who extracts the swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold your elbows, and they should be the thickness of half a thick cane, well-healed, or of a staff that is used to split logs, or of palm reeds, and should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the elbow one puts on the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And let it be as long as required for the limb, whether large or small.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it steady on the stirrups as you did at the first joint, then tie it above with a thread coming along, just like in the first joint when breaking it.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The following is narrower, shorter now; and the thread should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who make their ropes with twisted linen threads, and this is a great error, for the rope cannot be even if it is too thin; and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stirrup.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the heads of arrows after setting in healthy bones, place linen or cloth bandages under them so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a break and the veins are severed, I will tell you the cure below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to set arrows in broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, there should be no need to apply hot irons before 5 or 7 days, or more, according to your certainty of the abscess healing process.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: you should take flour that is kept in the mill walls, mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of a plaster for restoring a fracture in various positions, and equally for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take barberries, dandelion leaves, nettles, tansy, and Arabic gum, in equal amounts; myrrh and aloeswood, 5 parts; alchemil, 8 parts; and make powder of these ingredients, mix them with an abundance of egg; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this plaster as it has a good composition and quickly restores broken bones for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster that is beneficial for twisting: take mugat and vismalve, mix together 10 times its volume; add mirrhe and aloes, 8 times its volume; acaice 6 times its volume; bolic armenic 10 times its volume, grind well, and concoct with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones, to relieve the pain arising from them, and for treating wounds: take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it on the area. This plaster does not restore [the bones], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and proper wound pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that mends broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-purslane leaves, grind together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to hasten the healing of an abscess. Take root of comfrey, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of peas, of each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is scalded, mix with moist coriander juice or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plaster more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of comfrey, flax seed, balm, lentil, and sage, flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; grind and make with salty water, sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that no other plaster should be placed on a broken limb for restoration except beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he said it should be between soft and hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galenic that one should place hot and slightly warm dry things on the broken limb, to restore it, such as myrrh, aloeswood, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of poultice that is good for wounds and pain: take ground mugwort and human hair shavings, or bird feathers, and yarrow, equal amounts, grind them up, and make a poultice from it and apply to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	Then wait a little after that, and take care to ensure the patient feels no pain, or the bone has not moved from its place; do not dislocate it by hand for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching comes at the joint, without rest or swelling, hurry up, dislocate it, and remove the emplastrum (medication) immediately; then take a light cloth, a sea sponge moistened, dip it in water, and lift up the joint, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, until you are sure of the abscess heating.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and remove the pain, then continue the binding gently, and a little emplastrum, and do not strain it too much as before; and bind it until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess swells and reddens and hurts and inflames are entirely opened up, and you need to plug and bind it, proceed as you did equally before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if no blood comes from the limb as we have said, do not unbind it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and bring the wound close to the skin above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then you bind it more tightly than before, and let the meat swell, as I have said before; and if you see the wound dry out more than necessary, know that pus cannot come in.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Arises then from hot, warm water, always when you dislocate it, and this should be done every third day, and apply a little cold on the joint.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work, then cut the nerves in the limb, and correct immediately what the foolish surgeon does, who keeps the member twisted: this is harmful, and it is dangerous work, and I see nothing else but to tire oneself and to work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are intended.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	fractures are made by sword percussion, and the bones are broken all the way to the shaft that is beneath the bone, as it happens with hacks or thrusts; this type of fracture is called "hackure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above, causing it to pierce, this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and these are either large or small breaks in the bone.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a blow embedded, or wound, or cuts from arrows, or falling on stones, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent breakthrough to the membrane beneath the bone, which protrudes above or below the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small tear, and for this reason it is called "hairline fracture".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with stones or falling, or similar things, and makes the bone piece to enter within, and the limb becomes swollen like a baker when he puts it in the oven; if the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones, such as a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and in all these ways of fracture, small pieces are dislodged as well; and I will speak about it specifically.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	We should be familiar with all ways of fractures by the dissection above them, and the investigation at attempts, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy appearance is known to those who, when the bone has been exposed and scraped on top, if the fracture is black it appears open.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, take care of the patient's condition, and if you see any harmful symptom such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever ague, hairs falling out and reddening, or other similar signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any doubtful symptom, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound first comes to you during winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day at the muscle that you can reach.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the event that we have mentioned occurs.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue that covers the brain, you must cut the broken part in such a way: and it is that you take hold of the patient's head, and expose above the bone in all ways as you can, and over the figure of the wound more gently than you can,
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the flow of blood or an abscess occurs when exposing the bone, use what is appropriate, and it is that you fill the cavity with damp cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And let the wound rest until the abscess subsides and ensure the flow of blood has stopped; then start to remove the bone around it. This is done in two ways of treatment: one method is that you cut at a narrow incision before, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have several incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp, and made with iron tools; and work lightly to avoid piercing the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is displaced and hard, then you must pierce it around, so as to administer splints with splints, not allowing them to penetrate beyond the bone's surface, and there should be a margin or circle above its point, which prevents the splint from passing beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, such that each comes in its place at the bone's edge, so that you have splints for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of splints:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splint on the bone, and turn your hand until you feel that the bone is perforated; then replace the splint elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the fracture pieces as finely and gently as possible, and do so as we have said, pulling the bone to your hand or any other tool such as pliers, forceps; and ensure that you do not touch the brain nor the nerves.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness which remains in the bone with any other tool resembling an incision blade, but it must be thinner and finer than the other blades.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And if there remains something of small bones, no scales, lightly remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work, which is more secure, is that which the Greeks called, and it is highly praised, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place the lenticular anvil under it as shown in its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from only one side, and the part is hollow on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on it, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take great care of the cloth that is underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is adhered to the bone, gently split it, because one can easily harm it and cause fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone does not break through to the cloth and it is cut only from above, making small pieces, then you should scrape it roughness, remove scales with a sharp rasp and different quantities, depending on the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If the king shaves with great razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and does not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In other hair cuts and breaks of subtle shape, it is necessary that you bring the cause according to his discretion; and this is not something that can be replied to by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the sore is exposed, it is necessary that you take one linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 4 layers, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the sore, then administer another linen, but do not strain it any further than covering the wound only;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	And leave it for a day or two until the abscesses calm down, then cut it open and administer the following medications like root of lily, flour of wheat, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make powder from these items and sprinkle on the wound, and immediately provide reliable medicines without bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	Ensure that the wound is always kept clean, you must not leave ointment or pus on it, nor let scabs form on the brain tissue, because when scabs form on the cloth, they rot and can cause great harm to the patient; because when something bitter is applied to it, it causes pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be cautious in case any bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, it is doubtful and full of uncertainty.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come violently except by the medicine that has been applied, then you should take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil and 1 piece of linen cloth and mix them together and apply it on the affected area.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal in the manner of treatments that are required, until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one of them alone because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, but only bows or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you insert your little finger or thumb into the neck, and place the break inside the index finger, and in the hollow by the side, until the neck returns according to its natural figure.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck and the finger cannot reach the place, then you must put a small splint on the head of the finger.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, you must set it again, and hasten to restore it as soon as possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then you bind to the head of the nose pieces of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another on the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the pieces be as thick as they fill the nostrils of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that one should moisten the pieces in butter and soften them each day. I do not think it is good, but they must be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour; then leave the piece until the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at times, feathers of geese are inserted instead of thorns, and if a single piece of soft linen is wrapped around it, and the breakage is held, then blow into the patient's nostrils; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess opens during the incision while you are working on it, put cotton wool soaked in rose oil or a little piece of onion there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	If an abscess does not open, apply a plaster from the inside, made of wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then put light compresses on top, but do not tie it shut.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break of the neck is small and it breaks into small pieces, then take appropriate instruments to extract it, then make an incision, and apply things that promote healing such as char, suture, plasters, and ointments suitable for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound inside the neck, then heal it with bandages and place wooden splints on it until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated beneath and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only displaced, but not broken in two, if one recognizes it easily, then it is corbeled within.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your index finger in the patient's mouth; if it is on the left jawbone, insert the index finger of your right hand and press gently into the fracture, then align it by pushing from the outside with your other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two parts, then you must administer extension of two parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on it a broken mandible splint, and place on it one double cloth; and place upon the cloth a large and well-made plaster, or an equal piece of skin, long and wide according to the mandible, and attach it to the jaw as you can, and command the patient to rest, and provide light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; place plaster upon it, with milled powder mixed with egg or flour of wheat after removing the splint; and place upon the plaster a light linen, and if the plaster sticks to him, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it heals within four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, bring what we have said previously.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, carefully remove no piece of the bone; if it can be removed with delicate tools appropriate for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, stretch it with fire as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and it does not dislocate anymore, if the wound is wide, stitch it up with one layer of appropriate dressing to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the forceps (a medical instrument)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks frequently in front of the shoulder, and the breakage occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places and divided into several pieces, being the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is when the breakage has an open wound, that you have two assistants, one to hold the shoulder where the forceps are broken; and the other to extend the neck towards the affected part; then adjust the dislocation with your hands so that the form is as it should be, having no appearance or displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen on the patient's shoulder, and make it large according to your needs; stretch and lift the forceps, and hold the cushion with your hand so that you adjust the dislocation as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards because it comes in fully, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one small pillow under the shoulder, and push the assistant's hand downward on the shoulder until the bone of the joint is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut above it; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike it at one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the joint to prevent it from dislocating:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and is shaped like a spoon, but not concave, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it should have two prongs, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, just as the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of the abscess being hot, if it opens and the wound is small, or you doubt that the abscess is hot, then apply bandages and lint to the wound, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if it is a hot abscess that comes, wet a linen cloth with rose oil, asafetida, and wine and place on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The bone compression when there are wounds or cuts is to place a plaster of flour and egg powder on the bone, put light packs on top, and put a spear beneath if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very large bandage, one palm wide, then put a double cloth damp on it and wrap it up; then take a subtle awl three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the awl on the break, turn the bandage around the neck, and under the skin of the healthy person and the sick person, and pull from each side, and when you see that the sutures hold the bandage in place, and you see clearly that the awl does not move above the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and when the threads loosen, tighten them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his armpit to lift the shoulder up; align the break with the forceps by adjusting the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Then repeat the application of pressure, if necessary, and hold it and leave it in that state until it is restored; and it is restored in most cases within 28 days, and less in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	for the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It happens that the broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal on its own and needs to be forced back into place; it should be aligned according to the figure of the dislocation, and reset according to its natural shape in all possible ways; then put powder from a mill with abundant egg white and fine starch, and cover it with two layers of cloth; then put a wide and thin splint, a little larger than the shoulder, on top, and if there is any hollow in the shoulder under the splint, use lin starch to fill it so that the splint fits evenly; and then firmly bind it all in one strong bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and observe the bandage every day; whenever it softens, bind it again, and if the splint moves out of place, adjust it and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, unbind it, and be careful, for it is not a bone that becomes loose easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front, and not beneath the skin, lift it up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to calm it with hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture on the thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thigh bone is sometimes fractured in the middle, but it happens seldom; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is fractured obliquely, it falls below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and immediately vomits blood, and the openings in the broken bones become apparent, and the joint feels cold.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back with one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, very carefully making it equal in all ways as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place plasters and bandages made of thin fabric over the broken bone, or something light, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; turn the arm round several times, and tighten the bandage gradually, and check each hour whether it is healing, if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be released due to corruption or itching at the site, or pain or abscess, hurry, release it, remove the plaster, and direct those who came to treat it in a healing manner; then bandage the plaster again, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is known that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones after the back, and in the chest within, and they do not pierce except because they are slippery; and one can feel this easily at the investigation of the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you set it equally, as required. Then put the splint, and hold it with a stick, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the fracture of the ribs is concave within, it causes the patient great pain and shortness of breath, as if from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; it points to the ends, and immediately vomits a large quantity of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients used great devices.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We should not cause abscesses to become hot unless they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If it has come, let it heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that anyone who puts leeches on the wound to drain it is reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leeches attract waste to the wound due to their weak positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put towels between the ribs to make the wound even, then it should be cured by sweating, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that it cannot be endured due to the broken bone, and there is fear in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision above the broken rib, and it is necessary to put one instrument underneath for support; and then it must be cut, drawn lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if they are large, and heal with plasters until it heals. And when abscesses come, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on top, and on the broken rib; and heal the broken rib as needed, and lie still on the affected side until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Occasionally comes a break in the collarbone or spine. And similarly...
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if he will be well or not, take notice if his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move nor stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many positions, and if they become mute and feel well when squeezed and pricked, know that the jointure of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if there is treatment applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when similar happens to the spine in the back, and you wish to know if it will be well or not, take notice if the feet are softened, and the symptoms are in the hands, and the vertebrae jump spontaneously and movement is against his will; and when it is soothed on his belly, it jumps again against his will. And when it is soothed on his back and he wishes to rest, he cannot. Know that it is mortal: do not labor at its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come upon him, it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward him if there is an abscess heated, put oil of roses or egg yolk oil on it until it is soothed; then put on one of the drying and comforting ointments, and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone dislocates, it is necessary to cover it; then remove the bone, and close the wound with two stitches if it is large, using a bandage; then treat the wound with an aromatic healing balm until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," push your left thumb into the space between the bones, and make it even with your right hand as much as possible; then apply the ointment and oil, if you have any; then bind it, and if there are bones dislocated, lift them up, remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it occurs, there will be a slight reduction in mobility at the site; and it extends for a long distance, bends towards the front, and causes pain at the location, swelling, and breaks the affected area.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above [the broken bone], so that you are on top of the breakage; and know what the break and its shape is; and if the break is only at the head, then make the break equal, as it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it bends inside, make the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of the break is made clear to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, place the splint on top, then place a rod or peg on top of the fracture and hold the break so that it does not move; and apply the position beneath the ribs until the fracture is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess has erupted, do not touch it until it is quieted, and place on it what we have said before; then return to the treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad accident; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breakage of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the chest and the head of the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two ways: the first being that you take a rod filled with thick paste, in this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two ropes, and lift them up, and raise the patient on one seat; then let him lower his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and have a rope attached at its midpoint, then lift it on some heavy thing or the assistants extend it downward; then place the mire (assistant) holding the breakage with both hands together, until the breakage returns as required.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way it is that one restrains the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one presses where there is a break with his hands, and the others press below all around, extending each one to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the extraction is more forceful, one tie a cord below the break, and above the break, and each minister extends to their part. If the break is near the shoulder head, it is necessary that you put a medium cord below the shoulder, and another towards the neck, below the break; and in the same way if the break is towards the neck, one should lightly tie a cord, without effort, until the break is even on the level, and on the neck; then make the break even as needed, and tie it, if no abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses come, do not tighten it for more than 7 days, and put a soft cloth soaked in linen and rose oil on it to calm the abscess; then tighten it, and the method of tightening is that you put a cushion on the break, gather the arm towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and tie the bandage, and tighten on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint on the fracture than the others, and have one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be large enough to pass over the fracture by two inches on each side; then hold the splints in place, as I said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the fracture, more firmly and lessen it in alignment.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you see the position of the splints and their binding, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is heated, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then observe every three days the binding, to ensure that pus does not swell or come to the place, or the new flesh does not come to the limb because it is too tight. Follow our advice.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	If no such accidents occur, do not unbind it before four days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one compress of equal wool, and observe every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the bindings are not softened; follow our advice by the power of medicine, and give the meat as we have previously specified, in such a way that the meat is first soft; and when it starts to recover, it should be thick. It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be rebound in forty days altogether; then unbind it and administer baths and liniments for the place to heal properly. If the incision is ugly and inflamed, wait to unbind it for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	Of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius"; one is small, that which forms the elbow, and the other is large, that which is beneath, near the little finger; by chance, only one fractures, either the small or the large, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small ulna is fractured, restoration and healing are easy; but when the large one is fractured, healing is difficult and more painful than when both are fractured together. If it is only the small ulnar bone that is fractured, then you should extend it slightly and align it.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	If it is the large bone that is fractured, then it should be pulled harder; stretch it over one fist, lift the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the others, and cross the arms above the patient's chest, with one fist in front of the other, so that the patient does not feel any pain; then extend the assistant's arm to the lower part under the fractured arm, or to the elbow, and another assistant above. Then align the bones as best you can.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, put each one back in its place, and if there is any displaced piece that protrudes, you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking into pieces, I have spoken in the individual chapter; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if, at the beginning of the resetting, abscesses arise, apply a cloth made of rosin and white beeswax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and glue one piece of cloth gently over it, until the abscesses are calmed down. Then remove the rosin, and place the plaster made with the powder of the mill with plenty of egg, then put on the splints, and make sure that the splint for the broken part is stronger and a little larger than the others; and be aware that it should have 7 splints or more in various positions: whether the broken part is in one bone, or two; and tighten more above the break than elsewhere, and always less when moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloth over the break be soft and moist, and neither too hard nor rough; and let the thread that holds it be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And check the member and the ligament afterwards after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	If any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that happens to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest. Then begin the treatment again, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, address this similarly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If the nails cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow, then you must soften it slightly and wait for some days until the nails grow, and then set it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If none of the things we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until 20 days or more. After that, you can put his hands at his neck and make them even, and watch for movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back; know that this break will heal in 30 or 40 days, or perhaps sooner, depending on the compositions and complexions of the properties.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	For at the back of the hand and near the fingers there are few fractures, but it occurs multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or dislocated, the patient should lie crosswise, straight and level; then put his hand on a cloth extended, and the attendant should extend the fractured bones and align them with mirrors, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and padding, if no abscess comes, then put an iron splint according to the size of the place; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is on the sides around the sole of the hand, make a splint of cloth, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his fractured sole; then bind it with a long piece of cloth, and let the iron splint be as large as the sole of the hand, and bind it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the outside (of a limb), it must be that you place a splint above, and another below in the heel, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and bind the joint between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the break occurs in any of the fingers (knuckles), it must be made equal as required; and hold with the heel, and if you see that you place a straight splint to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in other fingers like the index or one of the others, make it equal, and tie with the sound finger which is after; or tie them all in one bandage, as needed, or put a splint above, as for a knuckle; and beware in the restoration and placement of abscess heat, and heal what comes there, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken shin (or thigh)
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when they twist it forward or backward; and the restoration is such that one ligament is tied above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant extends their ligament equally to its corresponding place; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligament should be towards the hip and others towards the fracture. And if it is near the knee, then ligaments should be below the knee, and extend beyond; then place the patient's leg equal to its two hands, as per its natural figure, and then apply the splint and the bandage, without an abscess coming up.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that boils, let it cool down first, then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should bind it up above the fracture with a thick doubled bandage for two or three days, and allow the superfluous material to drain out, then turn the leg so that the heels are at the root of the thigh, and insert one long pin between the thigh and the leg, just below the knee, and bring the head of the pin above; then turn the leg and the upper part of the bandage, then place the stirrups on the fracture and place a stirrup on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth for seven inches between the leg and thigh to even out the tightness, then begin to bind tightly in four turns or more above the fracture; and as you go higher up the fracture, loosen it; then take the two pins that you inserted between the leg and thigh, and tie three stirrups over them, then return to beneath the head of the pin, so that you are below the hip, tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, until there is no sign of abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If pieces of the bone are protruding, you must remove them if possible; and if not, you must cut the area and draw out pus; treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the leg is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in the restoration made in this manner, the patient does not experience any pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the leg is restored within a day, or a little more or less, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the alleyway of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the alleyway of the knee occurs little breakage, but it bends frequently. And if it breaks, it is not just a fracture, but rather a split or a deep wound, and it causes pain everywhere, and this is felt by everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one equalizes the round end to its socket, as long as it can be assembled; then place the arm, and place a round peg there if needed, and tighten it as required; then check all the arrangements we have said in other breakages, like an abscess, burn, and so on; place at each accident what is needed for it, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called directly "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and it has the same kind of fracture as the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both the bones of the limb are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it turns under. Then bring an extension, make it even, and tie the splinters equally; however, if the break is misaligned or has more pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fists of thick yarn that wrap around the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wind them twice in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them at this point; the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and it is good; nor should anyone add a splint of the same length as the leg, and place the leg for protection from movement; it is done properly at the break where there is pain; move the leg every day to see if there is any abscess or other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breakage, but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer breakage and also the toes, and there is no force except for the shortening in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breakage in the bones of the foot and you see these bones rise up against each other, place the patient's foot on a flat surface like he wants to walk, then place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them back into their places; then put a splint and bandages on it, and put a small board under the foot with two hollow spaces, then bind the foot evenly, as you have covered it with cloths and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when four or six days have passed, unbind the bandages, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two [shoulders] are broken, restore them as we have said for the hands of the hand; then place a splint on the broken one according to the length of the arm, and let it be slightly larger; then place a piece of wood under the affected shoulder as I have said, and hold it in position; and if there are 2 or 3, or more [broken shoulders], break each one, placing a splint on it according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the wood under the affected shoulder; and let the top of the wood be turned away from the stomach of the shoulder so that it covers well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And do not forget the other things I have said about broken bones, after we have spoken of them; and treat each accident according to its need.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	on the break of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the woman's pelvis is broken, make her sit with her legs apart, then incline her to the lower back part and hold her from behind; then fill the cavity in the pelvis with cotton and put in as much as a pound; then turn the woman, tilt her hips and scoop out the lower back gently, and when the cotton comes to the entrance of the pelvis, the bone returns with the pound; and whenever she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and whenever she has emptied it, put it back, and do this for 7 days: the break will heal, and if you see, take a bladder of barley, tie one end of a cord to it, and push the whole bladder into the pelvis; then inflate the bladder forcefully through the cord until it is filled inside: the break will return; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the man's thumb is broken or that of a woman, restore it as we have said in the treatment for the pelvis; and these breaks shall not be hidden from him who applies his study and experience to them, and my book is intended for this purpose. For the break indicates various dispositions towards restoration: take note of this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In a spear (shaft), when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and put the shaft inside; then wrap fabrics around it, and leave it for 3 or 4 days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of a break with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, that it should be treated immediately, as the writings we have said bear witness to.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, anoint it with vitriol, unless you have something else, then immediately proceed to restore the break in that same hour, or the next day, if abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and appears on the surface near the opening, it should be set gently with light pressure, at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the limbs are not aligned to be set evenly by your hands, it should be realigned with this tool made of iron, which is about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; and therefore, the mirror must grasp 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each case of bone setting; and it should be round and slightly larger than required, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and sharp at the front, and large in the middle towards the wound, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche," so the curved limb should be placed on top of the visible bone; push it once until it returns to its original position and align it evenly with the other one. If the fracture is subtle, and the tool cannot grasp the bone properly, you must cut the visible part of the bone until the tool can take hold of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, within your power; then remove what remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure it is in its proper place, then moisten a clean cloth in black, sticky wine (if it is summer) or alcohol; do not apply any oil to the wound, as it will cause pus and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, cover the area completely according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not strained with a fracture. Many fools have done this, causing either death or further injury to the patient; therefore, let the bandages be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	If the wound is large or bad and you fear that an accident may occur, as we have said, and if you feel pain at the site, do not apply splints; instead, wrap it without splints, using hard cloths and tie them. After one or two days, if you see pus coming out of the wound, remove what you had put on it and apply a healing ointment such as tetrafarmaçon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it heals and becomes healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be set in such a way that the bone moves downward slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it passes many days and the bone cannot heal but keeps bowing out again, as there are small fragments of bones; therefore, you must press the wound firmly and remove all the dislocated pieces causing pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if there is an abscess or other corruption at the site, you must treat it according to what was said in its chapter earlier. And when a bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large members, do not drain it, as many times death follows; but leave it until it can be drained; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 or 30 days. Then treat the wound if possible; otherwise, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The swellings that come upon the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is dreadful to see; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take care with him if he is weak: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saracolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you choose one of these things or all together, grind them into powder with wine steeped in alcohol or egg whites or oil; place it on the sore in poultices, press it well and do not remove it for many days; then loosen it, and start another, until the swelling is removed; or you strain over a piece of plank well made; because the properties of wood are such that it removes all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodation has turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, you chop off the top, and reveal the superfluous parts; or you shave it at any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak limb after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the limbs are weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of excessive movement, not in its proper time; or because the patient has little blood in his body, making him weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the remedy is to make the sick person eat, and make his body lean, until the wounds multiply in him; provide baths, and give joy and cheerfulness; then apply balm to the limb, so that the balm attracts great nutrients to it, and irrigate it with cold water often, until the nutrients reach the limb; return it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is misshapen, nevertheless do not lose hope; do not believe the foolish who say one should break the limb new, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; however, if the swelling and twisting are fresh, you must anoint with warm water, or softening herbs such as marshmallow leaves, roots, clover, and similar things, and make a poultice. You should prepare one soothing poultice, such as daisy, and take the musk oil of comfrey, and mix it with ginger oil or sesame oil, and apply the poultice; or you can grind ripe figs with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands. It should be moved in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuousness is swollen and hardened, just as with a stone, it requires being cauterized; therefore, it should be covered up to the bone, incised subtly and lightly; and cloth and dressing should be applied in its treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, it is now necessary to return it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	If one waits, the joint swells, and perhaps it can be reset at the place; for this reason, it should not be moved until the swelling has subsided: many times it causes pus and other pain.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Nevertheless, when this happens, first let the patient cleanse himself, then allow the abscess to heal; then heat the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations down to the feet.
des mandibules	The jaws [or mandibles]
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It sometimes happens that the jaws [or mandibles] are dislocated in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and drool saliva from the mouth which it cannot hold, cannot close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it often returns with multiple displacements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and finished, you must reset it promptly, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	Hold the patient's head firmly and place the thumb of one hand in the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is two parts; and the other hand should be open to provide equal pressure; command the patient to soften their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the thumb holds it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is reset, indeed it is the jaws that are together, anoint them with hot water and oil while gently manipulating them; do not force it to be reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly and the mouth of the patient closes well, soak it in a cloth made of softened rose oil and beeswax, then tie it lightly with thin threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows so that it does not move to either side nor exert itself, but take light food until the pain is alleviated, and bind the jaws.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And then gently soften what he wants, and do not work at all to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jawbone is well knit and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jawbones cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their places, fevers and accustomed sores come about, and possibly a rupture of the stomach, and perhaps pus vomit.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know it is ruin; and many times the one who has this dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	Of the collarbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot dislocate from the chest within its continuity and from below, but sometimes it does dislocate to one side, and this is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and stretches out his arms; then presses the shoulder firmly with your palm, and it will return; then place a bandage and sling over it and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the part of the shoulder that is towards the chest cannot dislocate; but if it does, you must reset it to its place as we have said; then put on a bandage and sling over it, hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder can only dislocate in four ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the lower socket (assle) below; and the second way is at the part of the upper arm; and by chance, it dislocates above the part, but this rarely happens.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder blade nor inside the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the socket (assle), especially in those who have little flesh, for it can pop out easily; in those with enough flesh, it jumps only a little, and returns quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they get hit or broken, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must examine it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	Dislocation is known when it moves towards the inside (internal dislocation) and you can tell the difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a noticeable difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find a hollow in the shoulder blade and press down on the shoulder blade as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot return their hand to its place nor make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And if it is dislocated upward, do not hide it, for you will find it clearly when pressing down.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	This manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the infant is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up, then places your thumbs beneath the joint, and forcibly moves the joint upward to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extends it upwards, puts it back in place; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	If it does not come as we have said in the hands for several days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and bring him a soothing and calming poultice, such as a decotion of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and place a piece of equal-sized linen beneath the joint, neither too soft nor too hard, then the minister places his foot on the cloth, lifts the head of the shoulder properly, and pulls the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And another servant holds the head of the patient still so it does not move downwards; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see, reset it in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and there is to be present one man who is larger than the patient; he should be facing towards the side, and push the shoulder of the patient beneath the armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs by the arm;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another servant pulls the hand of the patient downwards towards the abdomen. And if the patient is too light, give him something heavy to hold, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is also reset in another way: and this is done by inserting one long needle into the ground so that the head [of the shoulder] is as rounded as a pea, and it should not be too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed beneath the patient but with soft wool on top, and the patient should be lying long along the staff; then the hand [should be] extended beyond on the other side and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return due to all the things we have said, then perform this treatment: take one needle of two hands in length and four fingers wide, which has a round head for easy insertion deep inside the joint, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie the patient's arm above the head with a bandage to prevent it from pricking the patient, then place it beneath the patient's armpit; stretch out the patient's other arm on top of the pole, and attach the shoulder to the pole, and the forearm at the wrist of the upper arm, then raise the forearm onto a block of wood about one foot wide, and extend the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side; the joint will now be in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whichever way that may be, you must put a cotton ball equal in size beneath the armpit, then apply an ointment made from flour milled with egg white, incense, and oil, all over the shoulder and around it, then bind it under the armpit tightly, and turn the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands still.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be kept closed, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal sooner; and then keep it closed for five or seven days more, and move it; and if it becomes hard and is not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of its place due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, then you should administer fire cauterization at three places, as it is stated in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched out or weakened; and know that the joint was never correctly set.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the back, either to the side or behind, is made by impact and stretching of hands, and other force is applied; and it should be treated until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing of the limb, groin comes to it late and slowly, then the patient uses many baths until that groin subsides, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	The cost of dislocation is...
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the jointure is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated everywhere, both in front and back, and dislocations are not cured, for one can see and feel it clearly; and dislocation happens according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick person's shoulder with the bone, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess heals, for if an abscess heals, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps there comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands should be turned according to the shoulder around it, above and below, and push the joint back to its place, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when the elbow doubles to its elbow, and strikes the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and there are two persons who extend the arm, and they hold it in extension so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on both sides, and when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirrors join the joint to the hand, oil it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And when it is in its place, put dry plaster with egg yolk on it and hold it in place, and make the patient hold his arm at the neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is closed in its place, remove the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it in this state for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	If there is pain after the reset of the joint, and it swells, wash and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put a piece of fat mutton on the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and make the patient enter warm water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when it swells, wipe the joint carefully, then place it back in its socket, and then immerse it [in water]; and do this 2 or 3 times until it is healed; and if you see, put warm moist hay soaked with butter on top of it; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is light and easy to reduce compared to other joints, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the very instant that it becomes dislocated, unless the limb swells or hot abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the repositioning is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the helper, and the mirror reflects it, so that it is even, as he places his palm at the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And therefore you should look to see if it is in the correct position, then make the sick person place the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, make the sick person place the back of his hand on the table, and place your hand at the appearance of the joint. If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if he tightens with plasters to alleviate abscesses, let him leave it in this state to begin healing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to put it back in place after any number of days, then the dislocation remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And do not harm the patient until his hand is crippled and cannot tighten anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries are severed, for there is no other tool available except to tighten with a cautery in such a case, and possibly nothing else is of value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, put it on the plaster as we have said, then hold it and leave it for 5 days, then release it.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, wet it with hot water and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand may be dislocated on either side, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then stretch out the arm, and push the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then hold the elbow of the arm, and turn it towards the part where it is disjointed.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	Leave it for two days, and then make it equal in the third day; bind it as we have said, and loosen it by a day, and make it move, and bind it again; do this frequently until it becomes narrow.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated from another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The dislocation of the vertebra of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are many such dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly comes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excretion jumps unintentionally, it cannot be held, and many times some member is softened, either both legs or the two arms or one of them.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the vertebra of the back becomes fourfold; that which becomes fourfold at the rear is called "gilbositeness":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The cure is such that you should inquire if the tumors have arisen from childhood; if there is no remedy or healing for it altogether.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of healing used to speak in large words, but they are not of much benefit in all cases.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the tumor which comes before, there is neither tool nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	And similarly, one that comes straight between two costal areas, cannot be cured by anyone other than the one who comes from behind, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	The patient should lie down face up on one even level and apply pressure beneath him to prevent bleeding;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a thorn into the head and another at the feet, and tie ropes around the soles of the patient's feet, hips, knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	And two ministers should know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two thorns;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	And let them be tightly closed, the tongs as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a plank that is three arms long and shaped like a wedge, place it under the patient on their side, and thrust the head of the plank beneath them, then place the edge of the plank on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and the mirrors place their feet on the other end of the plank, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see that it does not work, turn the plank with your hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you stick two needles in the head of the patient's arm, near each joint, and have space of about an inch between each needle.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have one needle twisted in each needle, or the turn is corrected, and the needles are firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between two needles have a turning needle, like cables, and in the two turning needles have two small needles of about an inch long, to turn the turn.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the cable that is between the ankles to the turn near the head, and the other cable towards the other turn at the joints, and each minister turns his turn with all the cable, and the master aligns the spike as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is evened (the affected part), place a plaster of desiccative substance with abundance of egg, then pour warm water over it, and then apply a thin board of 3 fingers in length, pressing the place of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a cord as we have said, and let the patient use warm fumigation until he is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes at the end of healing, then administer softening and soothing medicines, with the board as we have said before; and sometimes one applies a piece of wood to it.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine and it seems to be a dislocation; but it is the bone that opens, for which reason there should not be any presumption: perhaps death will come as a result.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the shoulder dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the shoulder and the shoulder blade come undone only due to dislocations, and it does not happen in the same way as other joints; and the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: inside and outside, front and back, more inside than others, and less dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the diseased leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and wider than the healthy knee, and the diseased knee cannot bend at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And it is the loin that is dislocated swollen with abscesses, because the knee joint is located there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who is about to die, is that this happening is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who is about to die, are that his leg is swollen and bent as described earlier; however, do not double the knee in pain, and if you want him to walk, he cannot move it forward, and he retains his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he limps on his toes.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who is about to die, are that he cannot extend or bend his knee, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at its place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The translations for the given lines are:
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one where dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inside and out, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then one strong servant should be prepared and firmly hold the leg with two hands or one chain tied around the knee:
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another attendant extends his hand over it in this manner, pushing his hands beneath the buttocks, then tightens a rope-like device on the thigh; and another holds the head with the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and everyone rises together at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four types [of procedures], and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If the joint is not dislocated, treatment should be applied to its appearance. When a dislocation is at the front, you must remind the patient to lie on their healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh and the part that is below the angle, and tighten the rope towards the angle and the forceps.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another assistant by the arms, and embrace the large part of the affected thigh and stretch it out in the opposite direction; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the patient's two feet together with a strong rope above their heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two feet more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang the patient by the neck from a post, and have them suspended two arms' length above ground; then command one servant to embrace the thigh, and another servant should be hanging with the patient, who should embrace the thigh, as the joint is returning quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at its furthest point, lie the patient down as we have said in the section on sciatica, and apply one ligature above the affected leg properly, and also above the pelvis.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	And then put two splinters, one at the neck and one at the feet, then insert one splinter between the thighs of the patient in the affected area.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And let it be planted with dampened cloths around [the affected area], so as not to prick the patient; then extend each assistant toward him, and place an equal mirror opposite his hand for the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns [the dislocation], that is good. If not, place him on a table and press as we have said in the gibbosity, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front [of the body], it must be extended quickly and as I have said; place the mirror above the injured angle, then press with the other hand and hold it below towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is towards the outside, it should not be extended downwards, nor raised up on the ground, but rather it should remain as if the haunch were dislocated outwards, just as we have said regarding the lying down on the two haunches.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	And it should be raised up, and the limb extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed on the joint towards the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be at the right point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, place the pillow, and bind with a bandage so that the haunch does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And it rests for 3 or 4 days, then you dislocate it, and put a splint on it; and if you see that they are even, hold them steady as before, and leave it. Three days; then you dislocate it again, and make it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees dislocate in three ways: inside and outwards, backwards; they do not dislocate forwards.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull it apart between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee outwards; and another servant extends his foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they bend slightly at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster on top, and make the leg adherent to the thigh, and let them lie together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then dislocate it; and do not disturb the patient to walk, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs have not healed, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and there is a bulge in the area where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reduction is easy, and it should be done lightly when it is only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold the leg (or "limb") of the affected area by the ankle with one assistant:
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then towards your left hand two times, then stretch it upwards and push the foot upwards forcefully.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this two times as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that is good; if not, repeat the work because it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, and make a firm pass through the earth between his legs, and bind cloths around it so as not to prick the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the ministers dye the leg, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to the length of one link, so that he binds it above the foot on the neck.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then all the ministers stretch equally, and the patient should be held tightly between the legs of the ministers to restrain him when he is stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the healer holds the dislocation equally in his hands, and another minister binds the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at its point, he applies the plaster and wadding, forms it, binds the foot to the leg, and watches the nerves that are above the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Leave it for two to three days, and if the ligaments soften, hold it in place; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and advise the patient to walk for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	If he goes before this time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears, then it is necessary to appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both [parts] are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without effort, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any way on the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit. On a flat surface or a table upright, and place your foot on that which opens those jointures, then press your foot firmly, until it returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is equal and nothing opens, place a table with two feet beneath the foot of the patient, then form a strap and leave it for three days, then release it; let it rest until it heals.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When wound comes with the dislocation, and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in healing, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and slow, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	And begin with soothing abscesses with warm water, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you see no hope of healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, before the abscess grows.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	And when the limbs are at their place, provide things to soothe the abscess, and treat the wound, as needed, with ointments desiccated;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are crushed, break them and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	And protect yourself from entering into fear, as I have said, for it is worthless to you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body. Amen;
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the medical text;
