Having thus completed this book for you, which is the latest work on medicine with additions thereto, and having reached the end of it through his explanations and his own statements, it has seemed to me right to complete it for you with this Treatise, that is, with manual surgery.
Since manual surgery is neglected in our region and entirely private in our time, until perhaps the knowledge of it has perished and its trace has been lost; and there remain from it only a few descriptions in ancient books, which have been distorted by hand, and errors and hesitations have arisen until the intentions of his art have been closed and its sight has faded: I have thought it right to revive it with the order of this Treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and so to come to the forms of cautery tools and the rest of surgical instruments; with the addition of declarations and the elaboration of what is necessary.
Moreover, the reason why a good master of this art with his own hand is not found in our time is that the art of medicine is long; and it is necessary for its author to exercise himself in anatomy before he narrated what Galen did, until he knows the members' helps, their forms, their union and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, the number of them, and their exit, and the pulsations and quietness of veins and arteries, and the exits of places.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that the name is much with the name, and little with the work, especially in the art of the hand.
Indeed, we have already spoken of him at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not aware of what we have said about anatomy, will not succeed, but will fall into error, which harms men; as I have seen many among them who boast of this knowledge, yet lack understanding and experience in it.
This is because I have seen a stupid physician cut into a scrofulous swelling on a woman's neck and he injured some arteries in her neck; therefore the woman's blood flowed until she died in his hands.
And I have seen another physician who presumptiously tried to extract a stone from a man whose urethra had become blocked due to age, and the stone was large. He therefore approached him and extracted it with a urinary probe. Why the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had been called to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the frailty of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another physician, who was receiving payment from a certain duke of our land for medicine. And there was a eunuch, black, who was with him; he had a fracture in his thigh near the calcaneum. The physician, through his ignorance, squeezed the fracture over the wound with lint and stitches, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he released him according to his wishes. Afterwards, he released him after a few days and ordered him not to loosen the ligature. And he remained in that condition until his leg and foot were gangrened, and he came to his end.
So I was called to him, and I hurried to loosen the ligature; then peace came, and he was freed from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member; and I could not stop it.
So, as the corruption ceased to spread in the member, it perished.
And I saw another physician, who was probing the cancerous abscess; and after a few days, it became infected until the evil of the disease increased with its owner's condition.
This is because when the cancer is pure from a melancholy humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all unless it is in a member that can tolerate it so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And because of that, children, it is necessary for you to know that surgery, when divided with the hand, is divided into two parts: namely, the operation associated with health, and the operation where there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have already discussed at length in every section of this book where the operation lies that carries fear and trepidation.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be careful and cautious so that you do not find foolish ways to speak and dishonor yourselves.
Therefore, take care with caution and protection, and tend to your patients with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading to grace from God for a commendable salvation and succession; and let go of terrible afflictions difficult to heal; and free your minds from what makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter into your faith and advantage.
For it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally for the extent of your power.
Galen indeed has already said in some of his precepts. Do not treat a bad illness; do not call yourself a bad doctor.
I have, however, divided this Treatise into three Chapters.
**First Chapter**
On cauterization with fire and acute medicine, this chapter deals with the forms and arrangement from head to foot, and the shapes of surgical instruments and cautery tools, as well as everything necessary for the procedure.
**Second Chapter**
On section and perforation, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: the extraction of arrows and similar foreign bodies, and all the chapter is arranged according to the forms of instruments.
**Third Chapter**
On restoration, dislocation, and treatment of torsion, and similar conditions, this chapter is arranged from head to foot according to the forms of instruments.
But before we proceed with the description of operations, it is necessary to speak of the qualities of healing and damaging factors, and in what types of wounds they manifest.
I say therefore that discourse on the quality of cauterization and its damage is lengthy and subtle, a knowledge and hidden secret.
Many learned men have also spoken on this topic and disagreed; for me, however, a brief summary of their statements is sufficient, lest I prolong the discussion.
I say therefore that cautery applies universally to every type of wound that involves matter or lacks it; excepting two types of wounds, which are the hot wound without matter and the dry wound without matter.
However, there is disagreement between them regarding the hot and dry wound with matter. Some said that cautery is beneficial for those wounds. And others said the contrary to him, namely that cautery is not suitable for a disease arising from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat, and it is unsuitable for healing from a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he who says the contrary to him replied: "Cautery is a remedy for every hot and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humors to the fire's complexion, you find the human body cold.
And I myself say by his words: for I have already tested it several times from experience.
However, one should not approach it unless they have already been tested and practiced in the final chapter of cautery, and have understood the variety of human complexions, the disposition of diseases within themselves, their causes, the events that befall them, and the space of time for their duration.
From the other complexions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases. For indeed all doctors have agreed upon these things, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery for them.
And know, my children, that from the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and the goodness of it over cautery with medicated substances, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless to the member to be cauterized, and it does not harm another member joined with it, unless in a slight way.
The action of medicine that fights against disease indeed reaches that which is stretched out from the body part, and perhaps causes difficulty in healing the disease in the body part, and perhaps it kills.
Fire, however, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause it (damage) unless it becomes excessive.
Indeed, through experience, because of the length of service and study with art, and the focus on the truth of things, and because of that, I am excusing the length of this speech.
And if not, because it is not permitted to this book of mine, I will present to you a hidden secret about fire, and the quality of its operation in expelling bodies, by which it expels diseases through philosophical discourse, sharpened by your minds.
And know, children, that they disagree in the time when it comes to making cautery, and they set a better time for the wound.
And I say that cautery is appropriate in every time: because the damage caused by chance through time is submerged in the healing brought about with cauterization. And especially if cauterization is for necessary pains from strong, urgent pains that do not tolerate delay: because it is feared from them that a greater harm will occur than the slight damage caused by time's passing.
And let not that notion fall into your minds, O sons, which they do not appreciate, except for common and stupid doctors; namely, that the illness which is healed by cauterization does not always return: and they attribute its consequences, and the matter is not as they think. For cauterization is only where medicine alters the complexion and dries up the humidities which are the causes of pains.
However, cauterization exceeds medicine in the speed of its healing, and the strength of its operation, and the certainty of its mastery; and it is possible that the illness returns after a certain time according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of his illness, and its strength; and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him. And it comes to itself in acquiring its causes from food and similar things, unless an illness occurs in which cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in a member due to a few superfluities and humidities, such as cauterization on a tooth because of pain and similar things, is possible; for it may not return in that place the same pain. But that happens rarely.
In truth, the common opinion that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is a correct statement; not what they intend by it, for they believe there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other means after the opportunity for cauterization has passed.
But the contrary is true; the cautery is the last resort of medicine, not unless when we apply methods of treatment to certain illnesses and they do not help, then we apply cautery at the end, which brings about relief. Thus, what is meant by the cautery being the last resort of medicine, according to popular understanding and many physicians, is false.
However, they said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they did not say this unless because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance; and they said that cautery does not cause pus in the wound. That is not entirely true; for I have already tested it and found that it does not work the same way in all bodies without others.
And cautery with gold itself is good, and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you use fire cautery with gold over fire according to the amount you desire because of the redness of gold, and if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire and turns into layers.
Therefore, the artisan falls from that work and because of it, cautery with iron becomes more convenient and closer to us, as a result of its suitability for practice.
And I have indeed now arranged this Chapter on Wound Care, according to the chapters: and I have ordered them from head to foot, so that he who seeks anything from it may find it.
**Head II.**
**Herein is described the cauterization that rules over moisture and coldness upon the brain: these two are causes of fever, and the great flow of humors from the head to the eyes and ears, and the abundance of sleep, and toothache, and throat pain, and in general all illness arising from coldness, such as paralysis, fever, epilepsies, apoplexies, and similar illnesses.**
**The method of cauterization is as follows: first, you must persuade the patient: to purge the head thoroughly with a cleansing medicine three or four nights in succession, according to the condition of the patient's strength, age, and habits.**
**Then instruct him to make incisions on his head with a razor.** **Then have him sit between your hands in such a way that he has already placed his hands on his chest.**
Then place the root of your palm on the root of your nose between your eyes. Whenever therefore your middle finger touches it, mark that place with an unhealed wound.
Then use a cautery with oil: which has this form.
Then place the same on the marked place with an unhealed wound, gradually lowering your hand, and you will turn it around. Then quickly withdraw your hand, and look at the place.
Which if you see has now removed from the bone the amount of the skull or the amount of the zinc, then withdraw your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron or another until you see the bones that I have told you.
Then add some salt, dissolve it in water, and soak the cloth in it, then place it on the place, and leave it for three days.
Then place the cloth soaked in butter on top of it, and leave it over the place until the scar from the fire is destroyed. Then it is treated with a four-ingredient ointment until it heals.
They also said that the deeper and more open the wound remains, the more pus it emits; therefore, it is better and more curable.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized from the mouth to the anus; and hold the cautery until something thick from the bone is burned.
Then it is smoothed after what is burned from the bone, then it is treated.
And others say that it is necessary to use a cautery until it leaves an impression in the bone so deep that the tooth falls out, which is done like a horn; or an instrument that women put into their vulvas when giving birth: and they think that vapors from this place are exhaled through the open wound over time.
Then it is treated until it solidifies.
However, these two types of cautery do not at all appear to me except in some people according to their fear.
And to leave it alone is better for my health.
The head becomes weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have witnessed in the other members, and especially when the head is naturally weak and feeble, then the first species of cautery is more healthy and better for me, and I use it in my operations to preserve health.
Head III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head and persists, becoming severe, it is treated with herbs, poultices, hot compresses, oils, and emollients. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one of the cauteries we have mentioned and does not benefit from them, then consider this. For if the weak head is of strong constitution by nature and is not feeble, and it suddenly feels a freezing cold, then cauterize below that point with another cautery, sparingly. Then cauterize the entire head with your cautery, without letting it penetrate the skin, and expose the amount from the bone as we have mentioned. And cauterize the center of the head with one cautery at the place called the "vas" (a term for a blood vessel or artery), which is the place where the flow is strongest, and raise your heat upon it so that you do not expose the bone. The patient indeed suffers from that constant pain, as well as various pains distinct from those of the other parts of the head.
And I will say that this cauterization should be done in its place: and it is necessary that there be a cauterizing instrument for the horns of the head, and a milder cauterizing instrument for the back of his head, through which the middle of the head is cauterized.
Head IV.
When a painful and persistent sensation occurs in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is drained with purifying medicines for the head, and the remaining treatment is administered as I mentioned in the divisions of ailments, but it does not alleviate the entire condition, then cauterization should be done in that area according to two methods: either cauterization with heated medicine burning it, or with iron.
However, cauterization with heated medicine burning it involves taking a tooth from one person and its own skin, and cutting off the extremities of it on both sides. Then, cut the place of pain with a phlebotomist's side, until a place beneath the skin where the tooth is caught, is formed.
Therefore, introduce it into the flesh itself until it is hidden; then tighten it with a delicate constriction and leave it for fifteen hours, then loosen it and extract another, and leave the wound uncovered for two or three days; afterwards, place a cloth soaked in butter on top of it until the pus has formed; finally, treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to do that with certain burning medicines, as I have written in the twelfth chapter of the book on drugs, then apply them.
Indeed, cauterization with iron is done in this manner. The burning cautery, whose form is as follows.
And it is called the claw cautery, because its form resembles a claw, in which there is something of curvature, and in its middle there is a small eminence.
Then place it on the spot and hold your hand, and slowly turn the iron with velocity; and the amount that is cauterized should be according to the thickness of the skin, as its halfway point. And raise your hand so as not to burn the artery below, which would cause blood flow.
Next, soak the bandage in a solution of salt water and place it over the wound, leaving it for three days. Then apply butter to the bandage, and afterwards treat with ointment until healed.
And if it be necessary, cauterize this hemicranium with the edge of a knife according to the art of cautery. And take care from the incision of the artery in this hemicranium, not too far or too shallow.
§ Concerning the method of cautery in ancient hemicranium.
When treating a hemicranium, as we mentioned in the previous treatment and in the division of ailments, and if this treatment does not help: and you see that the illness does not suffice with the first cauterization with medicine or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to make the cautery with a knife until it turns white after marking on the site of pain with a line, whose length is half a finger, or something like that; and place your hand once with pressure, and tighten it until you cut the artery and reach the jaw.
However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during chewing, so that it does not burn the side or the nerve that moves it, from which spasm may occur.
And this should be above all a guard and caution regarding the flow of blood from an artery that has been cut. For in cutting, there is fear, and above all to him who does not know what he is doing, and is neither studious nor expert; and he leaves the operation with that first mistake.
And I come to the remembrance of the regulation of the flow of blood from an artery according to its own manner and in the place of this book.
If you see from the severity of the wound that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see the body tolerating cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, treat the wound until it heals.
And if you see, administer cautery which we said in the chapter on extracting an artery with a cautery having two knives. For cauterization is indeed better and more effective with this method.
# On the method of cauterizing in the case of ear pain.
When ear pain occurs due to cold, and it is cured with warm compresses, and the remaining cure as we said in division, and the pain does not go away, then apply fire cautery; and that is called 'Punctum', which has this form.
Then, after the ignition of the point, it is applied around the entire ear, as it has been shown; or around both ears if pain is felt in both simultaneously. Then, using the cauterizing iron, stretch it from the root of the ear, shortly after you have marked the site with wax; and the amount of caustic should be ten points on each ear, approximately.
Then, take care of the wounds until they heal.
§ On the method of cauterization in surgery.
Chapter VII.
The surgery which is cured by cauterization is only of certain types that occur from phlegm, according to what we have mentioned in the division of diseases.
And for the species of cauterization that occurs from desiccation and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this species of surgery with fire, and hot irons, and gargles, and it does not confer a cure, then you should cauterize the patient three times: first at the root of the ear, second slightly below its natural position, and third at the connection of the two lips.
And place your cauterizing instrument from the opposite side of the weaker part. For softening does not occur unless it is in the part that appears healthy.
And the shape of cauterization is such that you cauterize the very tip of the upper ear lobe just beneath the forehead's horn, and at another time; its length should be according to the length of the thumb. And place your hand with the cauterizing instrument until the amount that burns through half of the skin's thickness is consumed.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it's a kind of knife, whose form I've described: however, it isn't too thin as you can see; and it should be that there's a little extra thickness to the knife.
Then care for the wound with what came before; until it heals.
# Regarding the ancient method of cauterization for apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes ancient (or when, after following the aforementioned treatments and care, your condition doesn't improve and the patient does not have a fever), then cauterize them with four cauteries over all the horns of their head, and with a cautery in the middle of the head as I've said before, and another cautery at the nape of the head, according to what came before; and the manner of cauterization should be as previously described.
It is also cauterized with a cauterizer on the stomach's opening: and this is more ultimate.
Then it is treated with what came before.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the early stages of a great disease of the hip, washes that cleanse the brain be given.
Then wash the entire head of the infected person, and place a plaster of cooked glue described in the treatise on plasters on their forehead, and apply it several times.
The same method is cauterization itself: and it should be done according to the same order that I mentioned there.
If therefore it is cured by that, it is good. If not: then perform three cauterizations on the back part of their head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye, and put between each cauterization a thickness of a finger.
Then care for cauterization, together with what preceded it.
If, however, you wish to add to it, and the patient can endure it: then perform cauterization in the middle of it. If you wish to add it: then cauterize the very top over the two horns.
Then care for the wound until it heals: and let cauterization be oily according to the form that has been described before.
§ Regarding the method of cauterization in paralysis and its soothing.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the purification of the head with hair, and with what we have said.
Then carefully clean the head of the patient: afterwards, cauterize the very top with hot iron in the middle of the head, and cauterize over every horn of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and apply three times over the spinal bones.
If, however, you need to soothe the body from many other ailments, and the patient can endure it, and the ailment is strong: then cauterize the very top with four hot irons over the spinal bones, and finish with the last iron cauterization, until much of it is burned from the skin, and draw your hand away. Then care for the wound itself until it is healed, and thus apply oil as a cauterizing agent.
**On cauterization in epilepsy.**
An epileptic should not be cauterized except for that whose epilepsy arises from phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to clean the brain first with cauterization and with the rest of the care that we have mentioned in division; when the patient's condition is severe or he is tolerant of accepting medications.
However, if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then gargles and brain-cleansing chews are administered for many days prior, with the aid of nutritious foods.
Then he should shave the patient's head, after which cauterize the wound with a single cautery instrument in the middle of the head, according to what was mentioned before; and another cautery on the back of his head, and over every horn of his head with cautery. If the patient is strong and tolerant, then he should be cauterized with the cautery instruments that I have mentioned while having paralysis, and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back; and the cautery should be done with oil as before.
However, if the patient is a young boy, then apply a fine cautery in this manner.
**On the method of cauterization in melancholy.**
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize them with cauteries, as we mentioned regarding paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of sad thoughts and the body is weakened by moisture, then give it something to purify its brain, as mentioned before in separation; then shave the head of the weak person, and make afterwards a proper poultice from flax, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head: and the patient, sitting square, should be held from all sides.
Then apply the linen compress. And it is better from an ancient sheep's tallow. And heat it gently over a moderate fire, to the extent that the finger can tolerate when introduced into it. Next, apply a cool compress in the middle of the head in a circular motion and continue until it becomes cold.
Apply this treatment to the patient once a week, along with the rest of his regimen, until he is cured.
If it is yourself, cauterize it by making small punctures in most of it, apart from holding the hand with a cauterizing instrument; deep down, it smells bad.
This type of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Next, place on it a cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
**Regarding the method of cauterization with descending water.**
**Head XIII.**
When you have determined the beginning of water in the eye by the signs I mentioned in division, then begin and wash the patient, with that which will cleanse his head.
And keep it free from all moisture, and make it sit in a bath, for several days of fasting.
Then command her to shave her head and burn a scar in the middle of her forehead. Then burn them deeply with two irons if there is an accumulation of water in both eyes at the same time; or from one side, if there is an accumulation of water in one eye; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and the burns should be long in width across the temples, and cauterize to stop the flow of blood.
If you see anything from this, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible, and I come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, cutting them off, and guarding against the flow of blood.
And when it is burned into the skin, under two bones, with the last two irons produced.
**On cauterizing in ancient tears.**
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, continuous, and flow over the veins and arteries that are clearly visible on the outer part of the head, it is because of the excesses of cold phlegm; then burn with the same iron used at the beginning when water descends, burn in the middle of the forehead, and use two irons on each temple, and two irons on the skin under two bones. And if you need to add to it, then cauterize it carefully on every side with a small cautery instrument above the end of the eyebrow.
On the method of cauterizing a nose ulcer.
When you treat it with what we mentioned in the previous section, and it does not respond to treatment; then apply a poultice of three nights, then shave the head and cauterize it with a medium cautery instrument and an olive cautery. Then cauterize it with two-sided cautery instrument above the two eyebrows slightly below the hairline.
And be careful not to injure the artery.
And this is the form of the clauis cautery.
On the method of cauterizing palpebral softening.
When the eyelid softens due to inflammation or moisture; then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery instrument, this cautery should be in the shape of a crescent moon.
If you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with just two cauterizing instruments on every part, and they will extend from two time periods; and the length of each cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrow, and do not use your whole hand with the cautery, but rather according to the amount that is burnt off of the third eyelid.
§ Regarding the cauterization of the eyelid when the hairs turn sharp towards the eye.
The cautery on it is according to two methods: either cautery with fire, or cautery with burning medicine.
However, in cauterization with fire, especially the sick person should be prepared beforehand to remove their hairs, if there are any that need to be cut, until they lengthen and equalize. If, however, they are pricked near their origin: then close the patient's eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move until they heal.
When they have healed and equalized, then place the head of the sick person in your lap: then make signs on the eyelids of the eye with wax, marking it according to the shape of a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a cloth soaked in albumen or in the mucus of psilia over the eye.
Then use a hot iron whose shape is like this.
Then cauterize over the shape that you have marked gradually on many wounds until the surface of the skin is burned, which appears like the shape of a myrtle leaf entirely own.
And the sign of health of your work is: if you notice that the eyelid of the eye is contracting again and the hairs rising up near the point of the eye.
So raise your hand then, and leave it alone for three days.
Then place a cloth with butter on it over it until the scar is gone. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
If any of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid softens, then repeat the cauterization over that place as you did at first.
However, if the hairs are below: then cauterize it until it goes back to its natural place, and ensure that the hairs do not bother the eye.
It is necessary to urge the patient to pull out the hairs until they are extended and equalized. Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from a piece of cloth.
Then take a known amount of soap and some dry lime, about an ounce or something like it, and rub them together vigorously while applying pressure to ensure they mix well, being careful not to let it freeze. Then take the prepared piece of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf and place it over one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cold compress soaked in egg white, holding the head of the patient in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine and gently press it. And you should move it whenever the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for its sting is like fire.
While he persists in this bite that he has discovered, then abandon the medicine and move it with your finger. When the bite has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider that if you see the eyelid lifting up as it does when it contracts with heat or a cut, it is good; but if not, then repeat the application of medicine to the place where it has left no mark or stain until your operation is complete and the eye contracted.
Then place a poultice of butter on it until the burnt skin is eradicated. Then care for it with a diaphoretic ointment or any other until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, during the operation, to take care as the last step so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If after several days the eyelid becomes soft and something from the hair falls into the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which is becoming soft from the eyelid, as you did at first. Then care for it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of humans differ in size and shape. Therefore, according to that, your consideration should be such that the way of righteousness is not hidden from him who studies this art.
§ On the method of cauterizing the lacrimal fistula.
When you treat a fistula, as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not bring relief, then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Tell the patient to place his head in your lap and hold his head with both hands in such a way that it does not move or be agitated while he performs this act.
Then place the heated cloth or a piece of mucilage over his eye: then apply the cauterizing iron, which has this shape.
It should be shaped like the curve of a reed's quill from one end, as is done with the cauterizing iron; and if it goes through to the other end or tries to go up, then it is inadequate.
However, this cut is better suited for your purpose.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and drain the blood from it, and clean it; and if it is not open, then open it, and drain the pus from it.
Then place a hot iron on it, which is made to burn very much.
And hold it with your hand for a moment near the iron by the eye, to the side of the nose, so that your hand does not wander or disturb the patient; and place the hot iron on the fat of the eye, and destroy it.
If therefore you have reached the end of your hot iron up to the mouth, it will be good. And if not: then repeat the hot iron once or twice, as you need; and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cloth with butter, and treat it with an antiseptic ointment until it is healed.
If, after forty days, it does not heal: then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed; and scrape it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some have called the first. Intend to the location of the fistula and find it; then place a fine iron (i.e., a thin cannula) into that fissure. And pour into it the quantity of a drachma of melted lead, and hold your hand firmly with good retention of the cannula, so that it does not move at all, or flow, or reach the eye with the melted lead.
And it is necessary that you place over the eye of the patient a cloth dipped in either albumen or water.
Lead burns the site of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful cure.
Which, when the fistula is healed through cauterization and treatment as we have said, is good. And if that does not happen, then it is necessary to create a nasal opening and bring the fistula back to flow with the nose, according to where it naturally goes.
# On the Method of Cauterization in Lip Fissures.
Many times, cracks occur in the lip folds, which are called pilings, especially on the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these cracks, as we said regarding the division of the disease, and if treatment does not help, then use a small iron cautery in this manner.
And the depth of it should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Then place the hot iron quickly into those cracks until it reaches the depth of the fissures.
Then care for it with a poultice until it is healed.
**On cauterizing oral fistulas.**
When an abscess occurs at the root of a gum, or on the palate, or among the roots of teeth; it forms pus and breaks out; then it becomes gangrened and pus runs, and a fistula is formed; if treatment does not help in this case, then hot cauterization should be applied according to its size. Then introduce the burning steel into the fistula's opening and hold your hand until the burning iron reaches its deepest point and its end: do this once or twice with two strokes.
Then take care of it afterward, as we said about the treatment until it is cured.
If therefore the healing separates and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place and take away the corrupt bone as it comes to its head.
§ Regarding the method of cauterization in the gingiva and the softening of teeth.
When the gingiva softens due to moisture and the teeth become loose, and treating it with medicines does not help, then put the sick head in your lap.
Then apply the cauterizing fire, whose form comes after these steps, so that you place a tube over the tooth and quickly insert the burning cauterizing iron into it; hold your hand for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then raise your hand; afterwards repeat the cautery several times, according to need.
Then the patient should fill their mouth with salty water and hold it for one hour and then spit it out.
For the tooth's motion becomes fixed, the gums, having softened, tighten and thus the corrupted moisture dries up.
§ On the method of cauterization for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or there is actual cold within the tooth itself, or decay, and treatment with medicines does not help, then cautery should be applied in one of two ways: either cautery with butter or cautery with fire.
The cautery with butter is to take the raw butter and boil it in a copper kettle or in vessels. Then take a cloth, and apply it over the affected extremity. Then immerse the affected part in the boiled butter and place it eagerly over the painful tooth, holding it until it becomes numb, and repeat this several times until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
If you wish, immerse the cloth or bandage in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth; then place a hot iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
Its cauterization with fire is to aim for the air canal or the iron channel. And it should be in the body so that the point of the fire does not reach the lower jaw.
Then apply the cautery, whose shape will come together, and place it on that tooth; and hold your hand until the cautery becomes cold.
Do that several times, for the pain will be moved, or on the same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary that the impression of that cautery fills the patient's mouth with good butter, and holds it for a certain time, then spits it out.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Cauterize with any available point of the instrument according to what is possible, and this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterization for styes.
When styes are affected with phlegm and cold humours, and do not yield to the operation of medicines, nor permit their dissolution by heat, then apply a hot cautery of this form.
It should have two open ends so that smoke escapes from one end as the cautery is applied to the other; then place the glowing tip on the wound once, and a second time if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the wound.
If the wound is shallow, then apply the cautery according to its depth.
Afterward, leave it for three days, and apply a poultice dipped in butter on top until the charred part is removed by the heat.
Then care for it with a dental ointment until the shape of the canal is healed.
On the method of cauterization for hoarseness and difficulty in breathing.
When moisture is collected over the lung channel, and especially when it is accompanied by the coldness of the skin, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated with the first use of laxative medicines.
Then, he should cauterize the same at the base of the throat in a depressed place, and be careful not to come across the cautery with it to the throat or skin, unless something of its own.
Then, he should cauterize the same with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last spine of it finishing: and let the cautery be made into a clasp according to the manner that preceded.
Then he should care for it with what preceded until it is healed.
§ Regarding the method of cauterization in lung diseases and coughing.
When coughing and lung disease are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, nor is the illness old: then he should cauterize the same with two cauteries above the furca in depressed places, gentle, smooth. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples: and let the cautery be made into a tube according to the form that preceded.
And if your cauterization by puncturing with a cauterizing instrument, called the *Punctum*, precedes the pain of the ear in puncturing; and there are punctures from thirty punctures as if to another.
Then care for the wound itself with what preceded it, until it is healed.
And now it has three branches according to this form. Why should cauterization be done with it when you make three cuts with it at once?
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to moisture and does not form itself back to its original position within the allotted time, until it has become accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement, which happens as we have already testified, at that time you must reduce the dislocation in the first instance. Then the patient should be placed back on his back or side, over the healthy side. Then lift the skin, which is inside the *Titillico* towards the upper parts with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint dislocates to the interior side.
Then, having a fire-brand, he holds two vessels. What is the form of this?
Then he cauterizes the skin, until it penetrates to another side, and the figure of the cauterization joins with four fire-brands.
And sometimes the cauterization is made with a fire-brand that has three vessels, why then the figure of the cauterization becomes six fire-brands; and the vessels are according to the thinness of what is attempted.
And this is the form of the fire-brand that has three vessels.
And sometimes one is added beyond this manner, why then there are eight fire-brands.
Then he places crushed salt on the fire-brand. Then he makes the injured part adhere to tranquility, so that the member does not move until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is to higher parts and it happens rarely, then he cauterizes itself on the shoulder with a fire-brand of a key, or with many points of fire-brands.
When the union is strengthened and moisture is removed, the sick person is healed.
**On the method of cauterization of the stomach.**
When cold and great moisture happens in the stomach, until they extract it from its condition, and phlegm is multiplied towards it, and persistent treatment is required, and no relief is afforded, then the patient should lie down on his back, and extend his legs, and his hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the shape of a scallop in quantity equal to one finger, and two cauteries below the two sides of the single cautery, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And stretch between each other so that they do not join when pus is formed.
And the depth of the cautery should be the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the figure of the cauteries should be according to this form without addition, and if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery that is made for this cautery be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by puncturing it which is troubled by this cautery; and it is as if signs are made on the stomach with punctures according to the quantity, as when wax is incised with encaustic; then it is cauterized itself with the cautery of the puncture; then it is cared for with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterizing with cold.
When pain occurs in the liver due to cold and moisture, or because of a thick excess of humor, until it is freed from its natural excessive discharge, and the patient is cured as we have said, and it does not benefit him; then he should lie back on his own head, and make signs with encaustic in three cauterizations according to this figure, and the same quantity below the epigastrium from the hypocondria where the elbow of the man reaches: and let there be a space between every cautery according to the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body; and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the quantity of that which is to be cauterized be according to the thickness of the skin, half of its quantity not added; and let the patient stand on his feet.
If, however, he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of cauterization.
And it is indeed possible for you to cauterize these wounds with the cautery knife when subtlety and caution reside within your art.
And take care not to proceed too far with cauterization, so that the thickness of the skin throughout is not too severe, which could affect the whole body and reach the intestines: since the skin there is thin, therefore be aware of this.
§ Concerning the method of cauterization, proceed with caution regarding the liver.
When it happens, and you need to know if that cautery mark is on the liver or its membrane, then if it's on the liver, a severe pain arises without any acuity, and gravity takes over; but if it's on the membrane of the liver, intense pain accompanies it, and you now see that their treatment has exhausted them.
Therefore, the patient must take back his weight on his head. Then, the shape of the cautery mark with wax is made; then, ignite the cautery tool that resembles a flame. And this is his form. And it should be burned with one cauterization until the whole skin is consumed by fire, and it reaches the siphon, until all the pus flows out; then care should be taken for the cure of the ulcers, until it is healed.
And this method of cauterization should not be used unless one is skilled in the art of medicine and has dealt with these illnesses many times before; then, and only then, should he dare to perform such an operation.
To release it, I prefer to do it myself.
## On Cauterization for Pleurisy.
The ancients said that cauterization with the roots of aristolochi should be used for cold pleurisy according to this method. And it is, as you receive the roots of dried aristolochi, one root longer, which is found from that, and it should be like the thickness of a finger. Then dip it into oil, and light it on fire. Next, he cauterizes with one cautery the space between the fork's continuation and the neck, and with two small cauteries beneath the guides at a slight decline towards the part beneath the beard.
And with two cauteries also in the space between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the rear a little, and another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And with three cauteries from the rear: one in the space between the two blades, and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, below the cautery that is between the two blades.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be placed openly on the skin so that it smells.
And certain ancient people have said that there are men who use cauteries made of similar iron radii: they ignite them and insert them into the space between the ribs until they reach the same point as the cautery, and then blood flows out, as we said about the hepatic apostema.
But in this cauterization, there is a risk that either the patient dies immediately or an ulcer occurs at the site, which does not heal.
**On Cauterization: The Splen (Spleen) Head 32.**
When you treat an illness of the spleen, because of what we said about dividing the illness from the treatment, and your treatment does not benefit, then there is cauterization in it according to three ways, all of which are correct.
One of these is to make three or four incisions along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the smaller livers (the ones that precede in order), whose shape should be followed.
And for every incision, the thickness should be that of a finger, or more or less.
And the manner of incision, which we said in the liver incision, should be equal.
And do not press your hand down with the incision; let the patient lie on their back, weak and relaxed.
And another mode of cauterization is: to have the fire for the incision with two veins, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus; and lift the skin that is directly on the spleen where the lower left cubit arrives, and your lifting should be according to the width of the body so that the incisions fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two hot instruments deeply until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then extract the cautery; so the four incisions are made.
And if you use cautery with another instrument holding three veins.
Then, after you have released the pus for many days, care for the cautery; for it is more beneficial than any of the treatments that preceded it.
§ On the method of cauterization in hydrops.
The cautery should not be applied to hydrops unless the swelling is properly drained.
When you treat a hydrops using the methods we have described in division, and the treatment does not improve, then you should apply four cauterizations around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the epigastrium, one on the spleen, two behind the back between the vertebrae, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the depth of the cauterization be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it can release pus over time.
And do not withdraw the weak from treatment after cauterization with it, for it should have two intentions; and it will quickly be healed with God's help.
The shape of the cautery instrument with which the stomach is cauterized should be curved; it should follow the shape that preceded it. And the shape of the one with which the back is cauterized should be oily; it should follow the shape that preceded it.
**On the method of cauterizing feet and crural areas.**
When they are soaked in hydropic (a medicinal solution) and replenished with citrine water, one should cauterize over the back of the foot at the instep, which is between the ankle bone and the little toe. Then raise your hand holding the cautery, without twisting it, and afterward raise your hand again, without touching it at all.
The citrine water will then revive, and the cautery should be applied in this form.
Then make two cauteries on both crural areas, one at the top of each leg, and let the edge of the cautery be a knife-like point; make another cautery along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other lower down, roughly in the middle of the thigh; and make two cauteries over the entire hip. Leave the open cautery without treatment for a long time, so that some water can heal from it; then care for the rest as we have mentioned.
**On the method of cauterizing in the abdominal solution.**
Chapter XXX5.
When the resolution of the entrails from cold and humors is delayed until the vital forces of digestion, which are in the stomach and intestines, are weakened; and it is treated with methods of treatment, but does not heal, you will see the patient enduring the heat of a strong vitality, then cauterize itself with a great cautery on its own stomach, as was done previously in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel, with a fine cautery; and a cautery over the liver above the ribs, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive moisture and the patient enduring it, then cauterize yourself with a cautery over the breast, and another over the entire body; and perhaps add two small cauteries over the stomach near the large one.
Indeed, healing is successful whose aid does not waver.
**On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.**
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids, or one large one, arising from thick, cold, or corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said in division, but do not benefit from the treatment; then cauterize with three cauteries over the lower spine below the navel slightly triangular, and a cautery under the navel like two fingers.
If you think that his stomach is chilled, and his food is not digested, and you see his face turn pale, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery as has been previously described; and with another cautery over his epigastrium, and another over his spleen with a claw cautery; and leave the open cautery for some time. Then take care of him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.
When you remove the athelul (a term referring to a specific anatomical structure), then ignite the cautery that is similar to a radium. Then insert the ignited cautery into the athelul that has been removed; and with your final touch, continue until the cautery reaches the venous opening from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many athelul (structures), then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have described. Then take care of them with ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over the ulcer, it is more ultimate (or, final) in the healing process.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the instructions for section and treatment that we have described in its place, and is frightened by it, perhaps he will heal with a cauterization.
When a fistula therefore occurs in someone and becomes chronic, pus runs from it, and corrupt humors (fluids) gather. Therefore, with due care, one should explore it with a delicate probe. Then, determine the depth of it with the probe.
Then apply the cautery, which is similar to a hot iron. Then insert the burning instrument itself into the fistula, and determine how far the clot (or blockage) has entered.
And apply the cautery repeatedly over it until all those corrupt bodies are burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to your need.
And guard yourself from the burn of nerve, if it is there, or a large vein; or if the fistula extends to the urinary body, or to the intestinal body, then guard yourself from all these places.
And do not perform it unless there is a fistula in a fleshy part, for you think that it does not penetrate.
Then pay attention to the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you know that it has already healed completely.
And if the materials do not separate from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a deep hole corrupted within it, or as if it were among those, whose memory will come to its place.
§ On the method of cauterizing veins.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or excessive heat, and they are weakened because of it, then one should cauterize them immediately over a hot stone placed on top of the kidneys, with a cautery iron over every kidney, whose memory precedes it.
And perhaps we cauterize it again a second time in the same hot stone. That is why three lines will come. Therefore they will be the last resort in treatment.
Regarding the cauterization of vesicles.
When weakness and softening due to cold and moistures occur in the vesicle, until the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize it at the lower part of the suprarrenal gland above the vesicle, where the hairs begin to grow, and use a cauterizer from above and another from below; and the length of this cauterization should be according to the size of the thumb: and cauterize it also with a cauterizer on the lower back, or with two cauterizers if needed; and let it follow the same procedure as before.
Regarding the method of cauterization of the matrix.
When cold and moistures affect the matrix, preventing conception and causing irregular menstruation, with pain upon their onset, then it should be cauterized with three cauterizers around the navel, as we mentioned in the cauterization of the vesicle, and with a cauterizer above the lower back or with two cauterizers; and let it follow the same procedure as before.
On the method of cauterization for a dislocated joint.
When the humidities of the mucous membranes are discharged into the anchor (joint), they become the cause of its exit from its place; and this is indicated by the extension of one leg over the other when they are compared again: and the site of dislocation is found to be hollow in it.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the infirm joint above the anchor with a similar circular cautery; after you have marked with wax around the joints, as it were, and so that the joint itself falls into the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, using a large oily cautery; and make the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin throughout.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
**On the method of cauterization for sciatica.**
When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to cold and moisture, and this treatment does not improve but instead aggravates the condition, then it is necessary to relieve the patient from thick humours with foul or artificial pills, and similar remedies. Then apply a cauterization.
The method of cauterization is in this case according to two methods: either a cautery with medicated ointments or a cautery with fire.
A cautery with fire is according to many methods.
One of these methods involves cauterizing the ankle joint itself with three triangular cautery instruments, in this form. And make them a deep incision, good or bad. And leave a space between each cautery that is the width of a finger; and the cautery should be oiled.
However, a cautery is also made in the middle on top of the ankle joint itself. Why are there four cauterizations?
And if you cauterize with a circle, whose shape precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, it should be so that the circle contains the ankle completely.
And burn the thickening of the skin throughout.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica when the pain is adhering to the ankle itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
However, if it extends to the hip and leg, then cauterize the inside of the hip with two cauterizations, on the spot where the patient feels pain, and use your cautery on the four fingers towards the outer part a little bit: and let the cauterization be surgical.
And the depth of the cauterization should be according to the depth of the thickening of the skin.
If the patient feels that the pain extends almost to the toes, then cauterize the place indicated by the patient with a point, three, four, or more cauteries if needed.
And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize the place with a single cautery of the knife.
And be careful in all your cauterizations so as not to burn the last nerves or a large artery, and take care through it to avoid further harm or contraction of the afflicted part.
And I have indeed seen one and another of those who cauterized on the wound, and ended up with cauterization, and the foot was inflated, until the swelling reached the toe, and it was entirely perforated and corrupted; then there was a rupture of the abdomen, and death followed afterwards.
If there is pain in both parts at the same time, cauterize both according to this manner.
And certain wise ones spoke about cauterizing the aching part, whose cauterization is this method. Make a similar one from iron, whose diameter is the middle of the palm: and it should be near the opening according to the thickness of the finger's nucleus, or a little less; and within that same third should be placed.
And let the space between each pin be the length of a thumb; and let the pins be open from both parts; and their height should be like a node, or two nodes; and make handles for them out of well-suited iron within the pins.
Then it is heated over fire until it glows, and scatters sparks; then place it on the scales above the infected foot lying on its healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauterizations using one application of heat.
Then leave it for three days. After that, apply poultices with butter, and leave the open wound for many days. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says that with this kind of cauterization, we have little experience because of the fear it inspires and because few people know how to perform it.
Nevertheless, for those who endure it, there is good healing, and they will find its place.
When cauterization is performed alongside medicines, as you do with two identical tools having a perforated ring, into which descends the hinge of its door made of iron or bronze, whose length reaches the wall—with two knots, or something like them, at their top—...
And there should be a space between both, equal to the thickness of a finger, open below and above, and such that they fit together in this way.
Then place it on the patient's healthy side, lying on their sick side. And press your hand firmly over the wound. Then apply a poultice between two circles of hot water, heated with fire to the point of warmth, and hold it for an appropriate amount of time; thus the patient will tolerate both the biting (of the wound) and its burning, as he himself caused the bite like fire until it subsides.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the wound with sweet water entirely; then leave it for three days.
And place butter over it until the burn's blackness is removed; and leave it for several days, and pus will flow from it. It is indeed the last resort in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If the pain extends to the thigh or the foot, make a soak for him according to what you did for the wound, equally containing water.
And this is the way of hot water, and I have already written about it in the book on medical rectification. Take some alkali and unextinguished lime, of each one part; rub both, and put them in a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that will enter it; and place beneath the bottom of the pot another pot that has been previously hollowed out: then throw over the alkali and lime water from a sweet spring, so that both are submerged by one finger; after which compress them well with your hand, and leave the pot until sharp water descends to the lower part of the hollowed-out pot.
Then add all that water to it and throw it over another lime; and continue until it renews itself.
For at that time it will be very sharp and effective, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the other parts of the body. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And there are medicines with which wide burns are cauterized, such as pitch, turpentine, and almond oil, and lime with soap, so that each is mixed together.
And Galen indeed reported, narrating the cure of a certain man from ancient times who was cured of the pain of the ankle and sciatic nerve, and he praised it as being very magnificent. And he said that it did not need any other treatment, and that he was healed at once, until he returned, because perhaps he had entered the bath with a disease, and left it already healthy.
And it is taken from a green vegetable; if it cannot be found fresh, it is taken dry and recent; and it is heated much with some fat, and placed on the spot where there is pain, in the leg or hip, and bound, and left for three hours' duration, or according to the amount that the patient feels relief from the heat. Then insert it into the bath.
When the body becomes cold, insert it into the fire. Since the pain retreats, it is healed.
And know this, for it is not necessary that anyone use a cauterizing iron with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that goat dung, when applied with it to a sciatic vein, relieves him; and the cauterization is made in this way. Take the wool, and soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot that is between the big toe of the foot and the ankle, and closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung, and ignite it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it upon the wound and release it until it heals. Then repeat this process. Therefore continue this until sensation returns to the midpoint, and the pain ceases.
And this method of burning is called the vaccinating burn.
§ On the burning of the back's pain.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back from many causes, or from chance, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and similar conditions due to the injection of cold and moist material; and the cauterizing does not take place unless it is in this particular case alone which is caused by the injection of cold material.
Therefore after evacuation of the infirmity with foul pills and similar ones, three lines should be drawn on the back where there is pain according to its width, then signs with encaustic are made in every line five times or more punctures, according to the quantity which came from the tolerance of the nurse, and the cauterization is done when the cauterizing point has been reached.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations, using a cautery on the mid-clasp, in this manner.
**On the manner of cauterization in incipient gangrene.**
This illness often occurs in very young children.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that a constriction occurs above the belly during breathing, and movement; and you will find it in the lower spine and the knots of his back, which have already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you see this, and wish to do it, then cauterize the same with a circular cautery in this form.
And the cautery should take hold over all parts of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a point cautery, make two or three lines, and the points should be close together.
Then take care of the place until it heals as we said.
And beware, do not apply cauterization to the gangrene that occurs from nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterizing podagra and pained joints.
When the pains of the joined parts are caused by cold humidities that extend to any part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, it is customarily called podagra by physicians.
When podagra is cured by means of treatment due to cold causes and the pains do not subside, then cautery should be used to remove them.
And it is done that after evacuating the joint of the foot, cautery should be applied with many cauteries and this cautery is with oil.
And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a cautery point. If the pains rise up to the knees or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize the whole knee with three cauteries or four from every side, using the same cautery as for the claw.
However, if more of this cautery is necessary for you, then cauterize the whole thing. And do not immerse your hand with a cautery, but rather place it around the thickness of the skin only.
However, if the pains rise to the knees and back, then administer what we said regarding cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then make dots around with a flame, as two lines are resolved.
However, if there remains pain in the fingers, then make dots on them, over every knot and also on the palm of the hand.
However, if the pains rise after days to the forearms or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not delay the weak from good treatment, from receiving medicines. For if a good treatment is done, and the phlegm is expelled, it will be healed with God's help through this cautery.
**On the method of cauterization in ruptures.**
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestine descends towards the testicle, becoming inflamed, it is then necessary to urge the patient to abstain from food on that day. And it should be used to release the stool from its lower part.
Then he should sit between your hands on his back and urge him to hold his breath until he expulses the stool or the intestine.
Then reduce the swelling with your fingers and mark with a hot wax sigil above the rupture on the ribcage, where the end of the sigil is similar to the midpoint of a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply a hot iron whose shape is as described until it turns white and releases the pus. Then reduce the intestine or the hernia to its cavity. Then the assistant should place his hand over the area to prevent the intestine from escaping and you, having already opened between the patient's legs, placed a poultice beneath and another above his groin, and another one over his chest which holds the hands in place.
Then place the hot iron over the sigil, with your hand holding the cautery straight. And hold it yourself, until you gain access to the mouth with it; or use it again once with another if you have not gained access to the mouth with it at first up to the end of the jaw.
And be careful to observe the exit of the intestine during your cauterization, so as not to burn it itself, and let it heal through that onto the afflicted part or cause great pain or death.
And know that when you do not gain access to the mouth with your cautery, your operation is in vain.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle, according to their measure.
Then take care with the remaining ointments until it heals.
And the afflicted person should lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you provide its nourishment for the duration of its healing, which softens its bowels; so that the intestine does not come out near the anus and expulsion.
Then when you want to rise after forty days, then administer a well-made ligature and hold it for another forty days.
And it becomes lessened by labour, and filling with food and drink, and restless conversations.
For when this regimen is used, thus is achieved complete healing.
And I will speak of the healing of ruptures with incisions in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the stomach, and they are beginning and appear not to be spreading, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; and it should be treated from then on as if it were one-third of it. Then attend to it yourself, as we said, and let it not be added.
And some have said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form.
After it is sealed with wax, a line is drawn which crosses the width at the upper side of the rupture, and another line at the lower side. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery cleaver.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
On the method of cauterization for pains due to injury or impact.
Chapter XLVIII
When, in certain parts, pain occurs due to injury or impact, and this pain persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment with medicines, then it should be cauterized with a point-burn.
And the cautery of every part should be according to its size, and its thinness or thickness, and its strength, and the position of the torsion, and the pain it causes.
If, therefore, it is healed from the first cauterization, that is good. If not: then repeat the cauterization on that same place.
Since these pains have the habit of shifting from one part to that which is nearest, in order to alleviate them, they must be transferred. Therefore, it is necessary to follow up on them with cauterization until the patient is healed.
On the method of cauterization for leprosy.
However, in lepromatous patients, cauterization should be applied with great care. And especially the type of leprosy, which occurs due to putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; so when considering to cauterize it, be wary.
If leprosy is beginning to appear and you have treated it as we said before, but it does not disappear or recede, and you are afraid that the corruption has spread over the entire complexion of the body; then cauterize it on the head with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the forehead, and a second below it facing the front at the end of the hair, and two on either side over the two horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally, apply your hand with the cautery briefly, until it makes a slight impression on the bone, and the scales come loose from it; so that the expulsion of gross vapors is facilitated from it, and cauterize over it again with another cautery, as was previously done.
However, if leprosy is now scattered over the body and appears clearly manifest; then you should cauterize with these cauterizations we mentioned for the head, and another cautery over the ends of the nose, and two cauterizations over each cheekbone, and two over the spine of the neck, and six over the spine of the back, and one large over the hip bones, and one above it; also over both shoulders, two over each knee, two over the softness of his chest; and cauterize him all over the joints, from the joints of his fingers and toes; and cauterize over every heel of his feet, and the palms of his hands.
And be aware of the nerves that are above the back of the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes a burn is made with a hot iron on the bone of the ribs, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the bone of the skull.
And know that the more you add to the burning, the greater is the healing, and the more it brings relief.
And know that the sick do not feel pain from the burn as the healthy do; for their body is already stunned.
And the burns should be of appropriate size and depth according to the members and joints; according to what has been mentioned regarding the types of instruments.
Then care for the burns with flour and herb paste with honey, and other treatments, until it is healed.
**On the Method of Burning in Stunning**
When a member is stunned and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then burn that stunned member according to its size or its smallness.
And let your cauterization be done in such a way that it does not penetrate too deeply into the thickness of the skin. Then take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
And when it is cauterized to a state of numbness that occurs in the hand and foot, at the joints of the spine near the exit of the nerves that move that limb, then the numbness subsides.
Indeed, one should not attempt this unless they are wise in the anatomy of the body and the exit of nerves that move the limbs.
Chapter LI.
When Albucasis is outdated and does not offer anything new in the art of medicine, then cauterize over that cautery deeply, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then take care of it with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and arni leaves, and pigeon's blood, and vulture's blood: each should be in equal parts: mix all these together, and apply them to a cloth, and let them adhere to the place until it is healed.
On the method of cauterizing a cancer.
When the cancer is just beginning and it itself can be stopped; then cauterize it with a hot iron in the shape of a circle around its circumference, as required.
However, it has been said that it should be cauterized with the last iron in the middle.
But I do not find that to be the case; for I fear it may ulcerate, and I have seen it happen several times.
And it is better that it should be cauterized around its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with many hot irons.
On the method of cauterizing an abscess.
When someone has an abscess that is delayed in ripening, due to its own excess or because of the weakness of old age, when it becomes thin and there is little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the ripening of the abscess, then cauterize around its circumference with many small hot irons. Then, release her. It will also be hastened by the ripening of the fruit.
However, if you wish to make an incision in it with a cautery, then apply the fire of the cautery, which has this form.
And place this itself in the middle of the wound, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery follow from this, as the disease requires, so that the pure current is restored.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
§ In the manner of cauterization, in a mild corrosive.
Head (L II I)
A corrosive is nothing but corruption in a moving member, and it corrupts itself; just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see a corrosive in a place that can bear the fire of a cautery, then apply many cauteries with small and large cleavages, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosive is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the entire corruption is eliminated and nothing remains of it thoroughly.
Then leave it for three days, and place over the burnt areas finely crushed sulfur with oil, until all the scabs and every corruption are eradicated.
Next, treat it with ointments that nourish the flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days the flesh is born with a healthy newness in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization over what remains from the corrupted places.
And the corrosive [disease] should be treated sometimes with acute medicine. Indeed, it [the healing process] arises at the place of cauterization.
However, cauterization with fire is more beneficial for the healing process: and indeed I have already said that cauterization should be done with acute medicine in certain cases; therefore, take it there when you need it.
§ Regarding the cauterization of claws and warts.
Chapter 50.
This affliction often occurs in the lower parts of the feet; it is a thick, putrid matter that damages the foot.
And indeed, there is cauterization in them according to two methods: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
As for when using fire, it is similar to cauterizing with a heated pen, made of iron according to the quantity it contains of the claw from every side and is thin at the margins.
Then place the same fire above the claw. Then, with the hand covered in cautery, revolve it around the claw until the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw, and leave it for three days until it begins to emit pus. Then apply it with a paste made from crushed garlic mixed with salt, and leave the paste on top overnight. It will indeed be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with a healing ointment made from meat until it is healed.
If they are not improved and often occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then apply cauterization to them with hot water. It is as if you take a small tube made of iron or steel or a feather from a bird, and place it over the claw or any other part. Next, insert a small amount of warm water into a tube. Hold your hand and twist it slightly with the pressure of your hand, so that the edge of the tube is pressed against the root of the nail, and the warm water reaches the depths, to the root of the nail, and the patient should wait for about an hour after the application of the hot water.
Then release it, for the nail is eradicated along with its roots.
Do this with each one, one after the other, until you have treated all that are present in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been eradicated, using what generates flesh from ointments.
§ On the method of cauterization in tremor.
When someone experiences tremor due to cold in a nerve, or from quartan fever, or any other cause, then they should be cauterized four or five times over the spinal bones, and between each spinal bone with a cautery, and also over the chest, and over the stomach.
For tremor ceases with the application of oil cauterization, and hastens the healing of cold disease.
On the manner of cauterization according to Albucasis.
Chapter LVII.
Sometimes Albucasis expels impurities from the body, that is, pustules that are formed from corrupted coarse materials.
Therefore, when you see them appearing, they should be cauterized with a fine iron on every part of the pustule's head, whose tip is heated with fire. Or with the root of long Aristolochia. Or with a semicircular iron.
And when they are cauterized, they draw out the impurity as it was first expelled in this manner, and they do not increase, but break up the surplus, making them well, and healing from them.
However, it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
On the manner of cauterization in bleeding from an artery in the arm.
Many times there occurs a flow of blood from an artery that has been cut near a wound that happens externally or at the site of a scarification or cauterization of a limb, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to sever it.
Therefore, if this happens to someone, then apply with your hand directly to the opening of the artery, and place over it your index finger, and squeeze it tightly until the blood is obstructed under your finger and does not escape from it.
Then apply a small oil lamp and many more to the cauterization, and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, or a few, or a large one, according to the wound and the place where the artery is severed, and place the cauterization on the same vessel, after which you move your finger quickly; and hold the cauterization until the blood stops.
If it is expelled with the withdrawal of the finger from the opening of the artery and the extinguishing of the cauterization, then quickly take another cauterization from those prepared in the fire.
Therefore do not stop doing this with one after another until the blood stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and let no further harm come to the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to sever it; especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods. Or when using cauterization, as we have said. Or when using extraction, when it is not extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends are torn, and blood is severed. Or it is tied with a strong ligature thread. Or they place over it medicinal substances that aid in stopping the flow of blood, and tighten them with a suitable constricting bandage.
Whoever administers the severing with ligature and tightening with cloth, or positioning of burning substances and similar methods, does not do it thoroughly unless rarely.
If such a thing happens to someone and they have no doctor or medicine, then they should begin by positioning their index finger over the wound's artery opening as we described, and tightening it strongly until the blood is stopped from the upper part of the injury, and above the artery. And let not the finger be moved, but keep it always above the cold water, until the blood becomes congealed and swollen and can be cut off.
And meanwhile, consider what it needs from cauterization or medicine.
§ On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds and similar conditions.
As we said in Chapter One, every illness that involves fire from cauterization and burning medicine, along with its circumstances, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization.
And I have placed chapters there from the beginning to the end.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path, so that it may be clear for anyone who seeks to know about it.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you, O son, to learn from the fear that is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of this, it is necessary to be more careful, for in the operation described in this chapter, the wound often bleeds heavily with blood, which can lead to death at the time of opening a vein, or cutting into an abscess, or opening a fistula, or treating a wound, or extracting an arrowhead, or cutting into stone, and similar things; from all these comes trembling and fear, and in many cases, death.
And I advise you not to be caught off guard, for sometimes people with certain conditions come to you in this art of medicine, and they are different from others. For some become angry when confronted with their illness, and for them, death is light because of the severity they find from their condition and the duration of their suffering. And when illness arises from fear that signifies death.
And among them are those who hand over their fate to a physician, trusting him for healing, and their illness becomes their undoing.
Therefore, you should not give in to those who come to you from among these, whose ways are such. And be more careful, than your greed and rapacity. And do not presume over anything from that, unless after certain knowledge that confirms among you the admirable succession to which it has come.
And you should apply yourself to the care of all your sick, with prognosis and indication for what is appropriate for their healing.
In that very thing lies your aid for the sake of gaining fame, glory, memory, and praise.
God's Son, inspire you with his understanding, and do not deprive you of guidance and inspiration, for it is in his hands.
And I have indeed organized this chapter by distinguishing it into sections, following what preceded in the chapter on cauterization from head to foot: so that you may find from it whatever you seek and whatever you need.
**On the treatment of water accumulated in the heads of children.**
**Chapter I.**
Know that this ailment often occurs in children at the time of birth, or when the midwife tightly squeezes the child's head without gentleness.
And whenever something happens, even due to an unseen cause that is unknown.
And indeed, I have not seen this disease in others as much as in children, and to every one of them death has followed: therefore it seemed to me necessary to give up the operation on it.
And indeed, I have seen from them a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was magnified every day until he could not sit on himself because of the size of his head; and the humidity increased until he died.
And this humidity, either it accumulates between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates beneath the bone on the surface.
And the operation on it, if there is humidity between the skin and the bone and an abscess is present, then you should make one crack in the middle of the head in width; and the length of the crack should be like two knots, until the humidity runs out.
And this is the form of the abscess.
If therefore the humidity has increased more and the abscess is larger, then put these two cracks according to this form.
And if the humidity is beneath the bone and its sign is that you see the openings of the commissures of the head from every side; and water sinks down when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and it does not hide itself from you, then you should make three cracks in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And after the cut, remove all the moisture. Then tighten the wounds with cloth and lint. Then sew it up from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligature, care for the wound with bandages and ointments.
And do not release the tension from the head equally. And feed the weak with dry food containing little moisture, until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of cutting as you consider where the magnitude of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is in the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left.
So rise up with the cut where you see the abscess and the collection of water, and split it according to what is possible for you.
And beware not to cut the artery, and let there be no flow of blood, and the weak may die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
On the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
**Chapter II.**
When someone suffers from a catarrh affecting the eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic and does not respond to medical treatment, then the final remedy lies in the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one decides to incise them, they should ensure that the diseased head is removed. Then, using a rough cloth, one should create a space so that the arteries become visible. Then, the diseased neck should be tightened with any cloth available. Then, consider where the pulse of the vein is located. And the locations of both [arteries] are the areas behind the depressed ears; they rarely become hidden, except in certain people.
Then, mark them with wax on both sides; and incise each one with a sharp scalpel on both sides accurately down to the bone; and it should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce a spatula beneath the artery and cut it towards the upper parts with an incision.
And the length of the incision should be like two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood flows out with pulsating force, rising into the interiors with frequent jumps.
However, if the artery is not visible to the eye, then it is necessary that the distance from gold should be the quantity of space equal to three fingers. Then mark with wax and follow until it reaches the bone.
And what needs to be released from blood is six ounces and perhaps you release more or less from it. All of this according to the amount that appears to you from the condition of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if there remains anything near the bone from healing, cut it so that there is no risk of a hot abscess; then tighten the wound with linen bands.
Then care for the wound with ointment until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries, which are found in certain parts of the body.
Head III.
When an old headache or sudden acute catarrh occurs due to the harsh humidities and heat in the face, or because of a sharp object such as a splinter, and similar causes, and treatment with the usual medical methods does not help, then we have to resort to the extraction of arteries from these parts, or their cauterization, as we have described.
And the method of operation for extracting them is to remove the weak hair from the part, and pull towards the visible artery in that time. It is indeed shown to you from its pulse, and it is rarely hidden unless in a few people or due to coldness.
If it is hidden from you, then press the weak head with any cloth you have; afterward, use fear to apply a rough cloth. Or use steam with hot water until it appears manifestly to you. Then take a knife that I formed a little while ago. Then use it to scrape the skin easily until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it and pull it towards the upper parts until you extract it from the skin, and make it pass through the tunics that are under it from all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then pierce it with the tip of the hook. Then make an incision from that part according to the length of its ends, and tighten it, so that there is no flow of blood. For if it is not incised and not severed, the blood will not flow completely.
Then take six ounces of blood from the vein until three ounces remain.
If, however, the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread, either from silk or from some other string, so that it does not flow into putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow occurs.
Then make an incision on the surplus, which is between the two ligatures. Perform that operation at that time, or after another hour.
And if you see it, cauterize it with a hot iron from the mouth to the end, with a cautery knife; until its ends are cut off and it becomes firm in that place through the same operation.
And it is better work, unless the patient has fever or is of heated complexion. Because the cautery is from those things that dry up humors. Therefore it is better drainage.
And after the arteries are extracted, the place must be filled with cooked fat; and small pieces of well-made cloth should be placed on top of it.
And after the wound is dressed with dried medicines that promote the growth of flesh, and with bandages, until it heals.
If, however, while you are operating, a flow of blood from the artery occurs, then quickly proceed to cut it off with a cautery, or fill the place with a plug; and hold your hand tightly until the blood stops. If none of those things is present to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood clots. And it embrows the site with a steady application of cold water until the acute pain subsides and it tightens as necessary.
And because it is easier to extract arteries from a softer and more pliable part, it is done by cauterizing the vein with these two instruments, and the sharpness of both knives should be similar. However, they have much less sharpness than the two knives. Because if they are as sharp as the two knives, both will apply coldness, and they will not cut into the flesh swiftly. Therefore, since they have a little less thickness, heat from fire is retained in them and flesh is cut swiftly; so with this, the work needs to be done better, easier, and lighter of all works.
And this is the form of cautery.
And there should be a space between the two knives equal to the thickness of a finger, after you mark with encaustics two places; and apply fire vigorously to both until they reach the wound, and cut the vein at both places: so as to elongate what is between its extremities. For they do not solidify completely with this cautery.
**Head IV.**
On the treatment of continuous acute tears from the eyes.
When tears are continuous and flow from the eyes, which are situated on top of the skull, and no medical treatment brings relief, while you see the face of the patient turning red and he feels a crawling sensation on his forehead like that of ants walking, and his eyes become strained, wet, to the point that their hairs are damaged by the constant flow, and the eyelids are inflamed from the intensity of the tears, then the ancients employed a special method for treating them, calling it 'the operation with the knife'.
And it is as if you instruct the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead. Then make three incisions evenly spaced along the length of the forehead, and the length of each incision should be about two fingers, with one incision placed in the middle of the forehead at the level of the nose, the second a little below the movement of the eyebrows, and the third on the other side. Be careful to avoid the arteries located on both sides. Extend your hand from the continuation of the lower jaw, and the distance between the incisions should be about three fingers. Prepare a piece of sponge or a dry cloth, with which you will absorb the blood.
Then insert the blade of a sharp instrument at both ends, after which comes the shape. From the incision which is from the temporal part, to the second incision: and the scar, together with it, all the skin which is between the two incisions, with the heal, which is over the mouth. Then do that from the median incision to the second incision as well. Then extract this scalpel and insert another instrument into the first incision again, which is called a sharp knife, with one side blunt, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side against the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the mouth; and push it until it reaches the median fissure, and cut along with it all the tendons that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision continues until what appears of the skin.
Then do that in the median fissure until another fissure.
And when it flows from blood in an equal amount, express the places from which the coagulated blood has formed a clot.
Then put in every fissure lint made from old cloth, and place over them rags soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And observe that there is no risk of a hot abscess.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large amount of the infusion with warm water. Then apply that care with the ointment of basilicon to the rest of the wounds, until they are healed.
Head V.
§ On the care of acute tears and cataracts on the eyes from internal head injuries.
When a person suffers from acute, intense, and persistent cataracts, you will notice their eyes are exhausted, weak, and their appearance is already debilitated; the eyelids are ulcerated, hair falls out of them, and there is a deep pain in the head, painful and causing subsequent sneezing. Then, from these circumstances, one must understand that these materials do not come out of the eyes unless through many channels.
And the better treatment for them is this. And it is, that you should advise the sick person to scrape their forehead. Then make one cut in that fissure in the middle of the forehead, or slightly beyond its width, and begin with the cut from the left side towards the right temple; continue the incision until it reaches the bone; then extend your hand away from the temporals, which move during chewing, until you reach the jawbone; remove all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate it between the two lips of the fissure with a hot iron or with linen lint. Then tighten it from above with small threads and moisten the threads with wine and oil so that there is no risk of a hot abscess.
And when you dissolve it and see that the hot abscess is already approaching, then you must grind your teeth until the flesh begins to grow there.
Then take care of it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh, as if you were to take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony, prepare a paste from them and apply it to these wounds to promote the birth of flesh.
Head VI.
§ On the care of that which falls into the gold.
Everything that falls into the gold belongs to one of four categories: either a mineral stone or something similar to stone, like iron and glass; or from a plant, such as wheat and beans; or a fluid substance, like water, vinegar, and others similar; or some kind of animal.
When something that resembles a stone or belongs to the stone family falls into the gold and does not add to or grow in it, expose the gold to the sun alone. If you then see the stone, distill some of the molten oil or essence into the gold. Then he should perform the extraction of the foreign body, and make the patient sneeze when ready, and press on the nostrils at the onset of sneezing, after you place a piece of cloth or wool around the ear area and stretch the ear towards the upper parts.
Indeed, this treatment should be repeated many times.
However, if it does not come out, then perform the extraction with the use of poultices, that is, subtle compresses made from pizigari (a traditional medicinal herb), whose form is as follows...
If therefore it comes out with the poultice, it is good.
And if not, then perform the extraction with a delicate, slightly curved hook.
If therefore it still does not come out through that (method), then make a tube from metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal deeply, and press the material around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil, so as to block any passage except for the tube; then extract it with your strong pulling force.
Indeed, it often comes out with what we have described. If however it does not come out in that way, then take some helkalimb (a type of herbal preparation) or from a viscose (prepared glue), with which birds' feathers are caught, a small amount, and place it on the tip of a radius after you have carefully wrapped a clean cloth around it; then insert it into the ear canal easily, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then proceed to divide it, before a hot apoplexy or spasm occurs.
And the manner of the incision is, as the phlebotomist makes an incision in the weakest part of the head; and he draws out blood from it according to the measure of its strength. Then place the weak part between your hands, and turn its ear towards the upper parts, and find a small incision at the root of the ear, near the fat, in the depressed place; and make the incision in the shape of a crescent until you reach the stone; then remove it with what is possible for you among the instruments.
Then use that incision with speed from your hourglass, and take care of it until it heals.
If the matter falling into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and swell, then administer its extraction.
If, however, it does not obey you for its exit, then take a thin, delicate forceps in this shape.
And administer with it the cutting off of that kind from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not do that when you think that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you place many turns on it; then remove them with hooks, or with a delicate gesture, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction to be relieved.
When water is introduced into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with the initial conditioning; and he has already filled his ear with some cooked wax. And he lies over that ear where the water is. If it therefore exits through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many small stones, according to the length of your finger, thin and soft, and heat them with fire briefly, and let the patient insert one of them into his ear opening; and he should lift up from that side a little on his foot, and strike with another stone the stone that is in his ear. He should therefore continue doing that with the stone and the stone until all the water has exited.
And the water will exit in such a way that you take one from the hot water or the steam and insert its end into his ear; and light the other end with fire until it burns most of it. Then he should repeat the process with another cloth, and do that many times until all the water has exited; and then extract it with a tube as mentioned earlier in the stone.
When extracting the animal that has entered it, if it is a small body, like a flea or something similar, treat it as I said regarding division.
But if there is a large body that appears to the senses, then perform its extraction with gestures and hooks, for it is easier than all those held in gold.
However, when treating a spine generated in gold, if you take care of it as we said in division and distillation, and it does not respond to your treatment, then you should look at the gold in the sun. If something appears there from the nerves, then extract it with gestures or with delicate hooks.
However, if nothing appears there from the nerves, then take a tube whose form is tight below and wide above, and insert its thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it using strong suction. Do that many times until all the nerves come out.
However, if they do not obey you to come out, then wrap the catheter around with wax, as I said on the stone.
If they do not come out with what I said, then perform distillations that the ancients are experienced in for the intersection of nerves, and you will find it in the treatise on distillation.
And let your discharge be as you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is depicted here. As you can see, make this one out of silver or bronze, tightly folded below, with a small opening on the inside and a larger one on top.
It should therefore be made such that it can push what is in the cavity of the tube; and it should be made neatly out of bronze. And if you wish, take a radius and insert its coated tip into the tube with proper lubrication; then pour oil or syrup or any of these medicines into the tube, and place it in the ear. Then insert the radius with the coating above, and express it gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the cavity of the ear and feels warm inside; but be careful not to allow anything cold to drip into it, for medicines do not tolerate that.
**Head VII.**
**On the Care of Treating an Injury to the Ear.**
Sometimes certain infants emerge from their mothers' wombs that have not been circumcised.
And indeed, it has also happened to some people that their ear tissue is damaged at birth from a wound or flesh growth within it.
And this operation is sometimes performed in a deep hole in the ear, which does not follow the usual method; and sometimes it happens on the outer part of the opening, and then it follows the usual method.
Therefore, what happens in the deep ear, and which does not fit within the scope of vision, is difficult to cure in many cases.
And in those that follow the usual method, it is necessary to place a warm compress over the ear and examine it; then, if you see the operation appearing, open it with a fine probe, whose shape follows this, with its end where there is some small width, and one part of it acute; and the rest of the probe should be smooth on both sides so as not to hurt the ear.
If therefore the operation is caused by flesh grown in the ear canal, then hold it with a fine hook and cut it away easily until all the flesh is removed.
If the operation is in the deep ear, then take a thin, flexible probe and heat it slightly with fire; then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the operation with what the patient feels with the weight of hearing, then try to open it easily; and be careful not to wound the ear's nerves.
Then place in the ear a quantity of lint according to the size of the wound you have cleaned with Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are free from the healing of the wound.
Or take the lint, and soak it in rosewater, then sprinkle over it powdered zinc, and use it.
If you see that the ear has already formed a crust, then it is necessary to remove the lint and allow it with the new lint you apply in the paste made with rose oil, until the crust is warm, then take care of it until it heals completely.
If, however, there is bleeding: then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the remaining cure that stops the flow of blood as described in the treatise on distillation.
**On the care of the eyelids.**
**Head VIII.**
These are the conditions that occur in the eyelids of the eye when they are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezers or with a hook, and cut them with a scalpel from their roots. Then place a tri-cut veil over the wound.
However, if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cauterizing iron.
And cauterize them, it is better after the incision. Indeed, they often return when something remains from its roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
§ On the care of the eyes' grand muscles.
Chapter IX.
Often it happens in the eyelids that something resembles the grand muscle in its strength and hardness, and because of that it is called Grandinus: and there is a thick aggregation of moisture in the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
The operation on them is therefore to consider at that time, if the grand muscle proceeds from it, which appears from the eyelid, and moves to every part, then its condition is easy.
Therefore, find the crack over it in width. Then he should scrape it from all parts with ease until it is healed. Then suspend it with a hook and cut it off.
However, if you cannot prepare to cut it off except after you have pierced the eyelid with an incision slightly, then it will harm the weak patient somehow.
If the cut is deep: then sew it up and care for it until it heals.
And if it is minor, it will not cause you any harm from that. Blood will restore it and make it flesh again.
And if the decline is great towards the inner part of the ear away from the surface, then turn the eyelid inside out and hang the swelling with a hook; besides needing an incision, press it from all parts.
If the eyelid is elongated by an incision, it will not harm anything.
Then wash the eye after cutting the swelling with mixed water and care for the place so that it becomes flesh again until the sick person is healed.
On the care of the axirna (eyelid) palpebrae (tissues).
**Chapter X.**
The axirna (eyelid fold) is a thickening that occurs in the upper eyelid skin. This most often happens to children, and it makes their eyes water in the morning, preventing them from seeing sunlight due to the tears, so they constantly rest their eyelids on their faces and sleep with them open, and the axirna becomes prominent and visible to the eye, and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel the axirna between them.
And the method of its operation is to place the patient's head in your lap.
Next, take a linen cloth and prepare it with care, making a circle from it according to the amount that contains the axirna from all sides. Then place it over the axirna and press with your fingers from all sides so that the axirna is gathered together in the center of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that humidity with a spatula, opening the cracks across the width, and let there not be a deeper crack than that made in phlebotomy.
You must find the skin entirely, until you reach the axira, for indeed the axira proceeds from the fissure according to the shape of the white, swollen fragment.
Therefore, extract it with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers towards the exterior, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed. Be careful not to add to the fissure, so that you can reach with the instrument to the eye, and do not injure it.
However, if the axira does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, add a little to the fissure with ease until the axira proceeds. Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the site, and bind it with small strings.
And there are people who rub salt on it, and they place it into the depth of the fissure so that whatever remains from it dissolves because of that moisture.
Then take care of it until it heals.
If however, there is an abscess at the site, then take care of it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the causes of eye atrophy, that is, when the eyelid softens the eye, causing it to bulge abnormally.
**Chapter XI.**
When additional hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their natural course beneath the skin, and they become old, they harm the eye and cause various diseases, such as frequent tears, eyelid softening, and clouding of vision, until that becomes the cause of eye destruction.
And eye atrophy is treated according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or eye atrophy is treated by cutting and stitching. Or by tubes, as I will mention.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it turns out well, so much the better. And if not, insert a needle into it, where the thread is located at the lower part of the eyelid, and make it penetrate upwards with the thread, so that it comes close to the individual hairs themselves, that is, close to the margin of the eyelid, where the hairs are born; then pull the thread towards the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it with the radius.
Then, find the inner part of the eyelid, beneath the added hairs, with a spatula-like instrument, from the larger tear gland to the smaller one.
Then extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton or cloth beneath the eyelid; then mark on the eyelids with wax, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid, since it differs in humans.
Indeed, there are those who need to have the eyelid incised with a large quantity, according to the amount that becomes soft from the eyelid.
Then, with the spatula, find the two lines you marked and begin from the larger tear gland to the smaller one, and let there be a single fissure near the natural hairs, according to the thickness of the radius.
Next, introduce a hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then, scrape off the entire skin from that area. Then, sew together the two edges with a needle and fine thread, to stop the bleeding and allow the excess threads to adhere above the two eyebrows, for some things may puncture if you do that; and if not, take no concern.
Then, leave the suture and thread until three or four days; after that, take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching and care for it so that it dries and contracts. For the eyelid is lifted at the sealing of the wound and its aggregation, but it will improve in time.
The ancients taught this method of healing.
However, there is a concern about the patient's condition, and it comes from good practice, and there is no fear in that.
And there is another method in Ataxmir as well; it is like signs on the eyelids in the form of a figure that resembles a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then elevate the eyelids with three hooks separated or joined, according to this form which follows, and then cut off the excess with small scissors, according to this form, with equality in the incision.
However, if it is not possible for you to hold the hook or if it does not align, then take a sharp instrument with which there is a thread, and insert it into the middle of the figure, and insert another thread near the larger tear, and a second thread near the smaller tear, and join the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then elevate your hand equally, and raise the skin above which the mark is made, as we have described.
Then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care of it until it heals.
If indeed there is an abscess near your incision or fracture, fill it with gauze and similar materials, using healing ointments.
And when the eyelids also turn, as if their hairs are converting.
Therefore, it is necessary to use what we have said about the wound: but the stitching of each (side) is more artificial. **Concerning the care of the eye with dogs.**
And thus, as you turn the eyelids and cut the gap that is inside, according to what I have described. Then, with the artifice, make two tubes or two thin pieces of wood: whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width should be less than the width of the space: and you have already cut at both ends on each side where you hold the thread.
Then, join each with delicate threads over the excess of the eyelid and tighten the two tubes on both sides with a strong twist, and leave it for several days. For the skin, when tightened, will die, and turn black, and rot until it falls off on its own.
If, however, it is delayed, then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it is healed.
When it is healed, raise the eyelid; and the hairs will no longer hurt.
And this is the form of the two tubes that you will make according to this shape and size in length and width.
**Chapter XII**
On the elevation of sharp pilons in the eye with a needle.
The operation consists of taking a thin needle and introducing it into the eye with a delicate, flexible thread. Then gather its ends together and tie each one with a very thin knot; the length of the threads should be one palm.
Then take another thin thread and compose it beneath the first in a small knot, and tie the ends of it if visible.
Then the patient should lay his head in your lap, close to the light, so that the operation may be shown, for it is a delicate and minute operation.
Then introduce the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it above the natural pilus.
Then pull the hair up to above the thread and introduce the hair into the thread; if it is one, or two, or three, and not more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out of the eyelid together with the thread and natural pilus.
If, however, the thread is withdrawn from the wound without the hair coming out with it: draw the hair to the lower part, using the thread which you have woven into it, until the hair emerges from the upper opening, and you see it with your eye; then draw both the hair and the thread, and close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either associate a longer thread with it from its natural hairs, and it will be lifted along with it; or leave it until it lengthens after some space, and then lift it.
Chapter XIII.
When this alxatrati (lidding) occurs in the eye, it is called leporina.
And this alxatrati (lidding) is either natural or accidental.
The accidental alxatrati is caused by the healing of a wound, or its cutting or burning, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is that you should find that healing, and separate the lips, and place something between them, a kind of gap from linen, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in the treatment of this things that burn and contract, for if you do so, it will return to Alxatrati (Albucasis) in a worse condition than before; rather, use things that soften, such as fenugreek; mix with water in which cooked aloe is soaked, or linseed oil; and apply it with a poultice or use it for treatment.
And the treasure of your treatment is to preserve every intellect so that it does not harden according to its original form.
And this very operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of Albucasis, so that it does not return to the original form of the place at all.
§ On the treatment of Albucasis (for) the lower eyelid, which is a swelling or contraction upward towards the right and left.
Chapter XIV
This treatment of Albucasis (for) what occurs below is what is truly called Albucasis. And it is both natural and accidental.
And accidental injuries occur from wounds, cracks, burning, and similar things.
And the way of operating is to take hold of a sharp instrument, where there is a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh towards the upper parts with the knife, and cut it with a broad scalpel. If it then returns to the shape of the eyelid as it should be, it is good.
And if it does not, take a radium (a pointed instrument) and insert it into the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it. Find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of these fissures meet at the two angles of the incision, until they form an angle. Until this is achieved, when they are joined, the shape of these will be like a Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh along the length of its sharp lower side, from where it follows the eyelid. Then join the separated parts, using a thread of linen.
Then care for them with the medicines that we have mentioned, and bandages, until they are healed.
And if an injury to the eyelid occurs from a fracture, and stitching or cauterization is required, then it is necessary to find the flat surface of the fracture beneath the eyelash, even as it was previously. Then separate between the two eyelids with a sharp instrument, as we said.
And in summary, regarding the care of the eyelid, whether it is above or below, the treatment should proceed as prepared according to Albucasis's form.
Indeed, it (the treatment) varies greatly in form: the skilled artisan prepares the tool in any way possible until they restore the figure to a natural or nearly natural form, and the patient themselves, as appropriate from the operation and instruments in many arrangements.
Chapter XV.
§ On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This hardening occurs in many people, so that the upper eyelid hardens with the whiteness of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the tip of the instrument beneath the eyelid and lift it upwards, or extend it with a hook, then cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp but slightly blunt, so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula, and harm the eye with its sharpness, and make the incision such that it frees that adhesion easily until, when the eyelid returns to its natural form, the whole adhesion is healed.
Then apply a salt water wash to the eye, and rinse it with water; or let it drip onto the eye from a sieve made of silk, dissolved in water.
Next, separate the eyelid and eye with a lint-free linen; place a compress soaked in albutylin on the eye, and use a sieve and compresses, strengthening them daily, until it heals.
§ On the cutting of the fingernail and the prominence of the flesh of the tears.
Head XVI.
Know that the fingernail is of two types. It is either nerve-like, similar to hard, yet delicate silk. Or it is not nerve-like, similar to the white frozen moisture; which when touched by hot iron or attempts to grasp it with a hook, it separates and does not adhere to the hook.
And neither of these types begins, unless from the tear gland, gradually increasing until it obstructs vision and blocks light, and movement of the eye.
And the method of cutting it is: place the weak head in your palm. Then he opens his eyes and lifts his eyelids with your hand. Then gather a finger with a hook having made it slightly thin, and extend it towards the upper part. Then take some thread and insert a needle into it from the equine hair, or wool, or silk; make sure the thread is strong, and bend both ends of the needle slightly, then fix it in the middle of the finger: and pierce through with the needle, and tie the thread to the finger, and extend it towards the upper part: and scrape along the side of the finger nail that follows the pupil, as if you were grasping it with the thread until its very end.
Then cut the remaining part at the base of the tear duct with a fine scalpel or small scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the tear duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears from the cut.
And when the finger is extended with just a hook, or with thread, as we have said. Then it will be scraped with a soft scalpel whose shape is as follows.
And be careful not to let the scalpel touch the corneal tunic, and cause it to tear or puncture the pupil.
Then, after the incision, insert into the eye some crushed salt or a liquid made from zinc, and leave it until the next day. Then, care for the wound with what is necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not nerve-related and you cannot insert a sharp instrument into it, nor is there a curved hook on it, then this type of nail often heals on its own with medicine, and it recovers as if divided.
If you must cut it, then open the wound with a gentle, delicate, and weak edge according to this form. And shave the nail from above with precision and delicacy. If you notice that it thins and contracts, and the shape is impressed on it, then from this moment onwards, pour into the eye a liquid made from zinc, or red lead, or crushed salt; and bandage the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the operation on that part until it is completely removed. Unless there is a hot spot in the eye, then leave it alone and care for the affected area until it heals.
Then perform a repeat operation on that part, using reason, until it is healed.
However, if the eminence of the tear gland causes great harm to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook and cut from that part, but not the final cut, so as not to disrupt the flow of tears.
Then apply a stop to the tears, either from a red eye or that caused by a foreign body, until it is healed.
§ On the incision of Albucasis, and the flesh grown in the eye.
Head XVII.
In some human eyes, a red flesh grows together or is overlaid, until it covers the pupil, draws close to it, or squeezes it against the eyelids, and perhaps even turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a rose bud.
And the operation on it is also such that it places the weak head in your lap. Then open the eye and pull that flesh completely with suitable hooks towards it: and hold it with a forceps or tweezers.
Then cut into the flesh at the first point, until it is entirely finished with the scalpel. And be careful with the eye, so as not to hurt it during the operation; and let your cut be made where you are cutting it, or with a spatula, which we have described in the section on the nail cut, or with small shears, with which the lint is gathered, according to its form after this chapter.
When your cut is complete and the entire wound has been cleaned, then apply to the eye an external compress with crushed salt mixed with red dust from medicinal powders, or similar substances, and place it over the eye to protect it from heat and inflammation.
If there remains some of the wound and you have a hot blood flow, and you fear a hot inflammation; then leave the eye and treat it with what soothes the inflammation.
Then repeat the operation on it until it heals.
And likewise do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye from this cause.
However, it is necessary that the cure for every weak eye, whether from natural or accidental causes, should be operated on with a tool and not with bare hands; and you should not attempt any of these operations unless you first understand that this member can endure such an operation.
On the collection of fluid from the eye.
**Chapter XVIII.**
The sebel (or veins) are red and swollen, lying over the eye, preventing the flow of tears and weakening the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, you must first consider whether the eye containing the sebel is strong and free from any illness other than that related to the sebel, and then collect the sebel from it.
And it is advisable to instruct the patient to place his head in your lap.
Then, suspend those veins with a hook or two, according to your judgment: the hook should be thin and flexible, shaped as follows, or there can be two hooks joined together in one body, also shaped as shown.
Then, carefully collect those veins with fine forceps and clean them hour by hour until you see the veins moving away from the eye and are resolved; be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And perform the operation in the middle of the day, facing the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to cut except those veins.
And when you have washed it, then let it trickle into the eye either with a green or red substance; so that its acuteness may corrode what remains of the grease.
However, if it is not possible for you to collect all of that in that moment, then apply a poultice to the eye with something that alleviates the pain of the eye, and leave it for several days until the pain subsides; and protect it from further harm by heat. Then repeat over it in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
§ On the reduction of an abscess to the nose.
Head 19.
The surgeons of abscesses make a fistula, which they treat with cautery or with sharp medicine, according to what has been said before.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in that; unless you find a fissure near its origin and extract all the moisture and pus within it until the wound is closed.
When the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening in it, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is as follows.
It is called the Hardness of the Head.
Go in with the iron, and make the head round like an apple, marked by a fine cut of the knife or a subtle point of the chisel, and place it over the corrupted bone.
Then take it between your fingers and gently press with your hand until you know that the corruption is completely smooth, and do this several times.
Then restore the place with dry aromatic medicines.
If therefore the place hardens and flesh grows, and the flow of pus ceases, and it remains for forty days without renewal or relapse, then know that it is healed.
And if this does not happen, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nasal opening, according to this form.
And it is necessary to remove from the bone with iron or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a drill according to this form, let the iron end be triangular, and the wood of its pyramid be thinned towards the end, as you see.
Then place it on the bone itself, and let it be near the tear duct, and stretch your hand slightly from the eye. Then resolve to move your hand with the knife, until it penetrates the bone, and the patient feels it; through this, he will find the strength to exit from it, when he holds his own hand over his nose.
Therefore, at that point, restore the place with styptic medicines that dry up, as I taught you.
When the flesh is formed and the place hardens, then the matter that was exuded to the outside returns to the nose; thus, it becomes softer over the patient.
## On Reducing Eyelid Protrusion
**Head XX.**
When the eye protrudes with its entire mass, and there is no pain or loss of vision, then you should relieve the patient; then use phlebotomies; afterwards, apply a flow of air to the eyelid without scarring but with suction.
Then place on the eye a liniment made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolla. Then close the eye with a bandage over it, using many small threads.
And the method for these threads is as follows: take many soft cloths, and make each cloth double over four times; then make many from them; then place them one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the eye; finally, bind them tightly with a strong, hard cloth.
And they also operate on flowing blood without scarification.
Then remove the blood flow and allow the eye to rest day and night.
However, if the ligature becomes softer again, it should be bound tightly; then, after a day and night, remove the ligature as we have said.
If therefore you see that the eye has regained its new skin, it is good; and if not, repeat the plaster, threads, binding, and bleeding until it heals.
## On the Incision of the Skin's Layer
**Chapter 21.**
When there is a tear in the skin's layer, it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelids like a grain, causing disfigurement due to that, and one should incise it; then the operation on it is as I describe: and it is as if you insert a sharp point into the root of the lid from below upwards.
Next, introduce another knife where the thread is double from the tearful side, and cause it to penetrate. And leave the first knife according to its arrangement.
Next, incise the location of the double thread, and tie with it the edge of the needle in a circular motion: and tighten it greatly.
Next, extract the knife, and place on the eye a linen cloth soaked in alum: and leave it until the thread falls with the eye.
Then care for the eye with it, so that it is strengthened, until the wound is healed.
And when the thread is tightened from all sides in a circular motion with the cloth, until the eye gains great prominence.
Next, it is pierced with a fine instrument that reaches the depth of the eye, and the humidity of the alum runs out, and the eye descends and enters immediately: then tighten it until it heals.
**On the cure of alum (or eye disease)**
Head XXII.
This disease called alum is not, but a health condition that is aggregated in the eye, similar to water running down, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation is such that you make the invalid sit on a prepared or straight seat.
Then take the head in both hands and move it until you think the blood has reached the lower part of your eyes. Then it is secured so that it does not drop, and the light is released; and the invalid sees things as he saw them before: and if it does not come down below, then know that it is water.
However, if the descent of the blood is not prepared as we said, then make the invalid sit between your hands. Then take a thin spatula and find it with the above skin fold just above the connection of the joint with the corneal tunic in the crown, until the blood flows out.
When the blood has thus flowed out, then pour warm water into the eye, in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey: then it is treated with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
§ On the care of water that flows into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have previously described the types of water in division, and what is suitable for piercing, as explained and expounded in the discourse, then take that same one according to health.
Therefore, you should make the sick person sit with their face square between your hands, opposite to the light, towards the sun, and bind their healthy eye tightly; then, with your right hand, if the eye with water is on the left, hold the left eye, or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then, take your right hand with the alum, if the eye is on the left, or your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then, place the end of the alum near the edge, by the thickness of the radius, on the same white eye appearing lacrimal smaller; then push the alum with strength; and you return with it in your hand, until it penetrates into the eyeball: and you will feel that the alum has already reached the vacuum.
And it is necessary that the journey of the alum to the depth should be measured, as much space there is from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the crown of the eye. You will indeed see that in the same pupil vision of the eye, due to the clarity of the cornea tunic.
Then place the alum until it reaches the place where water is. Then press the same below with one hand after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the patient will see it over which he opens his wound immediately, and alum in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If therefore the water descends, then lay it down again the second time, besides what alum comes out.
When it is thus fixed, and does not rise up: then draw out the alum with ease: and you return your hand little by little.
Then dissolve in water some of the clear salt of the stone, and wash with it the inside of the eye. Then put on the eye entirely the poultice, or wool steeped in rose oil, and alum too: and bind it with a healthy eye.
But we, and those of our time, put on it ground cumin with alum.
If the surgeon does not obey you and enters the eye without softening it because of its hardness, which comes from human flesh, whose eye is very hard, then he should take a spatula called "Alberid," which has this form.
Therefore, when handling it, connect only the joint itself and not your entire hand into the wound, and there should be only a narrow space for the spatula to enter.
Then insert the spatula as we said.
And for the completion of your work, prepare a dark room for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back; forbid all movements and coughing; give him that food by which his nature is soothed; and do not allow him to move his head to the right or left at all.
And the bandage should be left according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then remove it in that dark room and examine his sight; and make him see things. Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do that at the time of healing or immediately after incision; rather, he should wait until a foreign body is introduced, because water rises quickly through an open wound.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to drain the eye before the seventh day; and straighten it with that which calms the abscess until it is calm; then release the sight of that eye, and place over its surface a poultice to regulate its sight for several days while it remains in that dark house.
Then it should gradually leave the house and return to its case.
And know that in zeal the student is not excused from sight for some time; then indeed he should dare to engage in surgery.
And indeed, some of those from Al-Andalus have now reached us, who say that a certain pierced magdan, through which water is drawn, has been done in Al-Andalus.
Therefore, no one has ever been seen in our land to have done that; nor is it written about in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species from magda, so that one who ignores them may stand on them.
Let them be made of their own air; and let the ends of them be triangular with the same subtle angle, and the end acute.
Head XXIV.
On the care of flesh grown in the nose.
Sometimes various kinds of flesh are produced in the nose, from which some is like a scorpion with many feet; and from this there arises cancerous, hard flesh, of a dark colour; and from this there arises soft flesh, not of a dark colour.
Therefore, with regard to that flesh which is soft, neither putrid nor cancerous, you should make it lie between your hands facing upwards and open the nostrils, then insert a hook into those meats; after that, pull them out towards the exterior, and cut what you have seized from them with a thin and sharp blade on one side, until you know that all the flesh has already been removed.
If anything remains of that which cannot be separated, then cut it with a thin instrument easily until nothing remains from it. If, however, blood dominates you or a feverish abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then apply cauterization to it until the blood is drained and all flesh is removed.
Next, after making an incision, pour vinegar and water or wine into the nose. However, if the nose opens up and moisture flows from it to the palate, then know that it is already healed.
If indeed moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh grown within the upper bones of the nose, to which the instrument did not reach with the incision.
Therefore, you should insert a line of thread that has some thickness and knots on it; place the space between each knot equal to a finger, or less, and twist the weak end of the thread into the nose with a hook, or something similar, and pull until it reaches the cavity, and comes out from its opening.
And indeed, many young children do this like atoms in schools; and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to.
Then, place both ends of the thread; one end that comes out from the nose and the other end that remains inside the nose. Then, using the help of the knots on the thread, close the wound with the flesh. Do this until you know that the flesh is sealed with the knots on the thread.
Then extract the thread and place it in the nose after diverting the blood flow with the ointment you applied from Egypt. Do this for three days or longer until the ointment has completely dissolved what remains of the flesh.
Then, after some days, insert a lead pipe into the nose until it heals.
However, if further treatment is needed to stop the bleeding, use it.
To make the head purification, with which oils are distilled and other medicines into the nose, make it from silver or brass, in the form of a small lamp, opened like a conch shell, and its passageway similarly.
And if you want to make the pipe closed like a reed.
And the conch shell of the head purification instrument should be full and open; it should have a handle at the end with which to hold it when heating oil or whatever you want to insert, or substances that can flow.
Chapter XXV.
Many times a lump is born at the end of the nose, and it swells and grows with the passing days, until an agreement is reached about its appearance.
And because of that, it is necessary to cut off that lump at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then apply a poultice, or a burn dressing, or a burning medicine that takes its place.
If the incision is delayed until the lump has swelled and its appearance has changed, then consider whether it is hard, firm, dark in colour, and has little sensation; if so, do not touch it with the blade, for it is a malignant tumour.
Many times I have seen those who have cut off a malignant lump, and great evil has come from it to him who had that one.
And if the lump is soft to touch, not dark in colour, and you see that an incision can be made throughout it, then encourage the sick person, and cut off the lump without fear or hesitation; and treat the place with something that draws out and constricts it until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
§ On the stitching of the nose, lip, and ear.
You should know that when there is a separation of the connection in one of these cartilage tissues, little surgical treatment is required for it, except in certain cases.
Therefore, when something like this happens to anyone, you should consider if it is a recent wound still oozing its own blood. Then, stitch together the wounds with cautery and afterwards take care of it until it heals.
And if the connection of the lips has already separated and one part becomes healthy, then it is necessary to clean all the parts appearing from the skin until they bleed. Then stitch together the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and apply over it dragon's blood and powdered frankincense; place above the wound a fragment of an ointment pad, and use another from consolidant plasters. And leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it, change the medicine, and leave it until the threads come out by themselves. Then take care of it with ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is to gather the connection of the cartilage, or with a pad, as we mentioned about the stitches of the stomach; or to gather the separation with threads, as you know.
**Chapter XXVII**
On the extraction of lip nodules.
Many men suffer from hard protrusions within their lips, often resembling small or large grains of herb, and some are more painful than others.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip and find the top of each nodule, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it off from every side.
Then, after the cut, apply pressure with a clean cloth until the bleeding stops.
Then, it should be washed with vinegar, and the place treated with it where there is stiffness, until the wounds heal.
**Chapter XXVIII**
On the incision of flesh grown over the gum.
Flesh often grows over the gum, which the ancients call an abulsion.
Therefore, it is necessary to suspend it with a hook, or hold it with tweezers, and cut it near its root, allowing the discharge of pus or blood.
Then place a third covering over the wound, or other sticky poultices, dry and excoriating.
If the flesh returns to its former state after treatment, as it often does, then cut it away a second time and cauterize it; for indeed, it will not return after cauterization.
Head 29.
§ On the reason for teeth with iron.
Sometimes teeth become attached to the surface from both the inner and outer parts, and between the gums there are rough and painful cortices, which sometimes turn black and yellow, and become bright, until finally corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul through that.
Therefore, you must make the patient sit between your hands, and rest his head in your lap, and scrape away the roughness and tooth, where you can see the cortices, like sand; until nothing remains of them, and do the same with blackness, whiteness, yellowing, and others until they are cleansed.
If therefore what is in them from the beginning of the reason can be removed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on them another day, a second time, and a third, until the ultimate study in what you wish has been reached.
And you should know that the tooth needs to be cut with various forms of instruments, in accordance with what is prepared for your operation; for the instrument that cuts through the tooth from below is different from the one that cuts between the teeth, according to other shapes.
And these forms of instruments should be prepared for you as you see.
**Chapter XXX**
**On the Extraction of Teeth Pain**
You should cure a tooth from its pain with all skill, and take your time in extracting it. For indeed, I have seen that its pain does not subside when it is extracted, since it is a noble substance; until there is no excuse for extracting it, then when the patient is compelled to extract it, as it should be strengthened and verified by you, the painful tooth.
Many times the patient is deceived by its pain, and thinks that it is relieved in the tooth and extracts it; then the pain does not cease until the infected tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the work of bloodletting instruments.
If a toothache is confirmed within your gums with pain, then you must perform incisions around the affected tooth with a scalpel, which has something of sharp quality, until the gum is completely dissolved from all sides; then gently move it with your fingers or with subtle pincers in the beginning gradually, until it detaches.
Then locate large pincers and grasp the lower jaw between your fingers; hold it firmly so that it does not move. Then pull on the tooth straightwards, avoiding to break it.
If it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and insert them beneath it from all sides easily, and try to move it as you did before.
However, if the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you must fill that hole with cloth and tie it with a thin end of a wire so as not to break it during your squeezing with pincers on top.
And it is necessary to be careful with incisions around the gums from all sides much.
And preserve your strength so as not to break it and let a part of it remain, and return from that malady which causes the greatest pain for it initially.
And beware, do not do what uninformed bloodletters do in their haste and boldness about its removal, except that they administer what we have mentioned.
Many times they cause great infirmities in men to develop, which are more difficult to break and leave all or some of their roots intact, or so that they extract it along with certain bones of the mandible, as we have often witnessed.
Then it should be washed after the removal with wine, or vinegar and salt.
If bleeding occurs from the wounds (which often happens), press something against it and fill the space with that, or if not, cauterize it if it does not stop bleeding.
The pliers should have long tips, a short handle, and be made of sturdy metal so that they do not double over when pressed against a tooth; they should resemble the handles of large pliers until, when you squeeze them, they do not bend or double over themselves. They should have sharp points at their ends, some of which enter certain spaces and grip firmly with constriction.
And when the tips take on the shape of the curved beak called a forceps, they become strong tools for grasping.
Chapter 31.
§ On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured jawbone.
When there remains, near the extraction of a tooth that breaks something, then it is necessary to place over the site a custom bandage with butter for one or two days, until the place becomes soft; then insert the proper forceps or pincers, whose ends are similar to the beak of what is called a forcep. The shape of these forceps is as follows:
The ends of these forceps are made like a chisel or a knife blade.
If, therefore, it does not yield to you when using these forceps, then you must apply leverage over the root and remove all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever, whose shape is as follows.
It should have a short end, slightly thicker; it must not be soaked, lest it break.
If, therefore, the root comes out through it, it is good; if not, leverage must be applied with other instruments of this shape.
The shape of the first end is triangular, with some thickness.
The triangular end is delicate.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded it in terms of teeth.
It is also a saw with this instrument that resembles a large hook, with curved ends of a triangular shape, which has some thickness to it so as not to break, and it should not be oiled.
And you should know that there are many instruments for teeth: and similarly, the other tools are not counted, and a skilled craftsman, subtle in his art, found this very instrument himself, according to which he understands the operation and illnesses themselves.
Because from the illnesses to which they (teeth) are subject, there were no instruments mentioned by the ancients, due to the diversity of those species.
However, if the bone breaks from the jaw or from any other bones of the mouth, or it decays: then examine that place with him (the surgeon) using the instruments and pincers suitable for extracting roots, and treat with gestures, whose form is as follows.
In that, put some thickness gradually, so as to tighten or hold the bone, and not let it escape or waste away, until the bone is extracted, and restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
If there is a small putrid bone, then cut it away from its putrefaction and treat it until it heals.
Head XXXII.
On the projection of the prominent teeth above others.
When the teeth project not according to their natural course, an unsightly form results from it: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, in those with thin jaws.
Therefore, it is necessary that you should consider. For if a tooth grows after another tooth, and does not move or become loose, then extract it; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following shape.
It has a similar appearance to a small face, and is made of iron bent, with very acute ends.
And your cut should be such that you cut it for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to disturb any other teeth.
However, if it is prominently exposed and its edge can be filed: then file it with a file made of iron, whose shape is as follows.
Sit entirely from the indus, and its handle of small punctured points like a liming tool with which pins are made; with it, the tooth is gently filed day after day until it smooths out without disturbing the tooth or causing it to fall out; then make it soft, finally polish it with certain rasors.
If there is a tooth, from which a part breaks off and injures the tongue, then it must be filed further until its roughness due to the fracture is removed and it becomes smooth; it should be smoothed without injuring the tongue or corrupting speech.
**Head XXXIII.**
**On the Relationship of Teeth with Golden Threads**
When the front teeth suffer a shock or displacement due to impact or accident, and the weak patient cannot hold onto what he chews to prevent it from falling out, and treatment with astringent medicines does not help: then there is a trick to make them cling together with golden thread. Since silver turns green and rots after a few days, but gold never changes.
And the thread should be of medium thickness, according to the amount that can fit between the teeth.
As for the method of threading, take the thread and insert its double length between two healthy teeth; then weave the ends of the thread between the moving teeth, one or more, until you reach the meshwork up to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the texture up to the part from which you started, and tightly hold your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not moved at all, and let your compression at the point where you are tying the thread, near the roots of the teeth, be such that it does not slip.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors, and gather them together, and twist them with your fingers, and insert them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so as not to harm the tongue, then release it so that it remains tightly held.
If it is however loosened or cut, tie them again with another thread, and let it remain thus for a long time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you can see.
And whenever a tooth or two return to their original position after falling out in their places, and remain as we have described, it is done only by an artist, prudent and skilled.
And whenever some suitable bone is obtained from a corpse, it is made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the position from which the tooth is supported and tightened, as we have said, and remains, and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the lower jaw at its base in your palm, and lift up his tongue; then cut through that nerve ligament across its width until the tongue is released from its attachment.
If there is something of hardness and knotting in it, resulting from the healing of a wound, then insert an hook into it and find its width, until you cut through the ligament and the knot is released.
And be careful, so that there is no tear in the deep flesh, and cut through the artery there, and let there not be a flow of blood.
Then the wound should be washed with rosewater, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a piece of linen that will hold it open at night so that it does not heal again.
If, however, there is a flow of blood, then place over the wound a torn cloth. If indeed blood clings to you, then cauterize the place with a lentiginous cautery, which is appropriate for it; then treat it as you would any other wound, until it heals.
Head XXXIV.
Sometimes a swelling occurs under the tongue that resembles a small ranula, preventing the tongue from its natural movement, and it may even become so severe that it blocks the mouth.
And the treatment for it is to open the lower jaw before the sun, and consider the swelling.
If therefore you see that it is of a pale or black colour, hard, and lacks feeling, then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it has dipped to whiteness with humidity, then throw a hook at it and cut it off with a thin instrument, freeing it from every part. If indeed blood clings to it during your operation, then place a crushed, third-degree bandage over it until the blood lets go; afterwards, return to your operation until you have completely extracted it along with its complement.
Then it should be washed with vinegar and salt, and the rest of the cure should correspond to that treatment until it is healed.
§ On the treatment of an aptham (edema) of both amygdales.
Head XXXVI.
Sometimes there occur in the throat, glands similar to cotton, which appear externally, and are called two amygdales. If these do not heal when treated as we have said, then consider them.
If therefore the aptham is of a dark color, firm to the touch, and has little sensation, then do not attempt to treat it with iron.
And if it is of a red color, and the root is thick: then do not touch it with iron either, fearing blood loss, but instead let it stand until it heals properly. And then either pierce it or it will break on its own.
And if it is of a white color, round, and the root is thin: then you must cut into it.
And the operation on it is such that you should consider before your operation if the aptham's heat has completely subsided or diminished in any way, then afterwards make the patient sit before the sun, and place his head in your lap, open his mouth, and with a tool of this form, press his tongue from below.
Make it from silver or brass, which should be as thin as a knife blade.
So, when you have placed it (the appendage) in the wound and it sinks into it, your finger should then be removed using a hook and fixed in a groove, and pulled out as far as possible without pulling on the skin.
Then cut it with the instrument, whose shape follows this one. It is cut with shears; however, its ends should be protected so that the hole of each one is in direct contact with the sharp point of the other, thereby ensuring it is made of iron-wrought or soaked alum.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a knife, whose shape follows this one. It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after you have cut one groove, cut the other according to this same pattern of cutting.
After the cutting, then wash the patient with cold water or with vinegar and water.
If, however, there is bleeding, wash with water in which bark of the hemlock or similar astringent leaves have been boiled until the flow of blood stops; then take care of it until it heals.
And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat, besides the two tonsils. Therefore, cut those according to what I have said about the cutting of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I have already treated a woman from an abscess that had been born between her throat, which was drawing towards blackness, with little feeling, which had almost closed her throat; and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and had forbidden herself food and drinking water; and she had already reached the point of death, if she had not recovered within one or two days.
And the abscess will only rise as far as it has emitted two branches, until they have emerged above the two nasal openings.
I therefore proceeded with greater haste, and fixed one of the hooks into one of them. Then I pulled it straight, and the portion that was torn out from it is a large one.
Then I severed it where it was caught in the nasal opening.
Then I did the same thing to the other one that had emerged from the second nasal opening.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; then I fixed the hook into the abscess itself; then I severed from it that part of it, and nothing more came out of it but a little blood: thus the throat of the woman is healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then accepted food.
Therefore I did not cease to cut away from that gap many times over a long period of time, and the gap was succeeded by the place where I had cut, until it became too prolonged and as a result, that gap.
I therefore devised a way and cauterized the gap between the throat.
It stopped bleeding; then I walked away from it, and I did not know what God had done with it after me.
§ On the incision of the skin gap.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the phlegm descends to the skin and forms a gap, which is long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, then it is called "uua".
When it is cured with what we have said about the division, and treatment does not help; and you see that the gap has become calm and thin, then it is necessary to cut it.
And what is aggregated from it in a round shape, and does not have length, and is of a bloody or dark or black colour, and has no sensation, then you must make an incision into it. There is fear in it concerning the sick.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, by its whiteness and length, make the sick sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument of which mention has previously been made; then attach a hook to it and pull it downwards; and cut it with one of the two instruments I have mentioned in cutting the two glands.
And it is necessary that you do not cut from it unless that which is added to the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it more, you will injure the voice and speech.
After the cutting, use what we have mentioned in cutting the two glands, and take care of it until it heals.
If, however, the sick is disturbed by the cut: then you must use skill in sealing it without fear and trepidation.
The manner of cauterization in it is not otherwise than with sharp water; and it is as if you place the head of the sick in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument I mentioned. Then take water as I have told you in the chapter on cauterization, and mix it with a paste of unextinguished lime, not too thick or too thin, and fill up this cavity of the instrument, which has this form.
Place the tip of it at the place where the medicine is to be applied, as the cavity of the radius bone.
And place the instrument with the medicine on that very same wound: and let the patient lie on his side so that the salt from his mouth flows out due to the medicine's inherent action, lest any of it descend into his throat and harm himself.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And from the first, place it over the wound with a quantity sufficient for half an hour, until you perceive that it has already turned black and the bite of the medicine is subdued.
And if you wish to take off the poultice and cover it again over the end of the radius, and insert the rayon with the poultice into a tube above, until the poultice adheres to the wound.
Do that many times until you achieve what you wish from the cauterization of the new (wound). Then release her; for she will heal and fall off after three or four days.
If you need to apply further medicine, apply the same to it; and after cauterization, clean around the new wound with butter-soaked cotton and purify it with what is left from the medicine; then wash it with cold water.
And it will heal from the outside with bandages, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This, therefore, is the kind of healing that is more salutary and less fearful.
And sometimes the wound heals even better than with burning or cutting; for it heals with fumigation, in this way. Take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, fennel, chamomile, and tansy, and other similar herbs; mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in vinegar, allowing them to bubble: the pot should be sealed with decent clay; and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which a concave instrument is placed in this way.
Let it be made of silver or brass; and the end with the grenade should be inserted into the mouth until the vapor rises to the upper part through the tube, blocking the wound a lot.
Then repeat this process many times over the same area until it heals.
And moreover, do not perform this cure at the onset of the apoplexy. For indeed, it adds pleasure to the apoplexy: and you should not perform that unless near the decline of the apoplexy's heat.
If, however, this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane, and fasten a piece of wood at its end, so that it does not burn the weak bone, for the wood prevents the vapor from burning the bone; and this is from good cure with health.
§ On the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Head XXXVIII.
Often, a bone, or a fish spine, or something else adheres in the throat.
Therefore, you must extract what is apparent from them, after pressing the tongue with an instrument near the sun, and it will be declared to you whether something is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food digests in the stomach. Perhaps the condition will be expelled through vomiting.
If the patient swallows a fragment of raw naph (a type of plant), or a root of lettuce, or chews but does not swallow a dry crumb of bread, he may take instead a piece of soft, dry seaweed and wrap it in thread, then swallow it. When, therefore, he reaches the place where there are spines or bones, and extracts them, then he is cured.
If, therefore, it does not come out as we said, then use an instrument of lead in this form.
It should be larger than the radius by a little, and its end should be sharpened so that it is easily inserted into the patient's throat; and he himself should keep his head raised upward.
And he should be careful with the touch of his epiglottis, so that he does not experience coughing, and pushes out with it a bone or a spine, or the doctor himself inserts it by hand.
Indeed, it is better for the patient to insert it himself, because of his knowledge of the place where the condition is attached, and he pushes it down or pulls his hand up with the instrument until it comes out completely according to the amount that was prepared for him.
On the extraction of the bloodsucker.
Chapter XXXIX.
When the bloodsucker is treated with what I have mentioned regarding division from cure with medicines, and it does not improve, then consider the drop of the weak tongue before the sun, or near the sun after you have placed your instrument on it as I told you.
If therefore your hook slips off the bloodsucker, extract it with a small hook or with delicate gestures.
If it is not possible with these [instruments], then take a hollow pipe and insert it into the weak tongue up to near the throat: then insert into the hollow of the pipe a heated iron tip with fire. Do that many times, and the weak person should abstain from water all day.
Then take a full cup of cold water and open the person's mouth with it: and have them suck their own tongue in it, and not swallow anything from it: and move the water every hour from one to another with their hand. The bloodsucker indeed falls immediately when it feels the water.
If, however, he does not leave with what we have described, then smother the sick with lice or with wings and an instrument, as I described for the suffocation of a fly.
Do that many times, because it will fall itself.
And the mode of operation in suffocation is to take a pot, in which there are live coals with fire; and let the pot be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is an opening; and arrange the end of the instrument in that opening.
Then release the suffocation, and have the sick person place their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation does not escape, until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood vessel. For the blood vessel will immediately fall.
If it does not fall, then repeat the suffocation many times.
And the sick person will endure thirst, and eat spicy foods, and others, and not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary to leave with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood vessel is extracted from the throat when it falls on that surface.
It is similar to forceps, as you see: except that there is a certain curvature which extends to the throat. And its end is similar to the beak of what is called a forceps, in which there is a rough edge; when it grips something, it does not let go of it completely.
§ On the opening of wounds (apopthema), their incision, and general care.
Head XL.
There are many kinds of wounds (apopthema), varying according to the manner in which they present themselves, namely, one kind and one alone is discussed in this book; and they differ in their punctures and incisions in two ways.
One of the kinds of wounds is from a specific type of aperture (apopthema) itself, and because it absorbs moisture.
The second manner (of incision) is according to the places where it happens on the body.
Since the wound (apopthema) occurring in the head is different from that occurring in the anus; and a wound occurring in a fleshy part is different from one occurring in joints; and each has its own judgment according to its operation.
And there are those which should not be pierced unless after the purification of the discharge within them and its completion; and these are those which must be pierced while they are still raw and do not complete their maturation according to their due course.
As for the abscesses that are close to the joints.
For when an abscess occurs close to a joint and persists until the pus within it putrefies, the surrounding ligaments or nerves of that joint might become corrupted; hence, it is a cause for closer contraction of that member.
Or it is an abscess near a principal member; for if you delay piercing it until it matures, it will harm either that one or the principal member through it.
Or it is near a bowel; therefore, pierce the raw abscess that has not yet completed its digestion, only if it is near a bowel to prevent deep putrefaction and to extend towards the interior of the anus, thereby creating a fistula or ending in a condition that does not heal.
You must know the time for piercing the abscess that has matured according to its course; and it is indicated by the relief of pain, the decrease in fever, and the diminution of redness, pulse, and sharpness of the abscessed head; and other signs.
And you must make the same perforation in the lower part of the apostema and of the more prominent eminence; and it should be a piercing cut along the length of the body, if the apostemata are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
However, in those that reflect, pierce according to that member.
When the apostema is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave off the piercing until its healing is confirmed, as we said according to completion.
Because if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much pain and swelling, and perhaps its lips become hardened, and its depth increases.
And certain apostemata are pierced according to the width of the body where it is necessary, or according to that which the member needs.
And it is necessary to administer in small apostemata a small piercing, and in large apostemata a large piercing: or many sections according to the similarity of the size of the apostema.
And there are apostemata where it is necessary to make the skin hollow: and it is cut when it has already formed as a cloth, and has become in the end that it is dead, such as happens in many cases, as it shrinks, and in gonorrhoea.
And from them are those that are cut with a section having three angles. And from them is that from which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As the scrotal hernia.
And from them are those in which a round section is administered, and a lunar section; and similar sections to these.
That, however, which has no head, as are the soft hernias on the surface, should be treated with a single or merely shallow perforation.
And when the hernia is large and has already absorbed much blood, and you make a single perforation, so as not to tear it and drain all the pus at that time; on the contrary, remove part of it from that very place. Then, bandage the hernia until another day. Then, remove something from the pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree, until it protrudes; especially if the patient is weak of will, or a pregnant woman, or a very young child, or an old person who has declined: for the animal spirit often leaves the body with the discharge of pus, and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore, this chapter demands great caution.
And after your perforation, through which you make these incisions, it is necessary to cleanse the wound; and consider this: If therefore the wound of the appendage is small or there is a flat cut, then apply a poultice of lint or an old cloth. And if it is a large fistula and there are many cracks from the perforation, then you should introduce lint into each crack until they heal completely.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the fistula or torn it in the surrounding area, then you should fill it with an old cloth or as when a cloth is woven, or cloth lint from dry linen and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove the bandage and care for it as necessary with ointment until it is healed.
If, however, there is bleeding during your operation, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which a cloth should be soaked in them and placed on the place of the bleeding numerous times.
If, however, the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer treatments and care, and use the poultices and substances I have mentioned in many places in this book, and according to division.
However, if it is in the winter season and the site of the abscess involves many nerves, then you should insert small threads with wine and hot oil and place them on the affected area.
But if it is summer and the sites are fleshy, then you should apply threads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil to them all, while they are cold. Until the third day, as we have said, then you should open up the abscess, wash it, and apply whatever is suitable for its cure until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the cure for abscesses universally.
According to the way of distinction, I have already spoken about every abscess, how the path to its cure is described individually.
Head 41.
**On the Abscesses that Occur on the Skin of the Head.**
Small abscesses occur on the head skin and are of a kind that involves sacs contained within layers of skin, as if they were small chicken eggs.
And there are many kinds of them.
From them come rich ones; and from them are those that contain moisture similar to clay; and from them are those that contain moisture similar to ointments and poultices; and others of a similar kind, and from them are the hard stones.
And in all these cases, there is no fear of extraction as long as the artery does not contradict during the cutting of them.
And the operation in the cutting of them is that you should experience these with an instrument whose shape comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if there is that which contains moisture, then dry it with the cutting according to the length of the superficial section: in this form.
And begin with the cutting from line B to line G. When the moisture is evacuated, then scrape away the crust that contains that moisture, and do not leave anything completely detached from it.
For often it returns if anything remains of it.
Then immerse the bandage in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; and if not, in water and salt: and apply it to the wound, and leave it until another day. Indeed, it corrodes what remains from a cyst.
Then it repeats over the top with a cotton cloth from Egypt, second and third times, and if you need to do that, continue until you trust that nothing remains from the cyst, then indeed treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If it contains a thick nodule: then dry it according to this form, cutting with a shape like a cross, and throw hooks between the two halves of the cut, and scrape it from all sides, and use your strength to remove the tunic that contains it.
However, if it causes you opposition from an artery, then do what I will tell you afterward.
And similarly, for an abscess, if it is hard like a stone, cut it out and cure it according to what we said.
And the cutting above an abscess that is hard like stone is easier, because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain of these abscesses that are in the head of some men, where there is no moisture whatsoever.
This is because I followed an abscess in the head of a young woman, and found it like a hard, solid stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if anyone threw something at it, it would wound itself.
In other cases of apostemas (deformities) occurring in the head, except for those that occur in the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, their removal should all be a superficial section.
Or make an opening (perforation) always from their lower part, so that the flow of pure (body) fluids towards below is not hindered.
Then care for them as is appropriate for their condition from treatment.
§ On the section of strophules (lumps) on the neck.
Head 42.
These apostemas (deformities) often occur in the neck, and under armpits, and groins: and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And there are many (kinds of) deformities above those that occur in the neck, some singular and others numerous, and they originate from one another; and every lump (strophula) from them is within its own sheath, as with the nodules and deformities of the head, as we have narrated.
And the types of these deformities (strophula) are many. And indeed, there are some that are hard (lapidary), and some contain moistures (humidities), and others are malignant (malignant), which do not obey treatment.
In that part, therefore, which you see to be of good disposition in touch, whose proximity to the skin's color is evident, and it moves towards every part, and is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with the tendons, nor with the arteries, nor is it deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line, b. to a line, g., and scrape it from every side, and extend two flaps of skin with a hook, or with many hooks if needed, as we said in the abrasions of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is above all caution that the vein or nerve not be injured.
And let the instrument be not too sharp: so as not to give you a hand with the cut or disturb the patient, and make an unnecessary cut.
If however you cut a vein, or an artery, and it hinders the operation, then apply a third-degree pressure bandage, or some powdery substances that stop the flow of blood, and compress the wound, and leave it until the acuteness of the abscess subsides, and the wound becomes softened: otherwise it will begin to putrefy.
Since the blood is stopped by the bandage, turn again to your operation until it is completed.
Then, use your index finger to feel if any remaining particles of the abscess are present; so cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the root of the strophula, then it is necessary not to cut that strophula from its root; on the contrary, it is necessary to tie it with a strong doubled thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with more of the same Egyptian ointment that you had already applied. Then take care of yourself.
If the strophula is completely cut off, then it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and close them immediately as soon as you see that there is no excess left.
However, if you see that there is excess left due to the size of the strophula, then it is necessary to prepare to cut its root and extract it; and administer the stitch as we have said.
And for those strophulas that contain moisture, make a superficial perforation in them so that you can see the place of their maturity; and then make another perforation starting from below the body as we have said.
Then after the perforation, apply a linen cloth with ointment and similar things to corrode what remains from the corruption, until you see that the wound is already clean; then take care of yourself with a generation-type ointment for the flesh until it heals.
**Chapter XLIII**
On the incision of the epiglottis through an opening within the throat by accident.
The ancients spoke of this incision into the epiglottis, and they knew of no one in our land who had performed it; and this is the writing of their words.
In cases of strangulation, the incision of the epiglottis must be made with care; if it is not done carefully, then because all the veins and lungs are weak.
In those who have a hot aperture in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, without any obstruction in the channels, it is necessary to use the incision of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that occurs due to inflammation.
Therefore, when we wish to make the incision of the epiglottis, we must cut it under three or four circles of the epiglottis with a small section in width, at the place that is between the two circles, in such a way that the incision be on the side (since it is enclosed by meat, and the vessels of blood are far from there).
If the physician is timid, then he must extend the skin of the throat with a hook. Then it finds the wound, until it reaches the canal: it should open the vessel of blood if it sees anything coming out from them.
Then it cuts through the part we have described: and this is indicated above the section of the canal from which phlegm comes out, when it breaks and separates from it.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When, therefore, the time comes when it is feared that the wound will close, gather together the two edges of the skin of the wound, and leave it alone without cartilage.
Then administer the medicines that cause the flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. In conclusion, as we have described, the exposition is not complete unless they see that one of these conditions has already saturated the throat of the patient; and the sick person is lifted up above death, and desires to be cut open, so that the patient breathes through the wound in some way, and is saved from death. And for this reason, they hastened to leave the wound open until the malady is consumed, and it lasts for three days, and as if it were itself; then they hastened to close the wound and care for themselves until they are healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a nurse takes up the knife, and sends it into her throat, and cuts with it part of the pulmonary artery.
And I have been called upon for the treatment of this condition, and I find her moaning, as is the moan of a dying person.
I therefore detected a wound, and I found blood that had emerged from the wound of the lung. I am therefore confused that she did not cut the vein, nor tie it off; and air was coming out from the wound.
I therefore prepared, and treated my own wound, until it was healed; and the nurse suffered nothing, except a hoarse voice: and after several days she returned for better arrangements.
From this, therefore, I say that there is no fear in the incision of the epiglottis.
## On the Incision of the Gut Hernia
Chapter 44
This hernia, called the gut hernia, is a large aperture, according to the color of the body; and it is common in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
Certainly, in the natural, there is no skill.
Accidental, indeed, it is according to two modes: of which one is similar to thick knots. And the other mode is similar to an aperture that is made from the knot of an artery. And there is fear in it, and it is not necessary for presumption to be made towards it with the iron, unless in what is barely sufficient; and you try it, and investigate it with the probe. If therefore you find it similar to a thick knot, and it is not suspended with any vessels, then dry it as knots are dried; and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if there is one; and if not, then scrutinize its whole self. Then take care of the place with what is necessary from treatment, until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
§ On the Section Regarding Knots' Species.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already described all their types in a division; and it is necessary that I tell the difference between a nodule and an exit here, as it creates doubt.
Therefore, I say that when the exitum (exit) presents heat, fever, and severe pain until the ebullition of excess fluid is calmed and putrefaction completes, then indeed the fever and heat subside.
When the nodule is not characterized by heat, fever, or pain and it contains a cystic sac that is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, then it is captured like a chick in an egg and becomes like a blister, with some larger and others smaller.
And they are according to two types: either plump or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a nodule, it is necessary that you experience it and examine it with the first instrument called Intromissum, according to its shape as it comes in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of examining the abscesses and nodules is to take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place that you find in the abscess; and you gradually push your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then, with your last hand, conform it according to the measure of the aperture's magnitude.
Then extract the intromission and consider what emerges from its track.
If therefore moisture emerges flowing, whatever its nature: then dry it by a shallow section, according to what I have said in the remaining apertures.
And if moisture does not emerge from the intromission's track, then know that it is fatty: so dry it by a section above it in the form of a cross, according to this form as I have taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and strip the skin from all sides easily: and guard the wound if you can over it, so that you extract the same healthy with the knot.
However, if the cyst ruptures during the operation and it is not possible to extract it healthy, this often happens, then extract it fragmentarily until nothing remains from it.
For if something remains from it, whether little or much, the knot returns according to its greatest extent.
Which if it catches you, and something remains from it, even little: then fill the wound at your completion with some sharp, corroding powder: and tighten the wound, and place over it what sits on the aperture a hot compress, and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If there is a large nodule, then its two lips and treatment of itself with what it encloses.
However, if the vein is pulsating or not pulsating: then approach it and fill the space with a third-degree wound dressing, and leave it tightened for two days, or three, until the ulcer putrefies and the bleeding ceases; then return to incising what remains of the nodule.
Head XLVI.
§ On external instruments for cutting and piercing.
From these are the forms of instruments for insertion, and there are three kinds.
Indeed, there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They should be made of iron, square at both ends, so that they hold the opening in the wound firmly.
And these are the shapes of instruments for piercing, and yes, they are called punctors, that is, piercing ones; and there are three kinds.
Indeed, there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They need to be probed and incised, and fistulas and buboes drained from what lies between them, which is bone.
And others are made round and smooth and soft, like a large needle that is used to sew, of citron or brass, or iron, or steel, or silver.
And the best of them are made from citron.
And experience is also made with black lead, which is used to probe fistulas, the cavities of which have reflections, so that they reflect with their gentle nature those same reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because they are long, medium, or short from them, according to the quantity of the width and tightness of the fistula.
The shapes of stitches, and they are of many kinds.
Because they are simple, that is to say, having one thread: and they are of three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And from them are blind stitches: and they are of three kinds.
And from these are hooks having two wounds, and they are of three kinds; and from these are hooks having three wounds, and they are also of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their respective places.
And these are the forms of scalpels by which knots and incisions are cut and made; and they are of three kinds, because there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The ends by which the cutting is done are acute, and the other ends are not; and they are not used thus except to provide help in the incision of knots at the site of a vein or nerve's fear, or to cure the sick through them, and gain some rest from the heat as they did during the excoriation of an apostema.
They are made of iron, and are similar to a knife with which alcohol is made; and at the tip there is a small hidden point of the scalpel, through which it flows inside and outside when you wish, as you see.
The form of the scalpels which are hidden among the fingers at the piercing of an apostema, and which are not perceived by the sick; and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of the wind instruments by which the flow of blood is divided; and they are of three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They should be made round and somewhat long from air or citron, as you see, and they should be thin.
And you should have these two kinds of wind instruments with you, the large and the small ones, so that you can drain blood quickly from them when necessary, and to use them when no other medicine is available.
However, do not use them for the removal of blood from every part of the body, and only use them on fleshy parts, such as the thigh, hip, arm, breast, abdomen, groin, and similar places, where they are applied to damp flesh.
And when they are made into smaller instruments similar to the shape of almond shells, they can be used to drain blood when it flows from a phlebotomy site or near a vein or artery incision; and sometimes they are made round according to this form.
Head XLVII.
§ On the care of human mammary glands that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the mammary glands of certain men are inflated at the time of the addition of sleep (that is, when they begin to wet in their sleep) until they resemble the mammary glands of women: and they remain attached by suckling.
Therefore, if one avoids that, it is necessary to make a cut above the nipples with a lunar section, following this form from line b to line g. Then, peel away the entire puffy skin. Afterward, fill the wound with an ointment made from incarnated medicine. Then, join the two edges of the wound with stitching and take care of it until it heals.
However, if the nipple turns downwards and softens due to its own size, as happens with women, then it should be secured on both of its upper sides with two similar lunar-shaped cuts, where each is enclosed with the other at their ends, until a larger line encloses the smaller one, following this form from line b to line g. Then, peel away the skin between the two edges and remove the puffiness, and apply the stitching and ointments as mentioned earlier, which are necessary for healing, until it is cured.
If, however, you do not complete the incision that is necessary to be made because of the patient's restlessness or due to the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a submerged ointment that corrodes and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the puffiness. Then take care of it until it heals.
On the perforation of the apoplexy, which occurs under the titillition (nerve stimulation).
**Head XLVIII.**
These apoplexies that occur under nerve stimulation are of the hard kind, resembling strains (tissues) that contain blisters, and some that contain moistures.
As for those that are of the kind containing moistures, they should be incised with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to g. When all that is in the apoplexy is thus drained out through the wound, then fill it up immediately with some healthy matter and leave it until another day.
Then the dressing should be removed and the wound cared for with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the apoplexy is of the kind derived from hard strains (tissues), then cut it through as we have said regarding cutting the strains equally.
If however the wound extends to this point as to discharge pus, then apply a cauterization to it according to what has been said above.
Chapter XLIX. Head.
**On the section of the apoplexy that occurs due to an artery and vein.**
When an artery ruptures and the skin above it hardens, a deep ulcer often results from it; and the same happens to veins, leading to ulcers and swelling.
And the signs by which it is recognized that the ulcer and swelling are due to an artery or vein are: since, when the ulcer is due to an artery, it is long, deep, and localized in the body; and when you press the ulcer with your fingers, you feel a kind of cracking sensation.
And that which is due to a vein is round, clearly visible on the body.
And cutting into the ulcer in this area is a mistake, especially when it is located under the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is a great risk. Therefore, it is necessary to take care of it with caution when using a knife, and the same should be done for those at the extremities, or at the head.
Therefore, over that area where an artery's orifice becomes inflamed, make an incision in the skin along its length. Then open the incision with hooks, afterward locate the artery; and free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert under it a sharp knife, and cause it to penetrate until it reaches the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, as I taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then punch the space between the two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood inside it has drained out and the hemorrhage is stopped.
Then apply treatment that produces pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards, care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the severing of a vein, then you must use your hand as much as possible to squeeze out the abscess along with the skin. Then insert a knife under the place that you have held with your hand, and cause it to penetrate until you extract it from the other side. And put a double thread in it until you remove it from the other side. Then bind the abscess tightly with a good ligament; as I told you about the young ligament, from both parts with both ends of the thread.
However, if you find that the thread cannot be extracted, then insert another knife with a different thread under the entire abscess near the wound of the needle; press and tie your threads at four places.
Next, dry the abscess in the middle of it until the purulent matter is discharged; then cut away the excess skin and release what is tied up in it.
Next, place on it the small piece of cloth that you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply the treatment using poultices and ointments until it heals.
Head (L.)
§ On the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Just as an abscess occurs in arteries and veins, so too does it occur in nerves; this happens either from a blow or from excessive strain, and similar conditions: and it is most common in the areas of assistance [i.e., the hands] or the foot, and at any location where there are joints, and it is severe.
It resembles the colour of the rest of the body, and is present in many configurations without pain; and when it contracts with spasms, the patient feels a weakness similar to stupor.
And the abscess is not formed deeply within the body, but it is beneath the skin, and it moves to every part, and does not extend forward or backward, nor to the sides.
Therefore, what arises from them at the joints should not be attacked with a sword. Perhaps it happens that contraction occurs.
However, for what arises from them in the head or forehead, find the skin with a scalpel. If therefore it is an apostema of the bones, then hold it with pincers and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it and dress the wound with sutures; and take care of it until it is healed.
Head (Chapter) LI.
§ On the cutting out of an apostema, which happens in the belly.
Certain men suffer from repeated growths in their veins and other parts of their bodies, which are called Fungalia, due to their resemblance to fungi.
Whose root is thin and whose head is large, and their edges (or lips) are turned inward. And there are a few among them that are rare, and there are some that are very impressive.
And indeed I have seen a man whose belly had two hernias, more similar to other things like fungi; there was no difference between them, white and thin roots, and their edges turned inwards, they closed up, and moisture always flowed from them.
Therefore, cut them and you will find that one weighs as much as one ounce and eight pennies, and the other as much as six pennies. And the operation is to make an incision in them, as you will consider then, if the patient is weak and moist, and the color is white and thin like a root: then cut it with a broad scalpel, and there will be cauterization before your eyes over fire.
For often much blood is expelled during the operation; therefore, if it should lacerate you, then cauterize it.
If you see that the patient is weak and timid from the operation with iron, then take a thread made well of lead and tie it around it: in this manner as I have said, and release it after two days.
Then add to the tightness of the lead. Do not therefore cease to tighten the lead whenever it presses on the edges, until it is completely cut off and falls by itself without effort.
However, if the root were very thick, then there would be something to fear and be afraid of in making its incision, especially when it comes to the abdomen.
However, it is possible to make an incision through its middle. Then cauterize it thoroughly so that it does not reopen.
Then care for it until the wound is healed.
And do not assume that you should make an incision into any part that is dark in color, has little sensation, and appears foul; for it is indeed a cancerous ulcer, and I will speak of this with remembrance of cancer thereafter.
Chapter II.
§ On the care of the hernia (umbilical).
The care of the hernia (umbilical) should be given due attention, as it arises from many causes. Or from tears (ruptures) in the skin above the abdomen, through which it exits, be it fat, or intestine, according to what happens in other breaks. Or from blood flowing from a vein, or artery, according to what has been mentioned before. He was constrained by the urgency of the case.
However, if it is due to a crack and the exit is clean, then the colour resembles that of the body's flesh: it is soft, without pain, and appears in a different place. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then its position is with the condition that we have described, of a greater diversity. Therefore, when you press it with your fingers and it disappears, then later it returns, and perhaps there is a sound with it, and it becomes very prominent at the bath entrance, causing great effort.
If indeed it is due to moisture, it is soft, then it does not disappear when you press it with your own hand, nor is there any constriction, nor is anything added.
Which if it is due to blood, then with these signs appears the abscess with blackening of the skin.
However, if it is due to new flesh: then the abscess is grey, thick, hard, and fixed according to one part's quantity.
If indeed it is due to heat, then its touch is soft.
And the operation in that case is to consider, if there is a protuberance of the umbilical region due to blood from an artery or vein or circulation, then it is necessary to prevent treatment of that condition. For in that case there is fear and trembling, as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of the apoptoes due to the artery and vein.
If the protuberance of the umbilical region is due to an intestine or gas, then it is necessary to urge the patient to retain their breath and stand stretched out. Then apply signs with hot wax around the entire umbilical area. Then instruct him to lie upside down between your hands. Then carefully with a broad spatula, circle around the umbilical area above the place where you previously marked it with hot wax. Then extend the spreader of the apoptoes towards the upper parts with a large hook. Then tie him tightly around the abdomen with a strong thread or a firm silk string; and let the knot of the ligament be loose.
Then open the middle of the abscess that is extended above the ligament. If therefore you find the same now captured by the ligament: then extract the tongue, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find the liver, then take it with a hook, and cut off its excess.
If, however, it is against you an artery or vein: then surround it with much care. Then prepare for your operation. And take two needles, and insert in them two strong threads: and insert two needles around the circumference that you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tighten the abscess at four places above the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles, and leave the place until the flesh becomes putrid: and it will fall by itself; or cut it when it becomes thin and putrid.
Then take care of it with the necessary ointments until it is healed.
If there is an protrusion from the flesh of the navel, either from bone or moisture: then it is necessary to make a hollow abscess as we said before. And extract blood, or moisture, as you find it within.
Then care for the wound itself to solidify the place.
Head (Part) III.
§ On the care of cancer.
We have described the division of the kinds of cancer and how the way to its cure is with medicines: and the need to be wary from it in healing, so as not to ulcerate; and we have described cancer generated in the matrix, and the precaution in its healing.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it completely, such as cancer that is in the breasts or thigh, and those similar ones, from the parts located to be extracted all of it; especially when it is beginning in a small way.
When it is truly ancient and great, one should not approach it too closely.
For I have not been able to heal anyone from it; nor have I seen another before me who has succeeded in that regard.
And the operation on it, when located as we have described, is to precede, and thus relieve the patient from the black cholera several times. Then, if you find the phlebotomy itself obvious with a manifest fullness.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is spoken of when performing the operation.
Then insert into the cancer hooks that are suitable for it. Then make an incision into it from every part with the skin, according to the examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and allow the blood to flow, do not cut it off quickly, but express the wound thoroughly by hand, or with instruments as possible there.
If, however, the flow of thick blood from an artery or vein causes you trouble; then cauterize the vein until the blood is stopped. Then take care of it with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
**Of the cure for hydrops.**
Head (IV) We have discussed in detail the division of hydrops and how the accumulation of water occurs; as well as the signs of each type and its cure with medications.
And those that are treated with iron are nothing but the sole species of ascletis, and they do not approach the species of tympanitis with iron; nor do they penetrate completely to the species of hyposarcae, for that is deadly.
When, after having treated this species of tympanitis with medicines, the treatment does not improve it, then consider this: For if the weakness has already taken hold, or there is another illness with it apart from hydropisis, such as cough, dissolution of the chest, and others like them, then be wary not to treat it with iron, for that is a danger.
But if you see a patient with abundant strength and no illness other than hydropisis alone, neither young nor old, then the mode of operation is that you raise the patient standing in your hands, and have the assistant afterwards press his belly with his hand, driving water down to the lower parts of the ribs.
Then take a spatule with a sharp edge, according to this form. It has two sharp points, long, with a sharp end like a spatule. However, it should have some degree of thickness gradually, so that it does not penetrate with you during the operation up to the intestine and injure it.
Then consider. If there is a swelling due to fluid accumulation in part of the intestines, then it is necessary to lengthen with a cut from the navel with the quantity of three fingers, towards the lower parts in a straight line above the breastbone.
If the swelling is indeed due to liver disease: then your cut should be from the navel with three fingers on the left side.
And if the swelling is due to the spleen, then the cut should be on the right side: and it is not necessary for the cut to also be on the left side where the patient wants to lie, so as not to cause excess fluid to flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument throughout its whole thickness. Then insert into that cut, and lift your hand with the scalpel between the skin, and make an incision, as if you were pricking it yourself: and the amount to be cut off should be about the size of a fingernail, or somewhat less.
Then make an incision through the scar, until the scalpel reaches the empty space: and that is the place of water. Then remove the scar tissue, and insert an instrument into the opening, which has this form. And it is similar to the cannula: it is made of silver, or copper, or brass, smooth: it has a small opening at its lower part, and on its sides there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other; and its end is cut, according to the manner of cutting the calamus, as you will see: at the top of its end is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it immediately descends upon the instrument, thus drawing the quantity of water equal to that of the hour at once.
Because if you draw too much water from it, perhaps the patient dies in that hour through the resolution of his animal spirit; or he suffers a fainting spell that brings him close to death.
Indeed, the drawing of water from it is according to its strength, and according to what the weaknesses of the patient tell you, from the pulse of his strength and from his goodness.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is retained immediately due to the skin which retains the opening that is above the sieve, about which I spoke, so that you pierce it according to that manner.
Then repeat the process with the instrument on the second day, if you see that the patient can endure it; and also extract a small quantity of water from it.
During those days, perform that operation without fear and guard yourself against error; until there remains no water except a little.
However, if you are dealing with a weak patient and have removed a significant amount of water, then take care of the patient with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and under the sun, and watch for thirst; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed; and cauterize over the stomach, and epilate, and treat the spleen after extraction of the water, according to what I have described above.
§ On the care of infants who are born in places where their urinary passages are not pierced.
Head 50.
When an infant emerges from its mother's womb, and its head is not pierced, or the opening is narrow, or it is located not in its proper place.
Therefore, it is necessary to help with the piercing immediately after birth with a fine forceps, according to this form.
Then insert a fine wire through the opening, and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When it is able to pass urine, remove the wire, and let it expel. Then reduce the swelling.
And if you do not apply lead (plaster), it is possible that the urine flowing over the place will prevent it from closing.
But he whose opening (wound) is narrow should be treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it widens.
But those in whom the opening (wound) is not in its proper place, they are damaged. This is because the opening (wound) is near the end of the handle of the weapon; therefore, it cannot be cleaned towards the front until it raises the weapon with its own hand to higher parts. It is not born in him, because the sperm cannot reach the matrix (uterus) straight; and it is a severe illness indeed.
And the mode of operation in that case is for the patient to lie on his back. Then extend the weapon's handle with your left hand, stretching it greatly, and cut the head of the weapon from its previous place with a sharp point or a sharp spatula; as if it is cutting a calamus or like carving something, so that a new opening appears in the middle as it should be.
And be sure to prevent blood flow near your surgical site. This often happens indeed. Therefore, oppose it with what causes the bleeding to stop and treat the wound until it heals.
§ Concerning Albater's accounts of events occurring in the prepuce and scalp, corruption, blackening, and adhesions.
Head (LVI)
These kinds of things often happen in surgery, and there is great danger to the flesh.
And from these, some are evil, and others not.
Therefore, the non-malignant one should be suspended with a delicate hook and cut it off until it is completely removed. Then place over it a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat the same place after that with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If the ulcer is malignant with a discolored wound, then after making an incision and its drainage, it is necessary to apply a caustic agent to it.
However, if the ulcer is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised person, and it is part of the foreskin, as well as a part of it outside: then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first, until it heals, and then take care of the outer part: because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin will not be secure but perforation will occur.
And also it happens in the testicles, and there is blackening and corruption of the foreskin. Therefore, you should take care to remove everything that has already been discolored and also wants to rot or is already rotten.
Then apply a line over it after that with honey and flour from crushed nuts and herbs from the grinder.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
However, if there is bleeding, then apply a caustic agent with a lunar cautery in this form.
A caustic agent is indeed useful for two dispositions at the same time, that is, for bleeding and a wound when it rots.
If the head of the whip corrodes and destroys it entirely in an instant, then you should insert a small leaden tube into the meatus first so that the weak one can urinate over it.
In the true adherence of the prepuce to the head of the whip, and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose prepuce is healthy, and no circumcision is required over it; and sometimes adhesion occurs because of a wound or ulcer: therefore, it is necessary to scrape it with a blunt scalpel until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the whip is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish these precisely, then you should scrape off a little from the head of the whip and from the prepuce. This is because when the prepuce is thin, it may be easily perforated because of its own thinness.
Then separate them using a thin linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
§ On the purification of infants and the treatment of errors that befall them.
Circumcision is not a cure for continuity, as with other wounds; however, when it is performed by our own hand, according to our own will, and its use is appropriate for boys from an early age, it is necessary that we perform the operation in a better and more gentle way leading to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not observe it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
Which is because I find a greater part of the art, and the use of purification by cutting with a sharp instrument, and with shears; they use cauterization, and binding with string, and incision with a claw.
And I myself have already tried all these methods, and I do not find a better purification than with shears and binding with string.
Because in purification with a sharp instrument, the skin often flees. Because the skin of the prepuce has two layers; therefore, perhaps the upper skin is incised and tears the lower layer; so it forces a cut to be made in order to incise the other one, and future pain. And when purification is done by amputation, that is, the digit used by surgeons, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not secured, because perhaps it enters his wound.
However, in the case of amputation with a fingernail, the iron may be bent and ruin your operation, and the skin of a boy is naturally thin, and many are born in such a way that they do not require purification. And you will already have seen this.
Amputation with scissors and tying with thread has shown me a good experiment: because the scissors are proportionate to the cut, so that the sharpness above is like the sharpness below. Therefore, when you place your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and they cut according to one operation at the same time, and compression is made in a similar manner, containing the skin of the weapon from every side, so that no error occurs at all.
And the mode of operation is such that you can estimate, especially a boy, if he understands a little bit what you are doing, unless you only tie the thread to his weapon and let it go until another day.
Then make him enjoy and be happy in every possible way from what he receives understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not sit down; keep the hidden scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his armpit, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the weapon emerges. Then cleanse that part of it from the filth it has accumulated.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread. Then bind the lower part with a thin strip of ligature according to need. Then hold it with your index finger and thumb, ensuring good purchase of the lower ligament, and cut between the two ligaments. Then quickly lift the skin upwards and extract the head of the weapon. Then allow the blood to flow slowly (it is better this way), and apply a poultice above; and over the poultice place a cloth in which the prepared ointment has been spread, mixed with rosewater and oil. Lastly, apply it well and leave it over the wound until the next day; then tend to the rest of the wound until it heals.
The shape of the scalpel for purification is as follows.
It has two sharp points and they are curved; the claw's branch should not protrude from them; the length of both cutting edges should be equal to the length of both handles.
A common error in purification is that perhaps the entire inner skin or a part of it escapes from the incision.
Therefore, from the beginning, you must stretch it with your finger before marking the place and cut it equally.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
If they exceed three days, and there remains something under the hook, marked and swollen, then leave it until the mark is warm and easily remove the scabs, cutting it according to what you have prepared, and be careful from the handle of the hook. For it will not harm him.
Therefore, take care of it so that it consolidates the wound from the impurities we mentioned in the treatise on impurities; and if it is cut through the skin beyond the required depth and widens towards the upper parts, it will not harm him even then.
Therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
**Head LVIII.**
**On the Extraction of Retained Urine in the Bladder**
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by congestion from stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh, or similar conditions arising from the modes of treatment we have described in division.
And if the bladder is not relieved and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then he should be laid on his knees for treatment. Then his feet should be placed on his back, and he should stretch his breath from the upper part of his back, and tighten his weak breath as much as possible. Therefore, it is squeezed with the neck of the bladder towards the rear to expel the stone, which releases the bladder.
If it is not relieved as we have said and the condition of the patient is grave, then he should undergo extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: made of silver, thin, flexible, similar to the reed of a bird's feather in fineness, long like the palm of one hand, with a thin tube at its tip.
And the method of exiting a wound through it is to take a doubled thread and bind it at its end with wool or cloth, a good ligature; and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut away any surplus wool with scissors, and insert it into the tube with care.
Then, moisten the syringe with oil or butter and alum: and place the patient sitting up, and insert the needle, and the same virga (catheter) with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the virga (catheter) easily until it reaches the root of the virga.
Then double that part at the upper side of the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has already reached the empty place; and this is not done in this order unless the passage through which it flows is one in which there is a bend.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. The wound will indeed follow the wool.
Then extract it and make the wound flow through the urethra; and repeat the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the vesica is empty and the patient finds relief.
On the quality of enema with a clepsydra.
Head IX.
When a ulcer occurs in the urethra, or blood is congealed within it, or pus is contracted within it, and water and medicines need to be distilled into it; then it should be done with an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form.
It is indeed closed, that is, obstructed. And it has three openings, two from one side and one from the other, as you can see.
And the concave place, where it is pressed, should be according to the amount that fills it without addition, until something is drawn through it from moisture; and when it is pressed, it is expelled with it to a great distance: according to what the clepsydra does, which projects naphtha, that is, Greek fire in martial conflicts.
When water is therefore projected into the urethra, insert the end of the clepsydra into the moisture and draw with it what presses towards the upper parts, for moisture is drawn into the concave part of the clepsydra.
Then insert the end of it into the penis, as we told in the syringe. Then he drives away the moisture with what drives it, for the moisture reaches the wound immediately, so that the patient feels it.
The form of a delicate enema by which the wound is enemaized.
Let it be made of silver or brass: the head should be higher like a small bowl, and under it there should be a cavity into which the ligature falls.
Then take the wound of an animal, and put into it the moisture with which you are to enemaize the wound. Then bind it between two cavities with a strong ligature of double thread, and warm that moisture slightly over the fire.
Then insert the end of the enema into the wound, afterwards tighten your hand over the wound with the moisture in a proper manner, until the patient feels that that moisture has now reached the wound.
If, however, the wound is not present to you, then take a fragment of parchment, and make from it a circle, and perforate it itself free of all its roundness. Then insert a strong thread into those openings as they unravel. Then add the circle, as you would with a bandage: after you place in it what you wish to remove from moistures, oils, and water.
Then tie the band tightly with an instrument; and do with it as you did with the other band from the expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the wound.
Chapter 60.
§ On the extraction of stones.
We have described the division of stone species and their treatment with medicines; I have explained the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, bladders, and signs thereof; I have spoken of the stone in which the operation takes place with the hand and the incision; and it is a stone that forms naturally in the bladder; and I am narrating this with clear exposition and abridgment.
I therefore say that stones formed in the bladder most often occur in children.
And one of its signs is that the urine comes out of the bladder similar to water in its fineness; and white sand appears in it, and the weak man rubs his penis, and he labors with it, and often hangs from it. Then it (the stone) becomes raised, and the anus opens with it in many of them.
And the healing of children is easy until they reach fourteen years old. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is medium, since it lies between these two: and the treatment is easier for him whose stone is larger; and if it is small, then the effort of treatment is lessened.
When we come to treatment, it is therefore necessary first to cleanse the patient with enemas, to extract all filth that is in his intestines; for this itself sometimes prevents the stone from passing near the urinary tract during the examination.
Then the patient should be taken with his feet up, and shaken and moved towards the lower parts: so that the stone descends to the depths of the bladder, or sometimes jumps out from its high position.
Then make him sit between your hands, and let his hands be under his hips, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards.
Then examine him, and feel him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in the space, then immediately approach with a knife to cut over it.
If it does not fall entirely under your touch, then you should clean the index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a young boy; or the middle finger if he is a fully grown youth; and insert it into his anus, while gently exploring from the stone, until it remains steady beneath your finger. Then gradually bend it towards the base of the penis.
Then press it with your finger and push it towards the outside opposite to the location, whose section you have made; and specifically instruct the assistant to press the vein with his hand, and direct another assistant to stretch the testicles with his right hand upwards; and with his other hand, remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the section is located.
Then insert the speculum, which has this form. And find what is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, towards the left side of birth; and let the section be above the stone, and your finger inside the anus; and make the cut transversal so that the outer section is wide, and inner tight, according to how much it is possible for the stone to exit without being larger.
Perhaps indeed the finger that is inside the anus, near the stone at the time of the section, will press it and allow it to exit without difficulty.
And know that from a stone that has angles and edges, its difficult to exit due to them.
And from it is derived a soft, gland-like, and round shape, which facilitates its exit.
Therefore, those that have angles and edges, add them to the fissure.
If it does not exit thus, then it is necessary that someone skilled perform an operation on it: either tie it with a thread over it with careful movements, whose end is like the Moon, which ties over the stone and does not slip from it; or insert under it a fine instrument with carefully guarded ends.
If, however, you cannot perform the above, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something catches you with blood, cut it off with a knife.
If indeed the stone is more than one, then push the largest first towards the opening of the urethra. Then make an incision over it. Afterwards, push the smaller ones after that one; and do similarly if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is as if cutting over it with a great section. Since it happens that a patient suffers from one of two conditions, either he dies or he experiences continuous urine discharge, as a result of which the affected area does not heal at all.
Indeed, administration of expulsion should continue until it is gone: or use instruments in the fracture with forks, until you extract it bit by bit.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood: tighten it, and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess.
Then turn the patient face-up on their collarbone, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day. When you have loosened it, then apply water and a lot of oil to the affected area.
Then treat the wound with the ointment of dyafinic and basilic until it heals.
If, however, a hot and infected abscess forms in the wound, along with corrosion and similar conditions: as if blood clots in the veins and urine is prevented from exiting; and it is recognized by the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood from it. For if it remains, it causes the vein to corrupt and its putrefaction.
Then, clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply to all kinds of it what is appropriate from treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary, during the whole course of treatment, that two bands be placed around the thighs and legs, due to the medicines applied over the place.
If a stone is small and lies in the urethra, and it is fixed in it, and blocks the flow of urine, then treatment should be done with what I mentioned before you reach the cutting stage. Indeed, many times I have avoided dissection through this treatment, for I have already tested it.
And it is, as you take a perforator of iron, whose form this is, with two pointed ends, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie the rod beneath the stone so that it does not return to the vein.
Then introduce the piercing iron into the limb with ease, until it reaches the perforator itself against that stone; and then turn the perforator with your hand on the same stone little by little; and protect the perforation of it, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
It is immediately emptied (or drained).
Then press your hand over what remains of the stone from the outer part of the limb. It (the stone) will then break and pass out with the urine, and the patient is cured of his ailment.
If, however, this treatment does not prepare for you because of something that prevents it from happening, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then dry the stone on the same limb between the two bindings. Then extract it (the stone). Then untie the binding, and clean the congealed blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread under the stone unless it does not return to the wound; and another binding above the stone, unless when the thread is untied after the stone has passed, the skin returns to its place, and closes the wound: and for that reason, you must do this when you tie the upper thread, so as to lift the skin towards the higher parts, so that it returns to your completion, and closes the wound, as we said.
Head 51.
On the extraction of the female stone.
The stone is rarely found in women.
However, if the stone should occur in any of them, then treatment is difficult and prohibited due to its many modes.
One of them is: that the woman might be a virgin.
And the second is that you will not find a woman who reveals herself to a doctor when she is chaste or has a husband.
The third is that you will not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the manual operation of it.
And the fourth is the distance from the location of the stone: for it needs a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
Which if necessity demands, then you must take a woman doctor, well-versed, and she is rarely found.
If indeed you desire this, then seek a chaste doctor, subtle, and a present woman obstetrician well-versed in women's affairs, or a woman who has herself learned parts of this art; so do make her present, and to her, especially command her to do all that you inquire of her regarding the stone.
First of all, one must check if a woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to insert a finger into her vagina and feel for a stone.
If she feels a hard object, he should press it with his finger and then immediately call upon the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone. After placing her left hand over the opening, she should apply gentle pressure.
If she finds the stone, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the vaginal opening towards the lower parts with all her strength until she reaches it as far as the root of her hip.
Then she should cut it off at the level of the middle of the thigh near the root of the hip, from whatever side it is positioned. She should feel for the stone in that area, and her finger should not be removed from under it; the initial cut should be small. Then she should insert the knife blade over that cut.
Then she should insert the knife blade over that cut. If she feels the stone, then she should continue cutting according to the amount that the stone emerges from her.
And know that there are many types of stones. From it is a small and great one, soft and rough, long and round with branches.
Therefore, know the nature of it, as it will show you concerning that which you see.
If therefore blood catches you, then add to the place three layers of bandage, and hold it tightly for an hour until the blood stops.
Then prepare for your operation until the stone is expelled, and make sure to have with you, among the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from men, those that will assist you in your operation.
If blood flow catches you, and you know that expelling the blood is from an artery that has been cut, then put powder on the place, and tighten it with little bands properly; and do not stop it tightly, and let the stone go, without extracting it. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place putrefies, then prepare for your operation until the stone is expelled.
**Chapter LXII**
On cutting through a water-filled hernia.
A water-filled hernia occurs only when there is an accumulation of moisture in a sac located beneath the skin containing the testicle or its appendages, and it is called the "sifac.
And sometimes it is contained within a sac that nature has prepared for itself in a part of the body, until it can be discharged, which is another fluid and is located between the skin of the testicle and the white sifac, as we have said, and it does not occur except rarely.
The cause of this condition is the weakness that occurs in the testicles, which allows this material to be discharged towards them. And it can also occur due to impact or striking the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or it may have a decline towards greenish, or reddish-blue, or foul-smelling black, or clear white, and these are the most common conditions.
And the signs by which it is known where the accumulation of water is located, are these. For if there is any defect in the operation as we have said, then the abscess is round and has a length somewhat like that of the figure: and the testicle does not appear, since moisture contains it from all sides.
And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscess is round with a portion of it, and because of this, a person thinks that it is another testicle.
And if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part of the operation, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore one has the knowledge of the colour of moisture, then examine the colour of moisture in the abscess with a square inserted, whose shape precedes it. Accordingly, according to what is revealed in the insertion, judge of that which is between them.
When therefore we come to the cure with a blade, then it is necessary that you urge the patient, if possible for him, to have blood let, and see the state of his body full.
Then he should be turned over on his back slightly elevated, and many cloths should be placed under him.
Then sit you on his left side, and strictly order the assistant to sit on his right side, who shall stretch out his patient's arm to one of the two sides of his testicle skin, and to the part of his heart.
Then take a broad scalpel and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, almost reaching the breastbone. Let the incision be made according to the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white head enclosing it: and examine and observe it, or carefully cut it yourself, so as to cut through the part that hangs down with the egg more easily. Then delicately explore the wound according to your ability.
Then make a wide perforation through the white head with a sharp instrument, and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the white head towards the upper parts, without touching the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut into the white head as best you can, either through its entire length or in part, especially its thin side. For if you do not carefully examine the wound, there is no security that water will not return.
However, if the egg proceeds outward from its skin during your surgical procedure: then when you have completed the incision of the white head, bring it back inside. Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with stitches.
Then take care of it like the rest of the wounds until it heals.
If you find a wound corrupted from blackness by some other cause, then it is necessary to use the instruments that are ligatures, being afraid of the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspension, and extract the wound; afterwards take care of it as we said.
If indeed water is aggregated in two parts, then know that there are two branches; so dry the other part equally as you did with the other.
And if it agrees with you, so that it becomes one operation, then do this; afterward blot up the blood. And introduce the thread into the sections of the lap covered with oil or rosy oil; and place from outside another thread than you immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and open the belly; and place two doubled cloths above, and they should be small; and bind them above with a ligature that has six according to this form.
Then take two cloths, and sweat them, and fill them with red dye according to this likeness; and let the ends by which it is pressed be of cloth or wet wool; and join them with the tightening around the waist; and one end should take hold on the rear as far as the back, and the second should take hold on the part of the chest; and two other ends should be placed above both thighs below, and two other ends should be placed above both inguinal regions, and all the tightening should be joined around the waist.
And sometimes, this part is surgically treated with a hot iron in the place of the cut, and it is as if you take a sharp scalpel and cut the skin of the testicles along with it; and it is inflamed, as we have mentioned. Until when it uncovers a white, healing cloth containing water, then take the cauterizer in this form.
It assimilates with Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that healing cloth, and it is inflamed until all humidity is expelled.
Then extend the healing cloth with hooks, and scrape it with a thin, ignited cauterizer, and cut into it as much as possible for you until you eradicate all of it.
And cauterize from there, so that it does not touch the original fire.
And know that this operation is more salutary, and causes less blood flow, and is better than the operation with cutting.
If, however, it causes you opposition in the hour of cutting, or in the hour of cauterization a hot apostema, or blood flow, or something else: then you must care for what opposes you from that with the healing that is suitable to it, as has been mentioned above.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect this operation because of its terrifying nature, then administer the perforation as I describe that it is.
When you have certified to yourself, through that which we said about the meaning of "ramex" (which is watery), then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the fistula in the lower part of his body with a broad spatula: and place the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place over the site a clean dressing, bind it, and let it flow out the remaining water; then care for it until the wound heals.
If, however, there is opposition to the flow of water at the time when you pierce it, and this is not otherwise due to a white pannicle causing opposition in the wound opening and preventing the exit of water, then you must introduce a needle into the wound or an instrument with which the hydropic water is extracted, whose form has already been described; or add to the operation on the wound slightly.
And know that water returns, and it is collected after six months, or about those times. When it is collected, then it will return in the same manner, and the patient will pass his days as before.
**Chapter LXIII**
On the care of flesh wounds.
Know that in this section about flesh wounds, there are many arrangements leading to fear and even harm. Therefore, it seems to me that the removal of these is a beneficial cure from it.
And I am mindful of the operation on them, and the appearance of the scar.
I say therefore that many scars occur in the bodies, from which the testes are formed: and this happens for many reasons, namely...
Or from the excessive or acute discharge that flows towards the testes. Or from striking.
And the appearance of the scar is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain; and the scar is gray.
And perhaps the scar is a hard one, whose color is dark brown, and it has no sensation.
And sometimes it arises from the constriction of arteries and their swelling, as has been mentioned before; or from the swelling of veins.
What is therefore due to their swelling of arteries can be known by the condition of the pulsating mass when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary for you to touch it directly at all.
But what happens due to the swelling of veins does not disappear from it when you press with your fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision can be made over this type of mass, and also over the other flesh; and it is as if you were to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the flap upwards and extract it with a clean knife; and free the suspenders from the cavity, and tie the vessels; and cut the suspenders after you have freed them from every part of the tissue.
If therefore the flap has become consolidated with those native tissues, then you must grasp the flap and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between any of the flaps or within what is between the vessels, then you must free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If, however, the origin of the flesh is in a place of adhesion which is at the back, then it is necessary to cut through all of it and extract the humour, as we said.
When, therefore, your work is completed, then fill the wound with the infused lint in rose oil and wine; then take care of it just as you do with the rest of the healing process, until it is cured.
**Head 149.**
**On the Care of Ramics, which is with Vine.**
It is a condition known as apoplexy, which is a kind of disruption similar to a stroke, affecting the testicles and making it difficult for the patient to move or exercise, or even walk.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear is involved, due to that which preceded it as a reminder.
Indeed, we must say that the operation on it should be according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore that it is necessary for you to make the patient sit on an elevated seat. Then push the suspender of the testicles down. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, close to the scrotum, and have another assistant pull it taut.
Then make an incision with a sharp, flat knife across the muscles in a straight line, until the muscles are detected.
Then clean it from all parts, as we told you in the extraction of the arteries in the temporal regions.
Then fasten it with a sharp knife where the double thread is located, and tie it itself at the first places where accidents occur; then tie it again at the last of them. Then cut it in the middle with a sharp knife along a straight line according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from corrupt, foul humors.
Then treat the wound with the care given to the other wounds, where pus is generated, so that the muscles that nourish one testicle will fall away. It is not harmful through that.
However, if all the muscles become affected, then they should be extracted for this reason, so as not to be deprived of nourishment due to the incision, and it becomes weakened or withers and is not healthy with them.
Head XV.
On the care of intestinal ramified (or branched) structures.
The course of these ramified structures (or branches) is from a cut that occurs in the perineum over the urethra in the inguinal region near the entrails.
Why do the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from a simple cut or from its extension.
And these two types occur for many reasons. Or from impact. Or through a jerk (or sudden movement). Or from noise (or commotion). Or from the elevation of a serious condition, and similar factors.
And the sign, when it is from the extension of a cut. It is that which happens gradually over a long period of time, and not suddenly; and the hernia is equal towards the deep side: for it compresses the intestines.
And the sign of its occurrence when it is from the section of the hernia, because it causes a sudden intense pain from the beginning; and the hernia is diverse, appearing under the skin nearby: and that is due to the exit of the intestine and its course towards the exterior of the hernia.
And when it emerges with the intestine, it is called the intestinal hernia, and the hernia; and sometimes it occurs with violence.
And sometimes feces run into the intestine and get stuck there, causing severe weakness; it causes intense pain, especially when pressed upon.
And in the treatment of these diseases, there is fear of complications; therefore, one must be cautious about such cases.
And the method of operation is to urge the patient gently to reduce the intestine by hand back into its proper position if he follows instructions. Then it should be raised above its collarbone between your hands, and support his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upwards, and dry the skin of the testes completely along its length. Next, fix two hooks of the section in the jaws, according as you need them to open the section with these: and the section should be according to the quantity that it is possible for it to emerge from.
Next, scrape the skin, and what is under the skin of the testicles, until the white siphon is detected, hard from all sides: then insert your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white siphon, which is under the skin yes, and between the second siphon, and absolutely adhere to it with the adhesion which is in the posterior part yes.
Next, move with the right hand to the inner skin of the testicles: and with this, extend the white siphon upwards with the left hand: and lift the siphon towards the part of the section: and instruct the helper to extend the egg upward: and you dissolve the adhesion, which is behind by complete solution.
And ask your fingers not to be anything there from the internal untwisted into the white hard siphon. If, however, you find anything from it: then push it towards the middle below.
Next, take the thread, in which there is a thick filament, made licentious from ten threads: and insert it near the last siphon, that is, the tunic, which is under the skin of the testicles following the section: then cut the ends which emerge from the thread until there are four threads. Then he should compose some of them over others with a figure in the manner of a cross, and tie them with the same ligature as we mentioned, since it is firmly attached beneath the skin to the ligament of the testicles, until he can cause some of the substances that nourish them to be released towards them, so that nothing hot comes from there. And place another ligature again according to the outer ligature, distant from it less than two fingers. And after these two ligatures, release from the ligature, which is beneath the skin of the testicles, a quantity equal to the size of a finger, and cut off the remainder entirely according to its roundness, and remove it from there.
Then, cut, in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, a section from which the blood flows and pus is discharged, as we mentioned in what has been said above.
Then apply a bandage dipped in oil to the wound, and place it as we mentioned. And apply the ligature that we have described. And when the white ligature that we mentioned has been cauterized, after the incision of it, fearing the flow of blood. This often happens indeed. And release the ligature until it falls of itself.
If, however, the case is delayed, then it is bathed with hot water; and place on top of it what we have said, until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the wound treatment until it is cured.
Head XVI.
§ Of the Abundant Blood Vessel.
In this abundant vessel, one does not see anyone who dares to surpass its curative power with iron.
And indeed, they first said that it is done as we have narrated in the vessel which is with the vein. Which is, as you bind the vessels after cutting them with ease below; then dry in the middle, and treat afterward with what opens it, until the vessels fall; and care for the wound according to what we have said, until it is healed.
Head XVII.
§ On the Disruption Which Occurs in the Groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the opening protrudes, and nothing from the intestines descends below the scrotum; and if it does descend, it is but slight, and returns in all hours; but if it prolongs itself with this condition for some time, a fissure is added to the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And it happened that this issue arises from the extension of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we have said. For it extends the scrotum: then it becomes soft, and the space moves aside, and it protrudes.
And the treatment of it is with cauterization, as its preceding description has narrated.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this manner: and he lies down on his back between your hands. Then dry the place of the rupture that has moved aside and protrudes, by cutting along its width, according to the thickness of three fingers.
Then tie the scrotum and, what lies under the skin, until it detaches the white scrotum that lies beneath the skin which follows it.
Then take the radium and place it on top of the protruding place from the scrotum, and press it deep into the belly.
Then press upon the two protruding places at the ends of the radium from the scrotum, and sew one to the other; then extract the end of the radium.
And you should not make any incision with a knife at all, nor stretch or pull, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then turn your attention to the care of wounds. When, therefore, you make an incision with a knife, cleanse it, and heal the wound until it is consolidated.
Indeed, it contracts and does not add to the prominence of the rupture.
And cauterization is better at this site, for it is closer to health.
Head LXVIII.
§ On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
In some men, the skin of the testicles often softens because the flesh surrounding them becomes softened, and the appearance of it is disfigured.
Therefore, he who is charged with his care must make the patient lie on his back and cut all the softened skin that has become detached from the natural skin.
Then, aggregate the two lips with a suture. If necessary, use three or four sutures to soften the skin's excess and form a firm suture.
Then, make an incision between the sutures.
Then, take care of the healing of the remaining wounds until they are healed and the threads fall off.
Head LXIX.
**On castration.**
Know that castration is excommunicated by our law, and for that reason it is permissible for me not to mention it in this book of mine, and its remembrance is not necessary except for two reasons.
One of which is that it should be known by the doctor when asked about it, and that he should know its cure for whoever happens to have it.
And another reason is that we often need to perform castration on certain animals for our purposes, such as rams, wild boars, cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is done according to two methods. By friction. Or by cracking and cutting.
In cases where friction is used, the method of operation is as follows: We make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become soft and relaxed and hang down; then we apply pressure with our hand until they break free and no longer appear under the touch.
In castration by cracking and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligaments and dry the entire cut with a cloth, until two eggs have been laid; then, after you have cleaned them, make an incision in each one and do not leave anything remaining from the shell except a thin layer that is on the surface.
And this method of castration is better than that by friction, because friction may leave some remaining part of the testicles, which makes the animal desire copulation.
Then tend to the wound until it heals.
Chapter LXX.
§ On caring for hermaphrodites using both methods.
An hermaphrodite is found in men in two ways. One type is because it appears to have a space following it, or on the skin of the testicles, where there is a figure resembling a woman's vulva, with hair, and sometimes urine flows from that part on the skin of the testicles.
But in women there is one kind, which resembles a woman's vulva over the breast as if it were the pair of testicles in men, protruding towards the outside; of these, one is like the penis of a man, and two are like the two testicles.
And the treatment for these three types, two of men and one of women, is as follows: because it is necessary to cut into the added flesh until the impression of them escapes. Then, treat them with the same care as other wounds.
However, in the second type of men, from which urine exits on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation and indeed no treatment at all.
Chapter LXXI.
§ On the cutting of the tentigine and the protruding flesh on women's vulvas.
The tumor may be added to the natural one until it becomes inflamed and takes on an unsightly appearance, and in some women, it is so magnified that it expands like that of a man, reaching up to sexual intercourse.
Therefore, it is necessary that you hold the excess of the tumor with your hand or a hook and cut it, but not too close to the end, especially deep into the root, so as not to cause bleeding.
Then take care of the wound itself until it heals.
But when a tumor grows in the mother's womb, it fills itself until it reaches its full size, and sometimes it emerges to the outside like a tail, and for that reason some people call this disease "caudate" (tail-like). Therefore, we must cut it like we cut the tumor, and take care of it until it heals.
§ On the care of the Alratic (a rare condition in women not pierced).
Chapter LXXII.
Alratic is when there is an abnormal growth in a woman that is not pierced or has only a small opening. It is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from a condition that precedes illness; it arises either from born flesh added, or by subtile and thin, or thick discharge, and occurs in the depths of the matrix, or on its sides, or on the upper or lower part of itself, and hinders coitus, impregnation, delivery, and perhaps menstruation.
Its recognition is done through the examination of obstetrics if pregnancy is evident and close at hand.
However, if it's not apparent, then seek it with your fingers or using a cane.
However, if the pregnancy is from a thin and subtle discharge and is close to two lips: then approach it and break it open.
And it is, as you place two little threads on the lips.
Then place your two hands together and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart. Then stretch the two lips with force until the thin discharge is broken and the pregnancy opens.
Then take a cloth, immerse it in oil, and place it on the spot; have the woman press it every day so that the place does not harden again.
If, however, the tumour is large and thick, then it should be cut out with a broad, similar spatula like a myrtle leaf.
If, however, the swelling is from flesh that has formed, then suspend it with hooks and cut it; and have with you medicines that stop the flow of blood without laceration, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and turpentine mixed with alum.
Next, insert a large lead pipe into the wound so that it does not heal quickly; hold it for several days. Then apply linseed oil, and afterwards continue with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And when any new growths of flesh are born, then they should be cut according to this manner; for as long as there is no cancerous ulcer, which is the cancerous growth within the matrix, let there be no opposition with iron at all.
Head LXXIII.
**On the care of haemorrhoids, Atehelil, and bothor (rubella) in women's bodies.**
Haemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the veins, as long as much blood runs out of them persistently.
Since hemorrhoids have existed from ancient times, they are categorized into types and each has its own signs; I will discuss here which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are inside the anus and do not appear to the senses: then there is no treatment for them with a knife.
But those that are among them, on which the sense falls, are the ones that receive treatment.
Therefore, it is necessary that a woman should enter a cold house. Then she extends the hemorrhoids with forceps or with a rough cloth and cuts them off from their roots.
Then she cleans them near the flow of blood from one of the incisions without wounding: like myrrh, and dragon's blood, and pitch, and similar substances.
Then she pushes her feet against the wall at the same time. After that, she lays her down in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then make her sit in a decoction of sumac, and sweet almond peel, and gall, and similar substances.
Then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on his back.
If blood comes out with it, that is good; and if not, make the plaster adhere to the back and the breasts without incision.
Then take wool and dip it in tar or sea-snail juice or grapevine juice, that is, in silver vitriol, wine, and make it adhere to the wound.
When the ulcer has healed, then take care of the place with ointments until it is cured.
Albucasis indeed describes the red bark as similar to the heads of almonds, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what appears from it, as I said before, equally, and take care of itself until it heals.
Chapter LXXIV.
§ On the perforation of the matrix (ovary) which occurs.
Many kinds of ulcers occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone ulcers, sores, abscesses, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, cracks, and hot ulcers.
And I have indeed already spoken of all these diseases and the forms of them, and their signs, and their cures by division: it is necessary that I should speak in this treatise of the hot fistula that occurs in the matrix, when there are fistulas that gather up the blood, and to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, it is necessary that you should consider. Then if the pain of the fistula is sharp in its beginning and accompanied by its inflammation and fever, and you see it turn red, and if the sensation passes over it, then you do not progress with its perforation; and treat it as it becomes better above the stage of maturation until such time as the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
Then you must make the woman sit on a seat that supports two cushions, and recline or lie down on her back, and bring her feet up to the lower part of her belly: and let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them with the appropriate binding.
Then the midwife should sit on the woman's right side, and use the instrument to open the orifice of the matrix.
And when you wish to use this instrument, you must insert it into the deep part of the woman's matrix; so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the matrix, and does not harm the sick person.
If the instrument is too long, then it is necessary to place small pieces on top of the cover of the deep matrix, in order to prevent the entire instrument from entering into the depth of the matrix; and it is necessary to place a guard, which runs along the side of the upper instrument, and to hold the instrument, and for the attendant to release the guard until the depth of the matrix is opened.
When the exit becomes apparent and is touched by the hand, and it is soft and flexible, then it is necessary to cut it off at its own head with a wide blade.
When the discharge is complete, then it is necessary to place on the wound a compress soaked in rose-colored oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and after placing the compress, extract the section into the depth of the matrix.
And place externally on the matrix, and over the comb, clean wool soaked in water with crushed stones.
Then, after two days, it should be treated with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
And when the matrix and wound are completely healed, then it should be washed with water and honey; afterwards, with water in which the root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled, and finally return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to prevent treatment with iron, and instead, take care of it as we said in division.
Chapter LXX: The Head
On Obstetrics: How embryos that have taken an unnatural form during their exit from the womb should be treated.
It is essential for an obstetrician to know the natural form of labor.
Therefore, from these signs, when you see a woman bending towards the lower parts and she desires fresh air, and relief is felt above her where the child is located, and it seems that the exit of the embryo is imminent; then know that this labor is according to a natural form, and the child emerges on its own head, and the second stage follows with it: either suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
When you observe these signs, then it is necessary to press her belly so that the embryo descends quickly.
For when it descends onto its own head, the second stage follows with it, and it is cleansed of those superfluities with a good cleansing.
However, if labor deviates from this form, it is unnatural and should be avoided.
For when the fetus emerges on its feet, and its body comes out before its head and feet, or one hand or foot at a time; or if its head and hand come out first; or if it comes out from inside; and perhaps turns around over its collarbone, then these forms are unwelcome.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be prudent and subtle in all these matters, and to guard herself against error and deception. And I will demonstrate all forms from them, and how the intellect is in each of them, and it shall be made known through that, and it will stand over it.
When the fetus emerges from its natural position above the mother's head, and it becomes difficult for her, and labor is now weakened in her, then make her sit on a seat or have women hold her; apply vapor to her private parts with cooked fennel and moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert her little finger into the vagina and find the second one with it, and cut it with her nail until what is inside due to moisture comes out; and press the woman's womb until the fetus descends.
If, however, it does not descend, then she should be enema-ized with the mucilage of fennel mixed with sesame oil.
Then after the enema, tell her to press herself; and make her sneeze with the condition, holding her jaw and nose at the same time. The fetus will indeed come out immediately.
If both hands of the fetus emerge first, then it is necessary to bring them down with ease gradually. If she does not obey at the entrance, then place the woman on a seat and raise her feet upwards; thereafter, strike the seat against the ground, and the woman must be held so that she does not fall during the striking.
If, however, the hands do not come out and the fetus dies, then cut them open and extract the remaining parts of the fetus; tie her hand with cloth and extract it with equal care, for it will come out.
The outcome of the embryo is on her feet. When the fetus comes out on its own feet, it should be gently pushed upwards; then, slowly turn the fetus around; afterward, leave it alone.
Then take one of her feet and slowly stretch it out.
When they come out as far as the thighs, then tell her to press and make her sneeze with the condition; for it will come out if God wishes.
And if it does not come out as we described, then slowly reduce the fetus until you place it according to its natural form. For it will itself come out then with easy exit.
If all that we have described is prohibited, then take some mucilage of aloe, and oil of sesame, and gum extracted; and grind it all well in a mortar with a good pounding. Then, with a line, mark the woman's vulva and the lower part of her abdomen. Then make her sit in warm water until she becomes relaxed.
When you see that her lower parts are heated up, then prepare a poultice of myrrh and apply it to herself. When she is holding the poultice for a suitable time, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her sneeze; and press her mouth and nose together, and gently press on the lower part of her abdomen. The heat will immediately come out.
The fetus emerges on the knees and hands. When the fetus is emerging in this manner, then carefully insert your hands one after the other. Then the woman should lie down on her back with her head raised and her feet hanging down; she should rest on the bed and interlace her hands. Then press above the wound gradually. Then extract what is beneath its feet from the particles, until it is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not emerge, then take its feet and move them with vigorous motion. Then press what is above the womb gradually, until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hand and take the fetus gradually, and especially instruct the woman to compress until the fetus emerges.
The fetus, hanging laterally from the hands. The hand should be manipulated for reduction. If, however, it cannot be reduced, then release the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and shake her legs with violent concussion.
Then apply the liniment you prepared from mucilaginous substances.
If she has given birth, then make her sit on a seat. Then strive to reduce the hand and equalize the fetus according to its natural form: and make the woman sneeze, and strictly tell her to compress herself until it emerges.
When the fetus emerges over its own neck, with its hands expanded and its face toward the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the fetus' hand, then gradually unfold it and make it easy.
When it is equalized, then place on its head what we described above from oil and mucus.
Then tell her to move gradually. After you have done that, then make her sit on a seat and tell her to lean toward the right side. Then tell her to compress herself: and make her sneeze when ready.
The fetus' exit is prepared on the side. When it descends to the mother's opening in this manner with the secondine, then cut the secondine with your finger, until it is evacuated by moisture.
If it is hanging over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the umbilical area; so that it does not hang on and die.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as it should be, and tell the woman to press herself several times; for thus it will come out through the birth canal.
§ The delivery of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born. However, that of multiples is rare and occurs infrequently.
Indeed, it is a rare matter outside of nature, and they do not live completely; and [the mother] contains them, even if they multiply, in a single secondine; and they are separated through the sifach, distinguishing between each other what is tied together at the navel of each.
And when they come out, as a single fetus comes out through the natural birth canal easily; they come out through an admirable birth canal, as we have narrated.
If certain difficulties arise in their (the body's) treatment during childbirth and they reach what we have described from unnatural figures, then treat them as we have narrated: and let it be with fine care, doing what it does easily or slowly, and ingeniously according to every figure with whatever is prepared for it by ingenuity leading to health.
A reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos, and some abort.
Sometimes one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb; and it has already happened to me that a woman, upon aborting, emitted seven, and others fifteen, all formed.
Which is measured by the glorious sage's art.
Therefore, all of this must be as it is in the knowledge of an obstetrician. Perhaps they may reach something similar to that; therefore, oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with what I mentioned in the process of division from medication, and it does not come out, and you take hold of it through an operation with the hand, then you must consider.
If therefore the woman is of healthy constitution and is not suffering from any of the accidents from which there is fear of her loss, then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back over the bed, with her head inclined downwards and her legs raised: and let someone attend her from both sides, or bind her to the bed so that her body does not come out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, moisten the mother's womb with moist oils mixed with alum, fennel, and flaxseed.
Then, the midwife should wet her hand with these oils and mucilages, and then insert it into the womb with ease. Then, she should seek with it the place where the hooks of the fetus are located, and the appropriate places for that.
Therefore, consider then if the fetus is prepared to descend over its own head: then fix the hooks in its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its chin, or in places close to its ribs, and under the ribcage.
If, however, the descent is above his feet, then it affects his chest and the middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he should hold the hook with his right hand, and place his left hand's pad on what is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hook with the hand easily, and fasten it in one of those places which we mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
Then fasten another hook in opposition to it, or a third if needed, so that there is an equal contraction and it does not lean towards one side.
Then it should be extended equally, and not just in a straight line, but moved towards every part so that its opening is relieved, as is done with a tooth during extraction.
And it is necessary that in what is between them, the extension should be softened. If any part of it is retained, then the midwife should use some fingers with oil and insert them from the side to loosen what is retained.
If therefore the part of the fetus comes out, then the hooks should be moved to another place that is higher; do this until the whole fetus has come out.
If therefore the hand comes out before the others and it is not possible to reduce it because of its contraction, then it must be covered with a bandage. Then extract it until it comes out completely, cut it or make an incision at the joint of the foot, or the forearm; and so you must do the same for the other hand and both feet.
However, if the head of the fetus is large, or there is a contraction during its delivery, or water has accumulated at the top of it, then one must insert between the fingers the spiny Spatumile and catch the head with it and extract the water; or break it using an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape corresponds to that of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly, if the nature of a large-headed fetus requires it, one must cut open the mother's abdomen; or extract the fetus using the Misdach, as we have said. Then, one should extract the bones with pincers.
Which, if the head comes out and is contracted near the fork, then it must be found until the humidity that is inside the chest is drained.
However, if it does not become complicated and does not obey to come out; then cut the head off as best you can.
If there is an abscess or hydrops in the lower abdomen, then it must be punctured until the humidity drains out of it.
If the fetus is indeed above its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction towards the mother's mouth is lighter.
However, if it is compressed near the abdomen or chest, then you must extract it with the cloth that you have placed over your hand, and drain the abdomen or chest until the fluid drains out.
However, if the remaining limbs are removed and the head is brought back, then the midwife must insert her left hand. Therefore, if the mother's mouth is open, then she must insert her hand into the depths of the womb, and feel for the head with it, and draw it towards her with her fingers until it reaches the mother's mouth, after which she must insert one or two hooks and draw it with them.
If the mother's mouth is compressed due to the heat that has befallen her, then it is not necessary to struggle over it, but rather at that time she must administer the flow of humid substances, oily plasters, and sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is above its side, then it may be delivered, after which what we have said about a living fetus is administered.
If it is not possible to do that, then it should be cut off directly and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything from the second part inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what I have said regarding the hot apoplexies that occur in the matrices.
If there is a flow of blood, then it should be stopped with a sting, and the remaining cure should be administered.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb was dead with a fetus within; then she became pregnant again over that same matter, after which the other fetus died as well. So it happened to her after a long time that an apoplexy occurred in her navel, and it swelled until it opened, and then began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called upon for her cure, and I treated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
I then placed some strong plasters on it; and the bone came out from its place. Then several days passed, and another bone came out. I am therefore amazed when there is no bone in the abdomen.
I therefore thought that they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I then examined the wound and extracted many bones from a woman who was in better conditions; and now, after such a long time, it sends out only a little pus from its site.
And I did not confirm this foreign object here unless there is knowledge about it, and assistance to the skilled physician who treats with his hand.
Chapter LXXVII.
§ On the shapes of instruments necessary for extracting a fetus.
The form of the vertige through which the bone opens.
Here below is the shape of the stirrup, which equals the books, having two notches at both ends of two logs equal to each other. However, this notch should be more subtle in the stirrup, and it can be made from ebony or wood.
And the width of all the wood should be like two fingers; and each edge should be like one finger, and the length of each should be a palm and its midpoint; and in the middle of both woods are two additions of the same kind of wood, already fixed in both, whose length is the midpoint of a palm and a little more or less; and the width of each is like two fingers, or a little more or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother's bone so that it may open with them when you reverse the two vertiges.
The other form similar to it, more subtle and lighter.
Let it be made of ebony wood or brass according to the form of the pincers. However, at the end of it there are two additions as you can see above: and the length of each addition is about a palm, and the width of each is like two fingers.
When you see how to open the bone with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down, opening what is between her legs. Then insert these two joined additions into the bone, and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with scissors, equally according to the amount that you wish from opening the bone's mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of another vertigo than the ancients have named it The form that impels, by which the fetus is impelled.
The form of the almiscam, which counteracts the large head: and it resembles a fork, which has teeth at its extremity, as you see.
And sometimes it becomes obtuse, like a fork according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like saw teeth, with which it cuts and grinds.
The form of the near one who has a single spine.
The form of the near one who has two spines.
The form of the spatula with two ends to sever the head.
The form of two spatulas, also broad.
All these instruments are exercised, and the more kinds they have and prepared among artisans, the quicker their work is done, and the higher their reputation among men due to their quantity.
Do not therefore despise this instrument from them, but have it prepared for you. It is inexcusable, indeed, the need for them.
Head LXXVIII.
§ On the Extraction of the Second Tooth.
When the second tooth is retained at birth, then it is necessary that you expedite the weakening of the gum so that it retains its breath. Then make it sneeze when ready: and place your hand over its jaw, and its nostrils. If it therefore emerges through this, then it is good.
If it does not: then take a cup, and drill a hole in its lid: and put in it herbs that open the jaw, such as calament, rue, anise, chamomile, fennel, dill, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and steep them in water, and place them on the fire.
Then place a tourniquet of rush over the hole in the lid of the cup, and another end in the jaw: and hold it until steam reaches the depth of the mother's tooth.
Then make it sneeze as we said. The second one will then exit with ease.
However, if it remains after this treatment and does not exit, then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or high-quality mucus. Then insert into the vagina and feel for the presence of the second one. When it finds it, then take it and gradually stretch it out.
If, however, it is attached deep within the mother's womb, then insert the hand as we described, until it finds the second one, and extract it gradually in a straight line, so that the womb does not fall during the powerful contraction; indeed, it must be turned to the right and left with ease. Then add to the amount of contraction. It will then obey and be held firm, and freed from adhesion.
Which if the womb's bone is constricted, as we have already mentioned, take care of it with sneezing and a poultice of herbs.
If, however, it does not emerge with all that we have mentioned, then be cautious not to tire yourself further by repeating the process of extraction.
Indeed, it is necessary that what emerges from the mother's womb be attached to the woman's hip. Then, apply a clister with a paste of four ingredients. Indeed, it will rot and dissolve after a few days, and then emerge.
However, when it rots, a bad smell is released from it that affects the stomach and head, and it harms the patient. Therefore, it is necessary that suitable fumes be administered to it.
Some of the ancient experts have already used nasturtium fumes and dried ficus.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman during childbearing and menstruation.
Make one from another material similar to the alcama or from bamboo: and place the broad end over the fire; and put the fumigation over the prunes; hold it until that fumigation is consumed; and repeat another.
**Chapter LXXIX**
On the healing of the unperforated gut.
Many children are born with unperforated intestines, which have already been cured by the subtle influence of sip (or perhaps a mild diuretic). Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife pierce it with her finger if it has not been done so already; and if not, she should pierce it herself with a sharp spatule, but be careful not to touch it.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in wine and oil. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If, however, it is such that it becomes inflamed, then place a lead pipe in the wound for many days and remove it when the child wants to pass stool.
And it often happens that the gut becomes inflamed due to the healing of the wound or the abscess. Therefore, it is necessary that this consolidation be cut away, then it should be cared for as we have said regarding healing and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
On the treatment of fistulas occurring in the lower part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are either a protrusion or an enlargement that occurs near the anus, or they affect a single space and can be one fistula or multiple.
When that protrusion becomes hardened, it opens up, and moisture or thin pus flows from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate through them. Therefore, they are recognized by what emerges from their discharge and the strength of the patient's defecation; and perhaps something escapes from them that is a worm.
And these fistulas are when they penetrate into the space up to the urethra and even up to the rectum. And these can penetrate up to the hip joint, and even up to the knot of the tail.
From what is recognized as a penetrating fistula up to the anus, even from one that is not penetrating, it is as if you insert your finger into the anus; and attempt to insert something thin into the fistula with air or iron: when there is no curvature.
If there is a twist in it, then insert into it a thin wire of lead or a hair from a horse's bristle, until you feel the wire, or a bristle on your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything come out of the wound in terms of discharge or swelling or pain as I have said; then know that it is not penetrating properly. So proceed towards cure accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates to the urethra or to the bladder, then its meaning is that urine exits from it, and it prevents the place from healing with medicines.
If it is indeed penetrating to the hip joint or to the hip socket, then its sign is that the probe reaches there without any twist up to the hip socket, if there is no curvature up to the hip socket; and pain is felt around the part, and pus comes out of it always, and medicine does not heal it, nor does it solidify with ointment.
And in all these fistulas that penetrate, there is no cure at all; and their treatment is toil and vanity on the part of foolish physicians, who are built upon them.
But in those that are not penetrating and are not old, there is hope for healing with a splint; as I will tell you, and I have already tried it: and he should lie down between your hands on his back, and raise his legs up to his hips, and his hips should be inclined towards his breath. Then they insert a lead or air probe into the fistula's curvature, until you know where the attempt reaches.
If, however, the patient feels weakness around the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel that your finger's attempt is already penetrating by itself, beyond what you feel between your finger and the anus or the flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; so do not exert yourself on it, because its healing is not like we said.
They also said that in some men, the flesh heals and a cure is expected through medication, by gently applying hot cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and inserting the burning cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then repeat this process twice or three times, until you know that all the added and filtered flesh is now charred, similar to a feather's thin tube.
Then apply the cure with lint soaked in butter until the charred flesh comes out, then apply it with ointments that nourish and solidify the skin.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it is never healed with any other treatment.
And if the attempt fails and it does not reach your finger which is inside, and there is a thick wall of flesh between it and the attempt, or if it is blocked: then you will see an opening in the skin following the course of the fistula, so dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and cut with the knife the attempt that is within the fistula, until the cutting reaches the end of the attempt where it becomes free, and it falls.
Then purify these filtered meats, which resemble thin feathers or ear canal hairs, so that nothing remains of them.
But if the blood binds you and releases you from the operation so that you can cut those meats, then it is better to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine.
Because cautery with fire brings good habits to union, adds heat to those meats, and stops blood flow and dries up moisture.
Then care for it with lint wetted in butter or crushed garlic, until the place emits pus, and these burned meats emerge from the pus.
Then care for the wound with hardening ointments that generate hard flesh: and these are medicines which have stopping and drying properties.
For when you restore (the health), then it is already healed; and do not fear repetition.
However, if a fistula has already reached down to the depths of the anus and is extending due to excess fluid in the body; then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
If therefore you feel a trial (or effort), and between you and it there is some pain or flesh that is close to penetration; then there is no operation on that part, unless according to your trust and hope.
Which is because it (the treatment) is administered in three ways: either by cauterizing it, as we have said; or by cutting it off, until you obtain its concavity, so that it becomes possible for you to insert a ligature and effect healing from thereon. And do not proceed too much with cutting, so as not to cut the fold containing the anus, and cause a hole to occur below without will (or control). Then take care of that as we said.
Perhaps it (the condition) will heal; or it will extend the fold, and clean itself after you dry it up close to the anus, as we said, either with a trial (effort) or with another sharp instrument. Next, cleanse the filtered meats that are in the incision until you can with scrutiny.
Then attempt the restoration of the wound throughout with the incision, and the upper hole where it is consolidated; and there remains a fistula open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter on the inferior side.
And when a fistula occurs in this manner: and it is, when you insert a probe into the fistula: and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus: then take the ends that are perforated, which is like a sharp needle, that is, the preparing coria, according to this form. And insert into it a threaded thread wrapped from five threads, and around that. Then insert a probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth.
If it is penetrating the inner margin of the anus, then extract the thread from that opening: so that you insert your finger into the anus and extract the end of the thread, and join both ends together: and tighten them both, and release it on one or two days: and as much as the thread penetrates the flesh, tighten it well until the meats between the two ends of the thread are cut through and fall off: then tend to the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If, however, the fistula's opening is not penetrating: then make it penetrate in any way you prepare for it, unless it is located too deep. For it is not that you should not make it, but rather that you do not cut into the proper tissue because of a slip.
Then proceed as we said, until it is healed.
The shape of a spinous spatula that finds the fistula, whose curvature is sharp and acute, and its other part is not sharp so as not to cut what is unnecessary, as you can see.
Chapter LXXXI.
§ On the stitching of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows due to cutting them: and on the treatment of cracks.
There are hemorrhoids according to two modes. Either they are within the anus, similar to the seeds of figs or prunes; or as if they were new grains. And from them there are small and large ones; and blood flows from them always, and it is one but many. And they are outside and at the ends of the anus.
However, those that are outside the anus are, for the most part, of little humidity, from which citron water flows, or a slight continuous flow of blood; and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the treatment for what is inside the anus is, as you gently persuade the patient to defecate; and it is expressed until the anus is emptied, and appears healthy to you. Therefore, suspend them with hooks or hold them with your finger. Then cut them near their roots.
If, however, they do not retain hooks due to their humidity and the softening of both, then take them with a rough cloth or with thread from doubled linen, and extract them with your fingers. Then cut them, and after the cutting, apply some hot powdery substances to them to keep them in place at the site of the burn. Or, burn them according to what has previously been described in the chapter on burning. Then they should be cared for with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the patient does not obey the evacuation of feces, then a weak enema should be administered to the patient in which there is a slight perforation, so that it may be relieved with what is present in the anus, and quickly obey the evacuation when the patient expels it.
However, if the external hemorrhoids are soft and easy to remove, then they should be taken with your finger or with a hook and cut off. Then they should be cared for with what we have said until they are healed.
And if one refuses to cut them with iron, then it is necessary to administer their stitching according to this manner. Take the soaked thread and insert it into the wound with precision. Then extract the hemorrhoid towards the upper parts and make it penetrate with the needle on its other side near the root; then soak both ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle and arrange them laterally, and tighten the hemorrhoid tightly with a strong grip. Then tie the thread and extract the needle.
Prepare that wound with all cleanliness and leave one part open so that excess blood can drain from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in pink or red oil over it and cover with another cloth; instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it until it falls off.
When the stitches fall off, treat them with ointment and continue the cure until they heal.
**On the treatment of fissures.** They often occur from constipation and the natural constriction of the intestines.
When they become ancient and medicine does not help: then you should use a knife or your finger to make them moist, until the upper layer of skin that prevents their healing is removed. Then care for them until they heal as necessary.
If they do not heal: then repeat the treatment with a stronger reason than before, until there is much bleeding and they are then cared for until they heal.
On the treatment of wounds, both open and closed, and of ulcers, and gangrenes.
**Chapter LXXXII**
You should know that an almirmar (abscess) is nothing but a round nodule according to the color of the skin, similar to the head of a nail; it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers, and causes pain during walking.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off what is around the nail's circumference and hold it with tweezers or a hook, and uproot it from its root.
Then take care of it, and if you wish to cauterize it, do so as mentioned in its preceding chapter.
However, from the gangrened (part) there is one small eminence, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And this often happens in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch the gangrened part, and cut into it; or tie it tightly with a silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off. And if you see it, cauterize it according to what has been mentioned, either with fire or with a sharp medicine; and now the diseased parts are eliminated, not those that are inverted with an instrument which I will mention.
However, the ant is also a small, filtered, thin excrescence on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply; and when it encounters cold, it feels like a bite from an ant, affecting the whole body, especially the hands.
And its treatment is to take a tube from the wing of a duck or a strong vulture's wing, and place it over the ant until it contains a circle of the tube's parts. Then, with your hand, turn the tube until you remove what is around the ant's circumference; and place it deep into the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you see it, make it with air or iron according to this form.
Place the upper part of the tube at the base to draw out a dead, wrapped-up obstruction so that it can be freed from your finger and its own twisting.
And if you see it, cauterize the ant according to what has been mentioned about cauterizing the diseased part as described in the chapter on cautery.
**Chapter LXXXIII**
On the shapes of instruments used for clistering in diseases of the anus, and for the treatment of hernias and colic.
Sometimes the clister is made of silver, or brass, or bronze, or forged and hammered iron.
And sometimes these instruments are made in various sizes, according to those in which they are used.
Therefore, that which is administered for the treatment of young children should be in small quantities: and for those with weak or painful anuses, their clisters as well.
Large clister.
Its stem, that is, the upper part where the uterus is tied, should be large according to this manner; and it should have a distinction so that the uterus can be tied as you see, and its lower end which enters the anus, blunt, soft, very thin, drawing towards thinness, and on one side of it there are two openings, and on the other side one opening.
And the size of the opening should be according to the thickness of the radii, and a little wider, and the uterus into which medicinal herbs are put should be from the tail of an animal, or from paper that is shaped like the small intestine; whose root should be one palm.
And it is perforated with many holes as required, and there should be space between each hole that is the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread from raw silk, which is made of about ten threads or so, and bind to it the other one just like a surgeon does. When the other thread is thus placed in it, tie it at the end of the catheter with a strong double twist. Then use the catheter.
And this is the form of the circle and holes as depicted here.
The quality of using the catheter is as follows: fill the other one or use a warm compress from medicine according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and make sure it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should lie down on his back and raise his legs towards the upper parts, and place under him a pad, that is, skin or cloth on which people lie.
Then soak the end of the catheter with oil, or white wax, or with mucilage of fenugreek, or similar substances. Then he introduces the same instrument into the anus with ease. Next, he should take the irrigator with both hands and squeeze it forcefully, until all the contents in the bladder are emptied into the intestine.
Then he should remove the bladder, and lift the patient's weak legs towards the wall.
If the medicine encourages him to defecate, then he should retain it as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it that whole night, it is the final step in the cure.
However, if he has difficulty passing the solution and his condition worsens, then repeat the enema until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or fissures in the anus, then use a mild enema, gently, from the enemas that children are given.
And this should be the form of a mild enema, over which the skin is tightly stretched.
Chapter LXXXIV.
I have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section of this book, and I will now describe here how to treat them with the hand and various medicines as required.
I say, therefore, that wounds differ according to the type of wound and the location on which the wound occurs.
The condition of the wound often resembles a blow from a stone; or a cut with a sword or knife; or a thrust with a lance, wood, or arrow; and many other similar things.
Wounds that occur according to the locations in the body are also diverse, such as a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or any other part of the body.
And I am describing the treatments for certain wounds in order to set forth this reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the recall of the composers will come at the beginning of Chapter III.
I say therefore. When a simple wound occurs in the head, and there is no fracture of the bones, consider whether it was caused by a stone or something similar, and has already damaged only the skin: then it is a large wound, and you should apply cold compresses to ease the flow of blood from the affected part. Act quickly and perform a cephalic phlebotomy immediately, without delay. Remove the blood according to the amount of force required, unless there is something preventing phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is in small amounts. And the phlebotomy should be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And the phlebotomy should be performed on the opposite side of the wounded part. And the patient should avoid overindulging in alcohol, heavy meals, and excessive wine consumption to prevent further complications.
If, however, something prevents abstinence from food, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and wine.
And if a hot abscess occurs, apply a warm compress soaked in rose oil or wine with astringent properties to the wound.
However, if you are free from the hot abscess, then apply a compress to the fresh wound still oozing with its own blood and not yet gangrenous; I will describe the kind of poultice to be used later. And if it has already turned gangrenous, then apply some ointment until it heals.
If, however, the wound is large, or it results from the incision of a knife, or similar, and its edges are not brought together with stitches, then these edges should be joined together with stitches, as I will describe regarding the wounds of the abdomen concerning their stitching.
However, if the wound is already exposed to the bone and hanging down, without any tension except for a slight suspension, then it should be incised. Then, care for the wound with medicines and restore hard flesh to it in place of the skin, and especially instruct the patient to take foods that are substantial, such as grain and cooked porridge, until it becomes firm to the touch.
If you notice putrefaction in the skin that does not adhere to the bone, then incise and remove the putrefied part entirely and treat it afterwards.
However, if there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood flows and it does not disconnect through medicines, then seek help regarding the artery. If therefore you find it uncut, then dry it with a sponge or bind it. If, however, there is a need to do so when it does not respond to what we said, then cauterize it until the blood stops flowing.
If these wounds are small and simple, then their treatment is easy and mild; so that they heal over this wound as if no wound were there, because it hardens before it changes.
**Mode of the Wound's Formation** Take one part of myrrh, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unburned lime; mix them well together, and sieve it; then use it to fill the wound, and tighten it with a good ligature, until it adheres well above, and coagulates with the blood.
Then tighten it from above with small threads and leave it untied, so that it does not loosen while it heals. For this medicine is not removed from it until it heals.
And whenever it (the wound) becomes a hard callus and you do not have myrrh or dragon's blood at hand, these substances still perform the same function in many large wounds when they are placed over them and tightened; and they are recent wounds filled with their own blood, which has not changed.
If, however, it has already changed with some alteration of air, especially in summer time, then the intention of this wound is not (to be) achieved; so take care of it using what we have said, so as to place over it certain ointments made from meal, or put on poultices made from barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it emits pus. Then care for the remaining part of the treatment until they are healed.
If indeed a fracture occurs in the bone of the wound and it is small, then extract it with the finger: and I will now speak of the treatment of fractures of the skull, as will be said in what follows.
§ On wounds of the collar (or neck)
If, however, a wound occurs in the collar, then there is no distinction between it and the treatment of other wounds, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
If, however, a nerve or artery of the collar has already been damaged: then, if it is a nerve, there is no skill involved in treating it, except to take care of the healing with something that causes constriction, such as a bandage or a splint. Since nerves cause pain and constrict them.
And do not place anything cold on the wound at all: for the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is higher among the members; and it should be treated gently with medicines, as a boil washed with sweet water several times mixed with oil, or with rose oil, and turpentine, when it is also washed with sweet water; and all other mineral stones, according to this manner, and moist ointments.
If, however, the wound is large, then apply a suture; otherwise, close its lips with small threads. Then care for it until it heals.
If indeed the wound is deep, or there is a cavity in its lower part where pus has already collected, then perforate it in a more depressed place within that.
If, however, an artery has already been cut open in the wound and its blood flow is occurring: then separate or dry it, and tie that very spot; or cauterize it if need be.
If, however, the muscles of the throat have already been cut and are healing, then close the edges of the skin with stitches above the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat itself, but rather equalize it, and reduce it to its natural shape. Then tighten the stitches gently, and leave it for a few days. Then care for it with ointments that have a constricting and drying effect until it heals.
If, however, the wound has already left an impression on the bone, then examine it; and if there are fragments of bone within it, remove all or as many as you can, and leave what cannot be removed, until the wound heals, and the discharge from it is separated and drained.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder over it as I have described. However, if there appears to be a bone in the wound and it forms a fistula, then treat that particular part as described in its own chapter.
**On Wounds in the Forearm**
If there has been a thrust with a lance or a cut with a knife, and you see the depth of the wound, then consider the following: If therefore a gust of wind issues forth from the wound and the patient grows weak from it, then know that this is a mortal wound.
If it is not deep and fresh with its own blood, then do not apply powder to it or press on it immediately, so that the blood does not get trapped in its depth and return to the heart, causing harm to the patient. But rather apply a strong ointment to it and loosen it twice a day.
If you do not have any ointment at hand, then place a piece of old cloth over the wound to absorb what seeps from it due to moisture; and make the patient rest upon the wound so that whatever is accumulated in it can flow out.
If indeed three days or more have passed since the wound, and no spasms occur in the patient, nor bad heart tremor, nor tightness in breathing, and you see that the rest of its dispositions are good, then know that the wound is healthy. Therefore, care for it yourself with caution and with the appropriate treatment, until it is healed.
If healing indeed excuses itself, and it is always opening, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore, care for it from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut with a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then care for it as its previous suture, if it was large; or with dust, if it was small.
However, if it has already made an impression in the bone and a fragment has been severed from it: then examine the wound, and strive to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If indeed they are not separated, then leave them, until the wound putrefies, for extraction of them would only worsen the situation.
The judgment on the rest of the wounds' accidents in the remaining members is the judgment we have mentioned regarding their cure.
On abdominal wounds, the exit of the intestines, and their extraction.
The disruption that occurs in the intestine can be major, medium, or minor.
From the major, therefore, the intestine sometimes emerges, or the number of intestines.
Why this intrusion occurs, and why their sewing becomes more severe and difficult.
And the minor disruption is also difficult in another way. Therefore, it follows that their reduction becomes more difficult if you do not proceed properly to their place immediately; for they are inflated, opened, and enlarged, which makes the entry difficult.
For this reason, the medium disruption becomes better: because when it does not make the reduction of the intestine difficult, as it is delicate in these two types.
Know that the stitching of wounds is according to four modes.
The two common stitches meet in the stitching of the abdomen and in the stitching of the rest of the body's wounds; and the other two stitches properly communicate with the rest of the wounds. However, they are more proper when closing the abdomen: and I will tell you each one with its exposure and declaration.
I say therefore, because when a wound is fresh and something from the intestine protrudes from it, making it difficult to reduce, then that is why it is one of two ways. Or because of the fragility of the wound, as we said; or because there is an inflation in the intestine due to cold air.
When therefore it is thus, then you must warm it up so as to immerse a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water alone. Or dissolve it in hot water with squinantum, cypress, and spices, and wrap the intestine in it until the inflation is resolved.
It makes wine within it, which has a constricting effect; and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
When therefore you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which other herbs have been boiled. For it will also facilitate the entry of its humors with little difficulty.
However, if his return after this treatment is delayed, then find in the rupture a small amount, with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the initial treatment is better when it is prepared, rather than cutting; and there should be no compulsion to cut after necessity has passed and the instrument is defective.
That part of it which is bent, acute, and the other part not acute, and its tip is not as fine as that of a knife, but rather more obtuse; and this one resembles chalk, as you will see.
When the wound has healed and the intestines have been restored, then it is necessary that its reduction be made according to its natural form in its own place, if possible; for this is better.
When the rupture is extensive in the lower part of the intestines: then you should make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the intestines, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly, if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the intestines, then direct your attention and always consider that the part with the wound should be higher than the other part.
And thus it is necessary that you should apply it to large wounds and to medium wounds.
But in small wounds, apply it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it so that there is a faithful servant between your hands who holds the wound entirely with his hand and closes its edges. Then remove from it something that follows the stitching at some point, and this is the common way of stitching one.
And it is necessary that you take a sharp point or a number of sharp points according to the quantity and width of the wound. Then leave a quantity from the edge of the wound equal to the ring finger, that is, of the doctor, and fix the point outside in both ends of the skin with two threads, with two edges facing what is under the skin from within, until you make it penetrate from another part, and now you have joined together both ends of the skin and both facing edges, and there are four parts.
Then tie with a double thread around the wound several times on both sides at the same time, until the two edges of the wound are joined together decently by the stitching.
Then release the thickness of the finger and fix another point in them; afterwards, pass it with a thread as you did with the first point. Do not therefore cease to perform that with it which you need from the bed, until you complete the closure of the wound entirely.
And there should be needles of intermediate size between thickness and thinness, because the thin ones penetrate flesh very quickly, and the thick ones have a difficult entry into the skin; therefore, they should be of an intermediate size in terms of both thinness and thickness.
And it is not necessary for the needle to be positioned very close to both extremities of the skin, so as not to penetrate flesh quickly, and to open the wound before its healing, and not to elongate even with suturing, so as not to prevent the wound from healing.
Then cut the end of the needle so that it does not injure the patient during sleep, and put small pieces of cloth on all sides to hold the ends of the needle; then let them go until you know that the wound has already healed.
And this type of stitching is indeed more appropriate for small wounds with needles. Since it is enough in stitching them with one, or two, or approximately those needles.
The second type of stitching is common, as it joins with stitching four ends together; two skin ends and two sides in one action, with a needle in which the thread is equally entangled in terms of thinness and thickness.
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, bring the needle back from the part where you began, so that the threaded thread falls from the upper part of the wound, in order to make a stitch, just like a stitch made with cloth to bind cloths together, and put between every stitch the thickness of a smaller finger.
However, people know this stitch.
And with this stitch, I treated the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a knife, and there was a larger disruption of the wound, about one palm wide, and it had protruded from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the belly.
I then reduced it after the intestine had stopped moving outside the wound after twenty-four hours.
So the wound was consolidated in space, having taken about fifteen days, and I took care of it, and it healed, and after that it lived for many years, changing into its original state.
And the doctors judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with ointment. Because I was in a place where I could not find ointment, nor anything from medicine. I therefore placed two layers of old cloth over the wound every day and insisted on washing it with honey water until it was healed.
I will now describe two types of suturing according to the description in this text.
And it is thus that one begins with the acute suture: introducing the blade from the outside towards the inside.
When the needle has penetrated the skin and moved along the wound, following the length and width of the entire body: leave one end facing sideways where you introduced the needle, and allow the other end to penetrate from the inside towards the outside at the opposite extreme.
Having thus made the first penetration, then make it penetrate in this way along the same extreme from the outside towards the inside: and leave the other end facing sideways, allowing the needle to penetrate the other end from the inside outward; and as you make this second penetration, follow the same path that you used for the first penetration on the opposite side, until it penetrates into the entire area.
Then begin again from this same side, and with the same end that was previously inserted, and extract the needle from the skin at the point where it entered.
Then insert it back into the same skin, and with the other end that was previously facing outwards, make a new penetration; extract it from the skin on the opposite side of its entry point, and repeat this process until all sides are completed according to this example.
And the essence of this suture is that it should envelop the edges of the wound as if they were a skin; so that you remove one part with one movement from one edge of the wound, and another part with another movement from the other edge, until you complete it.
A second species of suture, as described by Galen.
He narrates that this method is employed by certain surgeons in such a way that they combine all parts to suit their natural disposition, applying one end of the suture to the other and the other end to its corresponding extreme. And that is done according to what I have told you.
You must now fix your attention on the end of the suture closest to you from the outer part and cause it to penetrate towards the inside, leaving the two ends of the suture free. Then, taking hold of the suture again, cause it to penetrate from the outer part towards the inside on both ends of the suture.
Then, taking hold of each one again, cause both to penetrate from the inside out, reaching the other two ends of the suture mirach that are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common easy suture, and it is the suture whose remembrance has come before.
This is therefore the discourse of Galen as well.
And some have said. The suture of the abdomen is corrected with two hooks. Which is, as you introduce into each one thread by the other: and begin with the introduction of the needle, from that which is with you, and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side, according to the stitching of their skins equally.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the abdomen, then its suture is more difficult than those of the other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the treatment of a wound, is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which is because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before it is altered by air: and reduce the intestines, and its own self, and make it suitable: then place over it the poultice of the flesh.
If the air has already altered the wound: then place on it some ointments which you have at hand, until pus forms: and the threads fall off, and it is healed completely, and miraculously. Then, care for it as is done for the healing of the other wounds until it heals.
However, if you do not have these medicines at hand, then apply them immediately to it as soon as it begins to emit pus, and change the dressing twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
For indeed, you do not need other medicines in most cases when the wounds are simple.
However, if there are instances where the wound communicates with the main parts of the body in the injury, then it is necessary to immerse a soft cloth in oil of a moderate temperature, or in rose oil: and place it around the areas that are between the groin and under the armpits.
If, however, it feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in their intestines (for this often happens), then cleanse it with a warm enema of vinegar: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and becomes an exit that penetrates to its depth.
And know that what is from the thick intestine is easier to heal, and what is from the thin is more difficult to heal.
However, the intestine called the jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that occurs in it at all: and this is because of its abundance, being made up of thin vessels, and its own natural nearness to the nerves.
If, however, what proceeds from a wound is pus, and you cure it fresh: bring it back according to your method of reducing internal organs equally.
If a space has indeed been left, and it has already formed as a bruise or blackness: then you must bind it with a thread above the place that has become discolored from it, so that there is no blood flow. In pus, there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place both ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that its attraction is avoided, and the extraction of that piece near the case of the pus wound, and the release of the pus from the wound.
**Reminder of the wound that occurs in the Intestine.**
When there is a rupture in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: therefore, because I have seen those who were wounded in their abdomen with a lance, and the wound was from the right side of the stomach, and the old wound: and a fistula formed, and excretion came out from it, and gas.
I therefore applied treatment, until I was not confused about its healing: nor did I stop subtilely massaging it, until it healed and the place was consolidated.
After I saw the wound had healed, I feared for the patient, that some misfortune might befall him and cause a harm within his belly; but no such harm occurred to him from that misfortune. And he remained in good health, eating and drinking, engaging in sexual activity, taking baths, and adhering to his routines.
And certain experienced people said that when a wound occurs within the intestine and is small: then it should be bound in this manner. And it is like taking ants of great heads. Then bring together the two edges of the wound and place an ant on one of them that has an open mouth over the two edges of the wound. When it bites into it, and clenches its mouth, the head is severed because it sticks and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first, and continue doing this until all wounds are filled with ants in a sequential manner according to the quantity of the wound.
Then close it tightly and heal the wound. For indeed, there remain certain parts attached to the intestine which, as long as the intestine is fed and healed, do not cause any harm to the patient.
And indeed, it is now possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread: which is extracted from the intestine of an animal, and attached to it after being introduced into the stomach.
And it is also possible to take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it becomes much fleshless. Then, tie the end of this thread with a fine linen thread. Then introduce that thread into the stomach, and use it with the intestine. Then reduce the lump into a disorder.
And this method of stitching with worms and intestines is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is great, wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines' grat vessels: then there is no skill but to narrow it, and its healing is not at all.
**Of care for fistulas and abscesses**
You should know that every wound, or fistula when it becomes old and hardened, forms an ulcer, and does not heal, and always emits pus, and is not severed. Then it is universally called in any part of the body where it may be (fistula), and we call it "zuchemen".
Indeed, a fistula is a true hardened, white, filleted knot: without pain, but with a feeling of pricking; and for that reason some call it "risati", which means "penne".
And it is in some cases humid, which emits pus. And perhaps the humidity is severed at certain times. And sometimes this humidity is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce; and it is thick, or thin.
And I have already explained in division, when I said wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor any flesh grow in it, is not that unless for one of nine causes.
Of which one is either for lack of blood in the body, or because of evil (disorder); or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because there are many abscesses and scabs; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or because corruption falls in the region, a kind of pestilence, or by reason of the property in the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where digestion of ailments becomes difficult, and healing of fistulas is delayed due to nature; or because there is one opening, or a certain number of bones.
And I have now set forth all the causes and signs of these conditions, as well as their treatments with medicines in division; and here it is necessary that I make you know the treatment of fistulas and incisions, which are made through a surgical cut with the hand.
Know therefore that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from these [fistulas] there are some that affect the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or passages; or they affect the intestines, or the ureters, or any of the ribs; or they affect any part of the spine or the connections of joints in composition, such as the hand and foot; and from them there are some that discharge near the primary member and similar ones.
Therefore, when fistulas occur in this way, they are difficult to heal from the illnesses and do not receive treatment, and dealing with them involves labour and ignorance.
If there is some fistula whose depth does not reach the places I mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its healing, and wish to learn about it, then accept attempts with air or iron if the fistula tends straight according to rectitude, and examine it with itself.
If, however, there is a curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a delicate lead probe. Since lead, due to the softness of its body, is relieved and healed around its curvature.
If there is a fistula with many openings, it is not possible for you to point to it with your finger. Therefore, wash it from those openings through its own openings.
Since the moisture through which it is washed, flows towards other openings, and runs out of them.
Then, inspect it carefully according to what is possible for you: to recognize if there is a bone or a nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or close, or if there is one fistula with many openings that covers the entire area with your greatest strength. When asking about the patient's illness, and when finding pain at the compression point with your hand over the place, and similar signs and causes of accidents.
So when you have considered all these things and are standing at the right place, then proceed with treatment according to your confidence. If there is a fistula close by that appears, or in a healthy place far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you about; then dry the fistula as mentioned earlier in my narration and remove what is inside it from leakage, and corrupt flesh, which arises at its opening from meat or something similar, and care for it until it heals.
If there is a fistula of great depth and it runs straight, then you must cut it as deeply as possible. Then cleanse that part from all corrupted flesh.
Then apply a clean, sharp knife to the wound and insert it into the depth of the fistula that you have reached with the iron, doing this several times until the acute medicine has corroded all that remains in the fistula's cavity from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that promote healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal from that treatment, then cauterize it as we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone and you have verified this, then examine it and dry it as I have told you; if nothing prevents you from tying off an artery, or nerve, or a major limb, as we said.
If you therefore detect a bone that has something of decay and blackness in it, then cut through it until all the corruption is removed. Then treat it with what causes it to heal until it is cured.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did before, then know that you have not achieved complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore, examine it a second time and make a thorough examination of its condition, and purification with all your remaining strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, it is good; and if not, then know that that corruption is deep and far within the body, which you have not achieved. You do not have any skill in this unless you let nature discharge it.
If the affected part is soft and it is possible for you, draw it out with delicate forceps suitable for that purpose.
However, if there are many bones, then carefully extract them all, and do not leave any behind with your strength.
If something causes you contrary feelings due to humors, and there is no fear or error in making the incisions: then cut away those humors and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones at this time, then place a poultice on the wound that is causing it to rot; and leave it until it has rotted away from around the bones due to the flesh and humors.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And the incision should be constricted, as you have made it during your operation. In my opinion, place over it, if necessary, a cloth soaked in triple-distilled sulfur and oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some kind of radiant ointment.
For when those putrefactions, that is to say moistures, have separated the bones from them, the sloughing of them should be relieved and their attraction removed.
However, if it is a single large bone, such as the shank bone or the hip bone, and similar bones, and that which has been corrupted from it is a significant part, then remove it with the last reason, until that blackness and corruption are gone. Then restore the wound.
If indeed what is corrupted in it is a significant part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it needs to be tightened and cut entirely back to where the corruption begins; then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you of a case that occurred with a man on his leg: so that you may use this as an example and assistance in your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old who suffered pain in his leg due to a condition that had arisen inside his body, extending upward towards it from within, until the affected material reached the leg, and it became a great abscess. And there was no external cause for this.
Therefore, much time has been spent on him with errors of doctors until the abscess was opened and many materials came together with it. And the treatment of his condition was postponed until the leg became a fistula, and many openings were made in it, which all discharged pus and bodily humors.
So it was treated by many physicians for about two years, and there was no skilled hand in the art among them, until I was called upon, and I examined his leg and saw the materials that were flowing out of those openings, with a great flow, and even all over his body had already become covered, and his color was yellowish.
So I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached towards the bone.
I then examined all the openings, and I found them connecting to each other in all parts of the leg.
So I probed and followed over one of those openings until I found the part of the bone, and I found it corrupted: already rotted, blackened, putrefied, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
I therefore cut out what I have discovered and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I marked that there was no corruption in the bone other than what I cut away and prepared. And I had already eradicated it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with long spaces filled with medicinal consolidants. And it was not consolidated.
Then I attempted it, and I found, above the first discovery, a second bone with continuous corruption; and I cut away what appeared to me even from that corruption.
Then I attempted the restoration of it. And it was not restored.
I therefore examined it again, and I did not stop striking the bone separately, and I tried to restore it; but it was not restored until I cut away about one palm's breadth of bone with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicine, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; and this repetition of the operation and cutting away was not necessary for its restoration, except because of the weakness of the illness, and the lack of endurance of the patient, and my fear of losing him to death, since he would have fainted at all hours from excessive vomiting.
Health is therefore complete healing, and flesh hardens naturally in the place of the bone, and a good arrangement is made within its body, and it regains its strength, and it changes to its dispositions, and causes no harm at all to its walking.
However, if a prominent bone in the body has already fractured, then it is necessary to secure it in this way, and so it is: take the ligament and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and instruct someone to gently pull it upwards, and place another ligament made from thicker wool around the first. Then bind it over the flesh that is against the bone, and extend the extremity to pull the flesh downwards, and you will uncover the flesh over the place where you want to secure it, so as not to harm the cut.
Place a wood or board under the bone correctly, because when you do this, it will not prevent the rotten flesh from being cut.
And it is necessary that there be a secure fastening over the rotten place for a little while, so that there is no gap between the bones, and it does not appear in its appearance to the eye, and it is compelled to attach itself in its own way.
If the bone is rotten and not prominent, then its part continues with another part, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all parts completely. Then place the wooden splint below.
Next, cut it from the affected side using a saw, until the fracture is completely joined on both sides, and the splint extends according to the length of the fracture, as we mentioned earlier.
If the fracture is at the joint, cut through the affected joint itself, and saw through the bone where it continues on the other side.
If indeed the fracture is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill involved except for the sawing.
If the fracture is in the palm of the hand or in the toe joint: then the case is very difficult. Indeed, it is necessary that you inquire about the fracture as it appears to you. And you should cut it and clean it according to any arrangement possible for you, and with every skill that is rectified for you, as long as it does not cause opposition from a vein or nerve.
And know that cutting and sawing these bones require much skill, according to the position of the bone, and the preparation for cutting them, and their thickness, and size, and thinness, and rarity. Therefore, it is necessary that you prepare an instrument suitable for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the kind of instrument you need when you have a long study with it. And the knowledge of these ways of this art is a testimony to the modes of sickness; for then you will indeed find within yourself what suits him from among the instruments for every illness.
And I am firming up for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will set examples over which you will incur trial and proof on others.
Another form of the saw.
The form of surgical incisions is joined. Place the head of this rasp according to the form of the locked star's head, and its points correspond to the form of the elastic hook's points.
And it does not adhere unless the joined heads are rubbed with it when they become corroded or an extensive and large hole is created.
The form of the larger rasp.
The form of the broad rasp.
The form of the rasp where there is indentation.
The form of the other fine rasp.
The form of the other rasp's curved ends.
The form of the pair's fine, tender rasp.
This resembles a saw, and its end is like a blade; it is exhibited in many places for the reason of bones.
The form of the saw that is appropriate for the reason that it pierces through bones.
Its end is triangular, sharp at the ends.
It fits from India. And likewise, it is necessary that all that we have said about razors, and knives, and saws be done.
§ On the cutting of ends, and the locking of bones.
The ends putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
Therefore, when you have treated the putrefaction with medicines, and it does not yield to treatment, and you see that the corruption occurs in a member, which does not affect anything else, then you should cut off that member where the corruption reaches, so that the sick may be saved from death or from the evil which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign of one who experiences this is that the member turns black until it can be attempted to be healed; either fire burned it or it putrefies after turning black: until that putrefaction extends to the rest of the body.
Therefore, with the appropriate incisions, and similarly if the cause of corruption is due to the impact of certain venoms: such as those of scorpions, jellyfish, and similar creatures.
If therefore the corruption or impact occurs in the extremity of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not allow space for the corruption to spread, so that it may not extend to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then cut it off at the root of the forearm, and do not allow space for corruption until it takes hold in the forearm.
And if it suddenly occurs there, then cut off the arm at its joint near the elbow.
If however the corruption has spread, and you see it around the elbow, then there is mortal danger for the patient. And beyond that, care should be taken, for it is a matter of strength.
And similarly for the foot, when sudden corruption occurs in a toe, then cut it off at one of its joints; and if it takes hold in the toes of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. If it ascends to the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no cure left other than to release it and leave the sickly one to die.
And the way to cut the member is either by severing it itself or by tying the ligature below, which you should cut, and tie another ligature above the place. And let the assistant stretch one ligature below, and let another assistant stretch a ligature above towards the upper part. And separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, using a wide scalpel, until the whole flesh is detached. Then it is cut or tied.
And it is necessary that you put a linen cloth over all parts and do not allow the knife to touch the healthy place; and cause an addition of wound for the sick, and post-hemorrhage heat.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly; or put some powder over it that stops the blood. Then prepare for your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded member with an appropriate ligature and tend to it until it is healed.
And I tell you of what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing that I am telling you about.
That is, since it happened on his foot, there was a discoloration resembling the burning of fire, and that corruption first occurred in his finger, until the whole foot was affected.
The man therefore cut off his own foot after he saw the corruption affecting it with its intensity, which he found due to the pain, and the burning of it; and it was cut off near the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, the same corruption occurred to him on his index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I attempted to recover that superfluity with what I placed on his hand from medicines after purification of the body, but it did not cease, and it began to spread to another finger, until the corruption reached his hand.
He then called for me to cut off his hand, but he did not want it, hoping from me the reversal of that superfluity, and I feared even for his life if I cut off his hand. Since the virtue of man was superior to the case.
After he had despaired of me, he returned to his homeland and came to me because he had journeyed and had cut off his entire hand; and he was healed.
And I have not related this story except to serve as an aid regarding this condition of the illness and its genus; and so that it is clear, according to which action it is understood.
§ On the care of wounds and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When a fistula occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the fistula extends until it forms a collection of pus, then it ruptures or perforates, and what is within it from the pus comes out, leaving an empty place as if it were a cavity; and the skin over it becomes thin like a cloth that has been worn out; and it does not reach its final stage in corruption, nor does it affect the mouth, or the bones, or the ligaments. It deserves to be called a "sinus" and is not called a "fistula"; however, if the space of the fistula extends until the corruption affects any of these members, then it is called a "fistula" or an "abscess.
And the treatment is to cut that skin entirely as it has become hardened; and especially when it has become thin and like cloth, and you can be confident that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If, however, you hope that it will adhere to the skin and does not result in that final corruption from it, and if there is a thickening of the skin from flesh, then treat it with a clister; it is as if you were considering the sinus.
If it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul smell, then clean it with an Egyptian medicine, which consists of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and ziniar, and apply it over a fire until the medicine turns red, and it will thicken like honey.
Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; use this to clean the sinus with a clister, tighten its opening, and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then extract it with expression; do this for several days until the sinus is purified and the foul odor is removed.
And when it is cleaned with a clister of ash water, if you do not have this medicine at hand, take ashes from burnt wood or from holly trees, and throw water over them. Then apply it and clean the sinus with it until you trust that the sinus is already cleansed.
If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then clean it with a mixture of water and honey to which some crushed ziniar has been added. It cleanses itself with a mixture of honey and wine, because of the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes the wound to adhere, especially when there is an excess of cauterization and dryness in the wine.
You do this several times, and trust that the corruption of the wound has already been removed: then cleanse it with what causes new flesh to grow in it.
And it is necessary to take some dyafinicon paste and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, or cleanse it with certain medicines and other ointments whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the wound is tight, through which a catheter for enema cannot pass, then widen it with a sharp iron, or put in it a moistened lint in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is widened.
And similarly, if the opening is also wide, then close its edges with stitching and allow the amount that enters for the enema to be without addition.
And similarly, if the opening from which pus flows is raised towards higher parts, then dry it in the lower location that is in it, so that pus can flow out of it to below: because when pus is constricted in the depth of the wound, it prevents new flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you wish, then try to prepare the member in a way that allows the pus to flow out of it easily according to what you have prepared. Try not to retain any pus within it at all, and take the consolidative medicines that are placed on the wound, suitable for what you wish. And extend them over the linen cloth. And the cloth should be of such a size that it allows communication throughout the entire sinus. Then, use scissors to cut directly into the sinus's opening, enlarging it slightly more than the sinus's orifice. Then, extend another cloth with unguents over it, according to the size of the orifice, and place it above the first position far from the sinus's orifice, so that the pus can exit from it: and do not remove the large cloth for a few days, except once in a while.
The one who is over the sinus's orifice should be moved at all hours to allow what has accumulated in it from pus to drain out: and you must know if the flow of matter coming out of it is much or little: digested or undigested.
And consider again the place of the sinus itself; whether the lord of that part feels pain therein, or not; and whether there is a fistula there, or not.
And since your treatment is thus, and you see the matter that emerges from the opening of the sinus, then know that the sinus has adhered or approximated to the adhesion; then dissolve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you have dissolved the ulcer, then change the bandage and renew the ointment.
But if a thin worm emerges from the sinus after a long space, then do not despair of its adhesion, for healing approaches it, since there are people who delay the regeneration of flesh in their wounds, and others who act contrary to it.
But if after many days a bad-smelling pus emerges from the sinus, then know that the sinus does not adhere.
If therefore the adhesion of the sinus is delayed, and its condition prolonged; then in the drying of the medicines, let the physicians make them such that they have humidity in their substance, and such dryness in their power as when added to it, excess of addition from moisture is removed.
And from the last part which is being cured, take dyafinicon ointment and dissolve it with pink oil, and apply it over it equal old wine in its substance.
Then make a wound in it with that, and use that very same thing.
And it does make a similar action to this one when you do not have the dyeing ointment at hand, honey, after you extract it, until it thickens, and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and incense; mix them all together, and sprinkle that over honey while it is still on the fire. Then cover it with a cloth and tie it over the wound; apply to that which you extracted from honey until it thickens, sprinkle on some powder, and place back over the cloth, tying it.
And when it is administered with long aristolochi, and roots of celestial lily, and becomes a lily; also flour of herb and centaury. Use them simple or combined, mix those, and sprinkle it over the honey I described; use that very same thing.
If the condition of the sinus persists and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is corruption within it; or it already leaves an impression on bones, or on the hard parts of other members, or on ligaments; then treat it with the same care as fistulas, as mentioned above.
On the care of panary and inflamed nails, with the addition of a cut digit and amputation.
Panary is an abscess that forms under the thumb's nail, or any other toe nail; it may also form in the other fingers or toes.
When this condition persists and its treatment is neglected, the abscess becomes infected with heat or pus, damaging the root of the nail until it entirely decays, and the corruption may spread to the bone, causing a foul odor until the digit's end widens and turns black.
If, after treating it as we described above, your care does not improve, then you should cut off the entire remaining part of the nail with a knife. After that, cauterize the wound. Cauterization is indeed a powerful remedy.
If indeed the bone is healthy and the nail as well, and the nail's edges are pressing into the flesh towards the interior and beginning to hurt it, then you should place a thin piece of wood under the angle of the nail that is pressing on the flesh and push it up; cut off the flesh with ease, and put over it what remains of the flesh from burning medicines or decay, until it is entirely removed. Then, treat that wound with ointments until it heals.
However, if the corruption has already affected the mouth, then you must cut that mouth and extract the corrupted part: for it is never healed as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
If you see that the corruption and decay are spreading to the finger, then cut it off at a joint, as mentioned in the preceding reminder. Then treat the cut itself until it heals.
However, if the nail becomes damaged through friction or a blow, and there is severe pain, then it is necessary to use a leech to draw blood from the affected area first. Then dry the nail using a sharp spatula, cutting across it from top to bottom.
And be careful so that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail; for you cause severe pain to the affected area, and it will lead to additional inflammation at the site of the wound.
Then treat the area with something that alleviates pain.
The real digit that is found in some hands of men may be entirely fleshy; or perhaps there are bones within them, and possibly a nail on one of them; and some are born at the base of a joint, or their origin is in certain knots of the finger. Therefore, he who is born with certain finger nodes does not move, and he who is born near the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore, he who is among them is fleshy, his section (i.e., cutting) is easy. Which is, as you cut into the same near its root with a wide spatula.
However, the one whose birthplace is at the joint's root, its treatment (i.e., cure) is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
In him who is born in a finger near the last node, then you should cut into his flesh first with a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of their saws suitable for that. Then take care of it until it heals.
The healing that occurs in the fingers, moreover, often happens either from birth, meaning he is born with it, or from a wound's healing, or from fire burning, and similar things.
Therefore it is necessary that you remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them a thin layer of lead or soaked cloth in pink oil; so that they do not adhere too quickly, and keep them apart. Or put between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place becomes consolidated as it should.
And similarly, if there is consolidation of some fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what has been prepared and it is appropriate for the shape of the member.
§ On the incision of a defect.
These are the veins that are involved in the circulation of melancholic humors, which occur in many parts of the body; and their flow is greatest in the legs, especially in those who walk or work, and bear heavy burdens.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer an expulsion of the body from black cholera several times with strong expulsion.
Then the phlebotomist should draw blood from the veins of the patient.
The treatment of these veins, indeed, is according to two methods. One of them is that they should be cut, and black blood should be extracted. And another method is that the vein should be raised up, and all of it should be extracted.
The operation of it, indeed, is according to this method. It crushes the limb first with hot water greatly, until the thick, foul blood is resolved. Then it binds the limb of the patient from the upper part of the thigh to the lower part of the leg with a bandage. Then it cuts the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then it raises it up, that is, extracts the blood in your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and at the upper part it is necessary for the phlebotomist to cut the limb first. Then it cuts the skin down to below, until a quantity of blood sufficient and as tolerated by the patient's strength flows out.
Then bind it, and strictly order him to abstain from foods that generate black cholera, and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when veins are full, and hurt the patient.
The extraction of his tooth is done in this manner. If there are many hairs, cut the base of the nail carefully. Next, insert the whole (body) into a bath: or immerse a portion of it in hot water, until it turns red and the veins bulge; or subject it to vigorous exercise if there is no suitable bath available, until the member becomes heated.
Then dry the skin with a direct incision along the vein, or at its farthest end near the knee, or at the lower part of it near the ankle.
Then open the skin with forceps and scrape away the vein from all sides until it becomes visible; and at its appearance, you will see it turn red and then darken. When the vein is thus withdrawn from the skin, you will see it appear white like a string.
Then insert under it a forceps, until it is completely extracted and comes out of the skin; hang it gently with a blind hook.
Then dry another incision near it with three fingers. Then, scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then handle it with the radii as you did before, and hang it up with another hook as you did initially.
Then dry another cut or multiple cuts if needed. Then raise it up and make an incision at the very last section near the heel.
Then extract it towards the section that is above it.
And do this until you have extracted it from the upper section or all higher sections, and when it comes out entirely, then make an incision on it.
If however, it does not obey you in being extracted and raised up, then insert a sharp two-edged blade and tie it, and extract it: or insert under it a radium, and twist your hand to every part until it comes out. And be careful, so that it does not get cut. For if it gets cut, then it will be difficult for you to extract it at all, and the injury will spread from that part.
After you have thus completely extracted it, place over the wound a bandage soaked in wine and rose oil, or just oil, and tend to it until it heals.
If the vein is contracted and has a twist that prevents its extension to the parts, and it is not as we said above according to rectitude, then you should find on it a place suitable for all its twists, and the places of its own extension.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have completely loosened it, and be careful near your incision not to pierce the vein or lacerate it, for it will be difficult for you to lift or extract it. Therefore, guard your prudence.
The shape of the incision that heals the vein.
The blind fold's shape.
It is not as hard as the rest of the veins, nor does it have sharp ends that could pierce a vein; instead, it has great flexibility, being soft. If it were thin, it would hurt the vein with its thinness, but on the contrary, it has superfluous thickness, as we said before.
On the extraction of the thigh vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions on earth, such as Alizegy and Arab land, and in dry, hot lands with little tenderness, that is, where grass or trees do not grow.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body, except the legs.
And indeed, its generation is from the decay that occurs under the skin, as happens within the bodies of snakes and internal worms, and parasites generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of the course of this vein is what happens in the leg with a burning inflammation. Then the site is used. Then the vein begins to exit from that site of use, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When it appears from that end, then you must cover the entire segment with a lead fragment, whose weight is from one dram to two drams, and mark it; and let the lead be suspended from the leg.
Therefore, every time something emerges from it towards the outside, envelop that in lead and stain it. If it extends too much, then cut off that part and envelop the remainder. And do not cut it deeply until it has emerged completely. For if you cut it, it contracts and enters into the flesh, causing an ulcer to occur at that place, leading to putrefaction and a bad wound.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted slowly until the last part emerges from it and nothing remains within the body; and from this vein indeed some men have a length of five palms and ten fingers. And now it has reached me, since a man has emerged from twenty palms (or inches).
However, if it is cut during your treatment time: then insert a knife into its hole and make a long wound with the body, until everything that is inside it of that material is emptied, and administer to the place of putrefaction with medicines for several days. Then take care with the same cure for ulcers.
And this vein, indeed, sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle joint, or even in the foot itself; and it has numerous openings, and a branch emerges from each opening.
So treat it as we said in the division, and with what has been mentioned above.
¶ Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is said to be a "boil.
This boil is called a "boil" in some lands among us; because it often happens to cows, and is a small, thin worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending; and it is perceived by the sense as it moves from one part of the body to another until it breaks through wherever it breaks in the skin and emerges.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors. As worms and snakes occur, that is, roundworms (lumbrics) and tapeworms in the gut.
And he (the surgeon) fears harm from his evil intent. For when he (the surgeon) cuts into the body and it is carried to the head, and reaches a certain place, then perhaps he opens something within and comes out, and destroys the eye—and such happens often.
When therefore trying to cure it and extract the foreign body, then this happens only during its movement, and with the appearance of the object itself.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above and below it with a strong strap. Then dry it above and extract it.
If it (the foreign body) is plunged into the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a caustic over the spot with fire until it dies.
And worse than that, is the corruption it causes, which corrupts the eye as we have said.
However, if you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tighten a good strap under it. Then dry it above and extract it.
And it is necessary that the patient use purification of his body with medicines that dissolve bad, putrid humours.
And he should beware of foods that generate putrefaction within him.
§ On the section concerning the disease of Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: it is a pain that occurs in certain members, and then it changes from one member to another.
And I myself have already seen it, according to what I am telling you. I have been called to visit a sick woman in certain parts. And she withdrew her arm, and I saw a little swelling in the vein at the end of her arm.
And after staying for an hour, I saw one swelling move with a kind of pulse, as a vein moves, rising towards her shoulder more quickly than it can be perceived: like living silver running from place to place.
Therefore the pain has receded from that place and is fixed in the humerus.
Then, after a short time, it moves to the rest of the body, until it reaches the other arm.
He then told me that it was turning inside his whole body, as I could see.
I was amazed, therefore, at the speed of its change from one part to another. And I, indeed, had not seen before this affliction with my eyes in such a manner according to this way. However, I have seen many who find the pain changing from one part to another; and they do not see it with their eyes as they see it in a woman.
And I do not think that it is otherwise than because she was a woman of those who have such veins detected; from this, therefore, appears to the senses that change of wind has occurred.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and humid bodies, secret veins.
If, therefore, you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain, then if it appears before your eye, as we said, tighten over it, and under it, quickly; dry it above, until that vent is exhausted; and cauterize the place.
If, however, you do not see it with your eyes: then take care of it with the release of the body and with what it expels vapours, and cleanse them with foul pills, and pills of myrrh, and similar things.
**On the Extraction of Arrows**
Arrows differ according to their kinds, and according to the places where they fall from the body.
The diversity of these is indeed great, for some have large and sharp points, others small and blunted; some are concave, others convex. And among them are those that have three angles. And among them there are those with tongues (or blades). And among them there are those with stars (or points).
These are indeed those that are according to the members in which they fall, and they are according to two modes. For indeed the members are derived from principal members, such as the brain, and heart, and spleen, and lung, and kidney, and intestines, and similar organs. When therefore it falls upon any of these members, and you observe signs of death, which I am telling you afterwards, then you must endeavor to extract that arrow from them, for death follows him in which it is, in many dispositions. And when these signs of evil do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then extract it, and tend to the wound.
Among the signs, when an arrow falls upon the brain and penetrates through the bone, emerging above it, it is: for from that there arise sudden vertigo, darkness, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, and choleraic deliria. And perhaps blood may emerge from the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And from the wound's site, a white, pus-like moisture emerges. And from it, something similar to the moisture of the flesh emerges.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment and extract the arrow if it does not emerge.
The signs of the arrow when it enters the heart are: that it is near the left breast; and you feel it as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not in something hollow. And perhaps the arrow's motion is similar to the pulsation of a vein; and blood flows out from the wound, black. And this is followed by extreme coldness, cold sweat, and fainting. Therefore know that death descends without a doubt.
And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the lung is the discharge of foamy blood from the wound; and the limbs that follow, the neck becomes rigid, and the face turns pale. And the great, strong breath departs; and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If an arrow falls into the chest, which is a small space, then it is near the ribs; and it causes great anxiety with intense pain and deep breathing, and all the limbs of the arms move.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested from the wound might escape through a side effect of food.
And if an arrow enters the abdomen and becomes lodged there: something of feces might escape from the wound, or a gallstone, or intestine that has already been ruptured. Therefore, there is no hope for its cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine escapes from it: something flows out of it to the outside, and more intense pain occurs in the patient; then know that it is mortal.
The remaining members, such as the face, neck, throat, tongue, armpit, spine, pelvis, leg, and foot, and similar parts of the body are affected in many ways; when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen these arrows to be used as signs for your treatment.
Which is because a certain man was struck by an arrow in his tear duct eye and at the root of his nose. I therefore extracted it from his other side, beneath the skin of his ear, and he was healed, without any harm coming to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had struck him in the fat of his eye beneath his lower eyelid; and the arrow was already concealed, and I could only extract a small part of it, where it was embedded in his wood; and it was a large arrow, with a soft iron point, without wings.
The Jew was therefore healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it had wings. I therefore followed it up between the two ribs, and it was already submerged in his throat. I was therefore subtile in dealing with it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow that had pierced his abdomen; and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, there was no change in him regarding the arrow; so I took a different approach and extracted it, and he recovered, without any further complications.
And I also saw a man on whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound over it had healed. After seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman on whom an arrow had pierced her abdomen; and the wound healed over it, and the arrow remained inside: and nothing changed from its position, and the woman did not experience any harm from any of her natural operations.
And I also saw another man on whom an arrow had pierced his face; and the wound healed, and remained, without causing him much pain, and there were many such cases.
And I extracted the arrow from a man at the king's court, which had pierced his nose in the middle, and was already declining to the right side a little; and the arrow was completely hidden.
I am called upon, therefore, to care for it after the arrow's wound for up to three days. I therefore find the wound of the arrow deeply strained.
I then examined it with a delicate touch and did not feel it; indeed, I found a puncture and pain beneath its golden right side. I therefore hoped that it was the puncture from the arrow's tip.
I then applied a poultice to the area, which had an attractive and soothing quality, confident that it would heal the place, and that I would see a sign of the arrow, so that I could cut it off above it; however, no incident occurred at the site, indicating that the arrow had not entered the wound.
I persevered with the poultice for many days; no incident occurred, and the wound gradually healed; however, it remained weak from the extraction for some time, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me that...
And he told me that... I then applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for many days, until it opened; and when I probed it with my finger, I felt the tip of the arrow that was adhering to the wood.
Then I added, in opening the wound, this sharp medicine, until the tip of the arrow became visible to us; and it took about four months for me to pass beyond that space with it.
Then, after the wound had widened, and it was possible for me to insert tweezers into it and move them around, it refused to yield and I had to continue working on it with subtlety and cunning until I began using properly crafted tweezers on a certain day, according to their shape at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And the doctors judge that the nasal cartilage does not heal. I therefore healed it, and the wound became consolidated and completely cured; not a trace of harm remained.
And I will tell you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you may establish a rule and meaning over what I have not mentioned.
Since the parts of this art and the distinctions between them are not comprehensible within the narrative; nor does the book understand it, and a prudent artist compares it with little over much; and with what is peaceful, he compares what is absent; and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of foreign objects in this art when they occur.
I say, therefore, that arrows do not exit from a member in which they are fixed, unless in two ways. Or through attraction from the place where it entered. Or conversely, of the other part.
And that which exits from where it entered, either it is an arrow proceeding into the fleshy part: it is attracted and exits.
Which if it does not obey to exit from the time in which it fell: then you need to let go of that for a few days, until the flesh around it putrefies: and its attraction will be released, and its exit.
And similarly, if it is fixed into a bone and does not obey you to exit, then let go of that for several days: and repeat the process with attraction and motion every day, until it exits.
If it does not obey you to exit after several days, then you need to drill around the arrow at every part of the bone with a fine chisel, until the arrows widen. Then attract it and extract it.
If, however, the arrow is already absorbed into the body and hidden from sight and sense, then seek it with the use of probes. If, however, you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
But if you cannot get above it due to the wound's constriction and due to the length of the arrow in deep places, and there is no bone, or nerve, or vessel there: then find a way above it until the wound becomes enlarged, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are any parts that can be held, then free the fixed flesh from all sides, with every skill and device you have, until it is healed, without causing damage to the skin or deforming the ears.
And when you perform the extraction of an arrow, wherever it is located, then use a twisting motion with your hand, using pincers on all parts, until it glides out, and with the final subtle movement, do not break the arrow, making its attraction and removal for you difficult.
If you cannot remove it at once, then leave it for several days until what is around it putrefies. Then repeat the process. Indeed, it will be cured then if, against your expectations, a flow of blood occurs, then apply what we mentioned from treatment in its chapter: and protect your skill from cutting a vein, or nerve, or chord.
And use every skill possible to remove the arrow, and let it be with ease, or calmness, or slowness, or firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you pull the arrow, it becomes weakened according to its form, as it was near the case of the arrow itself. Because it is more practical. If, however, it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the figures.
However, if an arrow emerges from the opposite side of a part or has already proceeded from it to external areas, the tip of the arrow forms a curvature at the end due to the sensation from the nearby skin's upper part, and you will see it protruding: so dry it above and make a cut according to the amount that the forceps can grasp.
Then pull it, for it becomes easier to leave on its own.
If it is indeed retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness until the arrow presses into the bone and increases its grip: then pull it out.
And if not: leave it for a few days, then repeat the process until it emerges.
If there is wood in the arrow, then push it along with that.
If, however, the wood falls and you want to apply pressure: then insert a sharp instrument into it so that its sharpness enters the arrow's tail: then push it along with that.
If, however, the arrow is bent, then push it with an instrument into that very place. For indeed, the arrow should be straightened through that.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to remove all the contaminated flesh, in which the venom resides, if that is possible for you. Then take care of it with whatever is appropriate for that.
If the arrow falls into the chest, or the abdomen, or the groin, or anywhere else that it is close to what you touch when you try to grasp it, and it is possible for you to cut across it: then cut, and cauterize the wound from the vein or nerve, and extract it.
Then dress the wound, if you see one, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the form of pincers with which arrows are extracted.
The ends should resemble the shape of a hook, made like iron: when they grasp the arrow, they do not let go of it.
And they come in many shapes, large and small, and medium-sized, according to the amount of the arrow's length, its narrowness, the size of the wound, and its constriction.
The shape that impels (or encourages) the healing process.
And the shape that impels (or encourages) the healing of the deafness.
This is the extreme of deafness, as if it were a radius, so that its entrance into the hollow arrow (or cavity) may be relieved and compelled along with it.
§ On the letting of blood from veins.
The veins that are let with blood, whose custom runs through the body, are thirty.
Of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsatile veins behind the ears, called the greater and lesser herbs; two arteries, visible on both sides of the temporal bones; two veins in each lacrimal bone of both eyes, called the attending veins; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose. And two guides, which are in the neck. And there are two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And there are two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algocerich. And there are two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is called Cephalic, and it is on the outer side of the skeleton: and common people call it the vein of the head. And Fusca. And it is the middle vein, and it is composed of the branch of the basilic and the branch of the cephalic; and common people call it the body's vein. And Basilic, and it is situated on the inner side of the body; and it is also called Titillary. And common people call it the stomach's vein. And the ligature of the arm, and it is placed on the knife, and this is where the bleeding is stopped, and that which appears above the thumb by a clear indication.
And the little vein: it is the one between the ring finger and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot, there are three veins. One of them is situated under the bend of the thumb, on the side of the sinew. And the second is the saphenous vein, and its location is near the heel on the outer side of the body. And the vein in the leg: its location is near the heel on the side of the sinew.
And in the leg, there are three other veins similar to these.
**On phlebotomy of two veins after the ear.**
True phlebotomy of the two veins after the ear, is indicated for ancient catarrhs, half-headaches, old wounds, and bad ulcers on the head.
And the quality of phlebotomy is what I describe. And it is done by shaving the head of the patient: and the nape of his neck is rubbed at the place of the two veins with a rough cloth, using good friction. Then the patient tightens his neck with a bandage, until two veins appear. And the places of them are behind the ears, at two depressed places of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of them under your finger, there mark the signs with wax.
Then take the phlebotomy knife, and it is called the "Incidents. Then insert the blade under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomy knife reaches the artery. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin towards the upper part, and cut the vein with the knife at the place of the incision made by the incident (cut). And the length of the cut should be the thickness of two joined fingers, or about that; and let it allow the blood to flow out as much as you wish.
Then tie it with threads and leave it until it heals.
And it has already preceded at the beginning of this book on incision and their sealing.
The two true arteries that are suitable for bloodletting at the two appropriate times for hemigrain are those of a strong and persistent headache, and excessive, sharp discharge around the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I have told you. The weak person should strain his neck much until two veins appear with a clear manifestation to the sense; and you should feel their pulse under your finger. Then indeed, the signs with encaustic.
Then lift the skin above the vein with your index finger, and insert the phlebotom (needle) from below, and then lift the vein to higher. And cut it, as you did with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to your need's quantity.
Then release the ligature at the lower end and place your finger on the vein just above the pulse. Next, place a bandage and little twine over the same spot and tie it tightly; then release it until the wound heals.
And now let us recall those things, the incisions, and their extraction as described at the beginning of this book.
The true instrument for venesection on the forehead is indeed used after cephalica venesection for ancient facial ailments, and for hemicranias, and redness, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of this venesection is, as I will tell you. The ligature tightens the patient's neck with a cut until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the "fossor.
Place the sharp point that is at the top of the surgeon's knife over the vein itself, and strike it with a saw or any other instrument in such a way, and allow the blood to flow according to its quantity. Then, solve the lower perforation and tighten it until it heals.
And when it is opened with a phlebotome on its side. However, it is not necessary for the phlebotome to have a sharp point like other phlebotomes; on the contrary, it should have a wide end. And hold the phlebotome according to its reversal, since the wound is close, and perhaps the phlebotome will break when it is thin.
The instrument for the two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the eyes is used for the eye due to itching and redness, and also for conditions in the eye and face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of them is such that it tightens the weak neck with bloodletting. Then take the phlebotome and stand over his head.
And let the phlebotomy be done according to the transverse direction to a slight length with a small, slightly broad phlebotome, for in this place it is not expensive. For if the phlebotome is too thin at the end, it may perhaps break.
Then make it flow out of the blood as much as is necessary for you. And place a cloth over them, tighten them once at night, and loosen them.
The veins of the nose, indeed, when subjected to phlebotomy, are for acute fever, severe headaches, and facial pains, such as hemicranias, and the redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is long-standing.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it tightens the patient's weak neck. Then hold the nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long phlebotome; fix it in the middle of its length, between what distinguishes the nose according to straightness. Since the vein is not visible to the senses there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you finish with your hand the operation with a phlebotomist shortly, and make the blood flow as needed. Then bind it once during the night. For it is restored quickly.
According to the true Guide for phlebotomy, it (phlebotomy) is used for constricting anxiety, starting leprosy, melancholy disorders, impetigo and bad ulcers, and corroding, that is, worm infections.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that it tightens the patient under both his chin with a bandage, and the artisan stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat.
Then the phlebotomist should make the vein wide for the phlebotomy shortly. Then extract from the blood an amount tempered or according to what you see is necessary for that. Then do likewise with another vessel.
Next, dissolve the ligature and tie two vessels with a medium tightness so as not to strain the weak one. And leave it until morning. Thus the wound heals.
§ On the bleeding of vessels, Albucasis. The method of phlebotomy for vessels, as Albucasis states, is as follows: because it leads to a buildup of blood in the mouth and gum corruption, bad ulcers, fissures of the lips, and even those in the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that you should make the patient sit before you and tighten their collar with a cloth. Next, remove the patient's lips and look at two vessels, of which one is from the right side of the lip and the second from the left; their distinction is shown by the discoloration of the colors. And the truth is: because there are small, black vessels around them. Therefore, incise both sides with each other.
However, if doubt remains with you and you do not know which is the correct one, then turn to the larger of the incisions and those that are more obvious.
And similarly, do for the two veins that are in the upper lip; and indeed, custom usually follows this, so incise the two veins that are in the lower lip.
§ On phlebotomy: After the phlebotomy of the veins behind the head, treat the vein beneath the tongue. Indeed, the two veins that are beneath the tongue, when they are incised, provide relief for conditions in the throat, and the pain of the uvula, and disorders of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that the patient should sit between your hands in front of the sun; raise his tongue, and look beneath his tongue at one vein on one side and another vein on the other side; and the color of each will turn black.
Therefore, perform phlebotomy on both; and be careful not to use your last hand in performing the phlebotomy. For beneath them are arteries, and perhaps the flow of blood may occur from these arteries.
However, the three veins that are tapped in the forearm, namely the two principal veins and the vein located between them, are the ones on which blood-letting is customary practice for all people.
And blood-letting from them takes place according to two methods. Either by pricking with a myrtle-wood needle; or by using an olive-sized instrument to make it taper; or by cutting with a surgical knife, which is called Alnesil. And this is the form of it.
And from these there are various forms wide and thin according to the breadth and tightness of the veins. The form of the myrtle-wood needle's blood-letting is broad as you can see. And it is used to open veins that are concave, full, engorged, apparent, thick, and those containing thick, cloudy blood.
And this needle is of smaller breadth and more delicate tapering.
And it comes to the phlebotomy of the subtle veins that contain the subtle citrus blood.
However, the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, has the most favorable (or powerful) phlebotomy point. Because it extracts blood from the ailments beneath the throat and neck, following towards the chest and vein; and the phlebotomist approaches it with caution, lest he be afraid of its artery that lies beneath it. So if he errs and adds to the phlebotomy point, he will hit that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary not to phlebotomize it with the phlebotomy instrument sharply; instead, it should be cut gently with an instrument such as a knife (or 'Alnesil').
If the basilic vein does not appear by its usual appearance, then you should look for another one and change to a different location, or seek out a branch of it; or phlebotomize in that place of the arm (the 'funem brachii'). Indeed, it (the basilic vein) is manifest, and it should be cut with the phlebotomy instrument (Anesil), as we said.
If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same arm, then you must first relax the arm, so that you can feel the pulse until you know its location. Then mark the location with wax, after which relax the arm and use a concave-ended phlebotomizer as we described. And be careful not to strike the space around the artery's location.
And when you see that as you tighten the ligature, the swelling appears at the marked location with wax, then that swelling is due to the artery's inflation: so be swift in treating it.
If you see blood during phlebotomy that appears like a child's urine, thin and red, then know that it is from the artery's blood. Then act quickly, and place your finger on top of the long space, then remove your finger. If the blood is severed (it often severs multiple times), then tighten the arm and release it; and be careful that the patient does not move from fear: and place them above their fear.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
If, however, blood does not stop flowing and seizes you, and you have no immediate remedy at hand, then cut the artery if it becomes apparent to you. For the extremities resist, and the blood flows out.
Or accept the fistula's skin and find its middle point, take one half, and tighten it over the vein with a ligature and a bit of thread until another day.
Then if the blood stops flowing, it is good. And if not: then attend to yourself with regard to the one whose memory precedes, from the place where the flow of blood from the wounds ceased: and the severing of his blood is not difficult in many dispositions, due to the small wound's location, and the possibility of binding it with a bandage from the arm.
The dark (or blue) veins, however, require a draw that extracts blood from the upper part of the head and the lower parts of the body; this is because it is composed of the branch of the Basilic vein and the branch of the Cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it happens that the phlebotomist should be such that there is no fear from the vein-letting, because under it is a nerve. If, therefore, he adds a phlebotomy puncture and discovers nerve vessels, there occurs in it stupor, and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. However, if it is hidden in some people and is subtle, and it does not manifest: then you must place your phlebotomy where you make the phlebotomies, with the knife, and cut the vessels with the strength of your hand.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
**On the Cephalic Vein** However, the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and conveys it to eye diseases.
And in this vein, if you wish, you must make phlebotomies by pricking it with a sharp phlebotomy tool, or with a myrtle phlebotomy: because it is the healthiest of all veins, since it is not beneath an artery, nor a nerve.
However, it is necessary for you, when making a phlebotomy, to take the head of the vein only with a phlebotomy tool, and seek a softer place, and it does not hurt him if it is not found with initial percussion, but rather turns over it with phlebotomy several times.
However, in some cases, it may be abandoned when, after the first blow, blood is not drawn from him, but that apostema does not harm him in any way.
§ On the usefulness of phlebotomy and precautions to be observed therein. The quality of phlebotomy and its accidents, on which one must ponder carefully for its rectification.
Firstly, it is necessary that you know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health and its continuation, and caution against the onset of illnesses.
And so that phlebotomy is performed on one of the three veins in the forearm, namely the cephalic, the femoral, and the basilic. And so that phlebotomy is performed at the beginning of the day, on an empty stomach, and in the springtime, summer, autumn, and winter after a meal when there are signs of overfullness.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the first day or third day after three hours have passed from the previous day.
However, phlebotomy administered for illnesses does not have a determined time; but when occasion and need call for it, it can be done at night or day, and at any hour or time.
And it is not necessary that boys be bled until they reach the age of fourteen years. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled until the fourth month until the seventh. Nor should the elderly, who have already passed sixty years, be bled.
So, if anyone wishes to be bled for any reason, he should cleanse his bowels before bleeding with a gentle enema, if much feces is retained in them; so that the veins do not draw harmful putrid excess from the intestines to the main members during bleeding.
Nor should a patient be bled when entirely sated from nausea or drunkenness until that condition is removed from them. Nor should an invalid be bled when suffering from hydrops.
And let bleeding be performed again after colic, vomiting, intestinal flux, frequent coitus, labor, exercise, vigils, fasting, and everything that dissolves strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that; if the blood is thick due to food, drink, and medicine: if possible, correct that.
Next enters the bath, if nothing prohibits it; otherwise, some exercise is performed to thin the blood.
And then perform phlebotomy on him in the chest around the third day, as we have said, and try to make his chest empty of all bad animal events such as distress, anger, fear, and also from all bodily events like labor, pain, excess, and similar ones.
And let him make his business present with those things of which custom has made use among people because of their pleasantness, scent, joy, and similar ones, in a quantity possible.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a stool higher than the patient; then he should extract his arm and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand twice or three times. Then he should tighten the ligature with a strap and envelop it twice.
And the ligature should be firm but not excessive, because when the tightness is uneven or there is too much tension in the ligature, it hinders the flow of blood; conversely, if it is too loose, it also prevents the flow of blood.
After the ligature, the phlebotomist should then rub his hands together repeatedly until the veins swell and become visible to the senses.
Then the phlebotomist removes the blood with a small amount of oil, an ancient practice indeed.
Then he places his left hand's index finger on that vein in the place where he intends to make the cut, gently: so that the vein does not escape, and the blow is softened. Since the veins are like cords that escape during bloodletting, and among them there is one that flows with great force; and when you place the phlebotomist's tool on it, it contracts under the tool, deceiving the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist does not open the vein properly; and if he does, it is tight. Therefore, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then the phlebotomist should lay down. If the vein therefore opens at once with a single attempt, then it is good. And if not, then try again at that place a second time, gently or above the same spot with haste; if the place is not healed.
If the place heals or becomes weak, then release it on the day, or after two days; and do not tie the ligature tightly. Perhaps indeed the abscess draws in heat. Nor should the bath be entered.
Then he should perform bloodletting if necessary.
If the opening is small or the blood flows finely, be careful not to draw out more than is necessary; then repeat the phlebotomy in the same wound according to the right method and add only a little to the procedure.
And do this with haste before the place becomes an abscess, for the place that becomes abscessed is a small one in many people during surgery.
If therefore you see that the place has already become an abscess, then do not repeat over it at all, for nothing does it exempt itself from your attention. And place something of the dreg of oil over it, for it eases the flow of blood. And this is better in this place than the mere oil itself, and than all other oils.
And similarly apply the dreg of oil in all your phlebotomies, where you stop the flow of blood; and it makes a lard-like and wise substance when one of them is placed over that place.
Blood becomes thin and resolved when it is thick.
If, during phlebotomy, a great pus forms, which often happens, especially to those who are not used to phlebotomy, or there is only a small opening in the vein, then apply immediately and place over the spot a sponge soaked in hot water and salt; press it tightly for an hour, as it will resolve.
And it is necessary that you do that after the blood has left the vein, with its completion or from another vein.
If after a few days there remains at the site some blackness or purplish discoloration, it does no harm; and if you wish, place on it something of aloe or myrrh dissolved in water: or anything from the juice of mint, that is, menthol or something similar.
And indeed, many times abscesses and swellings occur during phlebotomy in the basilica.
Therefore, place your hand on that spot; if you feel any softness during your pressure on it, then that swelling is bad. So, put something on it from what we have said. For perhaps blood from the artery flows out of it.
But make a plaster for her with that which is there, where the constriction is, so that the place hardens. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary that you extract blood from every man according to the amount of his strength. And what appears from the color rising above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it be allowed to flow until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it thins out; and likewise, if it is sharp, then remove its sharpness until it becomes smooth.
And he who is full, strong, and needs blood extraction with one cut, should have the venipuncture performed on his side, and contrarily, for him who is weak.
And it is necessary to extract the blood from vessels, and that a tight opening be made; and better still is the administration of venipuncture, so that there is a crossed cut, not a puncture.
And this method of venipuncture is safe from the flow of blood and cutting of nerves; and it is more commendable and healthier than venipuncture by width and length.
And if anyone is accustomed to arrive at phlebotomy after a fainting spell, it is necessary that he should take some food before phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in grenadine water, or secaniabin, if heated; and draw blood from him in three or four places.
And if the complexion is chilled, then he should take some bread soaked in a mild syrup before phlebotomy, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, or in an aromatic scented syrup.
If a fainting spell occurs during phlebotomy and the cause is excessive blood loss, then he should take some meat broth and subtle aromatic syrup; and use aromatics with bandages, and press his chest with them; and employ the rest of what we mentioned in the division of fainting spells from evacuation.
Whoever wishes to restore his arm and drain his blood a second time: he who undergoes phlebotomy due to excessive evacuation and whose strength is weak, should drain his blood slowly according to his strength over several days.
Whoever truly wishes to restore his arm and drain his blood a second time, and he is physically strong: then he should do that after seven or nine hours, from the time of his first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite side from which it tends to flow: he should do that on the second or third day.
In a body where much blood has been already heated and heightened, it causes fever; it is necessary that blood be allowed to flow out in one stream, and a great quantity be extracted from it: the opening should be widened until syncope occurs; after you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy, and place your hand over the pulse at the site where the blood flows, so as not to cause death by syncope. This often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and it falls due to negligence.
And it is not necessary when you see the arm being released and the blood being discharged a second time, while the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of the blood becomes difficult, to press on it with force, lest the injured part be damaged or quickly extended. For that is a great evil; leave it alone until it has been bled a second time.
Or remove with care during phlebotomy that which has coagulated from blood in the vein opening, and place on it some dissolved salt in water. And place on it some of the paste made from alfalfa or sage, and apply gentle compression until the blood flows out.
If the vein has indeed burst, then leave it alone and do not press on it until the hematoma subsides.
If necessity arises to draw blood a second time and there is no excuse, then either perform phlebotomy on that very place or in another arm in another vein.
However, the phlebotomy site of the arm's veins is at the fusca (veins near the surface) and basilica (deeper veins), if they are not easily found and hidden because they are composed of them.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient should insert their hand into warm water until the blade turns red and the vein appears clearly.
Then it should be tied above that place with a ligature, applying a slight constriction. Then the phlebotomy should be made according to the crosswise direction gradually, not longitudinally or widthwise, and the opening should be wide, and your phlebotomy should be through that joint of the hand a little above.
If the exit of blood is blocked, then repeat immersing your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your necessity.
However, if it were the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing your hand in warm water. Indeed, the flow of blood into warm water is greatest in winter.
And phlebotomy of this vein is more salutary than any other vein, because it is not under this vein a pulsating or nerve vein.
True phlebotomy of the salutary right hand is conferring with liver diseases.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that you tighten the vein with your finger or hand, after you have inserted it into warm water, until the vein is bent and appears very much to the sense. Then the phlebotomist should cross it. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm that part in any way.
And be careful, do not use your last finger with the phlebotomist. Under it indeed are the nerves of the fingers stripped bare from the flesh.
Then return your hand to the warm water and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will clot in the vein's opening and be hindered from flowing.
After you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place on top of the wound oil and salt; so that it does not heal quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary that you do with every branch tightly.
The true instrument of this phlebotomy from his hand with the left is: because it is conveying to spleen diseases; and similarly do in his phlebotomy as you did in the second equally.
However, the instrument for phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the matrix, and retention of menstruation, and kidney ailments, and old ulcers of the coxa and crura, and similar diseases from others.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that a weak foot should be inserted into hot water: and make friction over it until the veins swell; and tie above the joint of the foot with straps. And the veins indeed are located near the calcaneus, appearing towards the thumb; and many branches radiate from it on the face of the foot.
Therefore, make the phlebotomy on it in its wider branch, or near the calcaneus in its aggregate; because it is better and safer.
If the phlebotomist cuts it on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath it and on the surface of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy tool across from the phlebotomist as if you wanted to cut it, and be careful not to harm the nerves.
However, if the outflow of blood is blocked, then immerse the foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow until it is completely drained.
If the phlebotomist mistakes the vein at first, then they should withdraw the phlebotomy tool slightly and move it higher up, since the area is healthy, and do not be afraid of harm from it when you are dealing with nerves, as we said.
And similarly with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The sciatic vein, as we said, is located near the calf on the lateral side of the bone.
And the application of phlebotomy is to relieve the pain of the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the technique of phlebotomy is that the patient should enter a warm bath and hurry, and tighten the foot from the side of the ankle up to the calf with four fingers, using a thin, long tool, for it does not appear unless done so.
When it becomes apparent, then perform phlebotomy on it as best you can, either directly or through diversion; and it is better to cut it with an incision or remove it with a section. Its location is indeed the healthier one, and it is hidden from many people.
Its location is indeed the healthier one, and it is hidden from many people. If you cannot find it and it does not appear to the senses at all, then perform phlebotomy on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot, towards the ear; and beware of the nerves, and cause a quantity of blood to flow out as desired.
Then release the tension, place a covering over the site of phlebotomy, and tighten the area. It heals immediately.
**On Drainage and the Nature of its Use**
They become tubes from horns, and from metal, and from other materials.
And drainage is performed according to two methods. With scarification and extraction of blood: and another is venesection without scarification.
And this venesection, which is without scarification, is according to two methods. Or it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the venesections that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body. Of which one is venesection of the alnocratis, and is last on the head; and alkehel, and is in the middle of the collarbone; and venesections of the algadhahim, and there are two plates on the collarbone at the same time; and venesection of the mind, and it is under the jaw in the lower mouth; and venesections of the two spatulas; and venesection of the alachosos above the end of the tail; and venesections of the two forks, and they are in the middle of both arms; and venesections of the two tendons; and venesections of the two cavities.
Indeed, venesection does not extract blood from the minute veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that, the strength does not leave them, as is the case with phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer ventilation either with fire or without fire in any illness resulting from congestion, until the entire body is evacuated.
If, due to illness or habit, ventilation is required, we administer it at every hour, at the beginning and end of the month, and at any time in between.
This is because there are people who, when the blood becomes concentrated in them, need ventilation until it is extracted, and they find a heaviness and soreness in their head.
And from them, some experience congestion and redness in their face, head, and neck. And from them, some experience itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and drowsiness in their eyes.
And from them, some scratch the area of their ventilation. And from them, some experience an increase in laughter. And from them, some experience a taste of blood in their mouth; either their tongue becomes detached and they spit out blood. And from them comes one whose sleep is multiplied. And from them is he who sees in his sleep blood and redness, and those who are wounded, and sores, and things similar to them.
When therefore we see something of them, and especially if it is in the third part of the month: then we order the wind to be raised, after two or three hours have passed from the day.
The wind treatment of the nape is: because it conveys weight to the head, and what flows down to the eyes. Indeed, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this, indeed, is the wind instrument that takes the place of phlebotomy in the head.
And it is not permitted for one who has a cold complexion or catarrh to use this. For it inflicts great harm.
And because of that, one should not use them on the elderly, and in heads that have cold ailments.
However one persists in attending to it, oblivion overtakes him.
And for that reason, you must urge the windbag to place his hand gently downward for a moment, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Bloodletting using the windbag (Ventosatio or Alkehel) is indicated for cases of black blood (Fuscae phlebotomia), basic bloodletting (Basilicae phlebotomia), and it thereby brings relief from symptoms such as asthma, constricted breathing, instrument-induced fissures, coughing, and fullness.
And the windbag must be gently urged downward, for if it is placed too low, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
The windbag (Ventosatio) is indeed effective for sudden pains in the head, eyes, half-headache (hemigraine), perforation, and tooth root pain; it is used for basic bloodletting.
And you must urge the windbag to be careful not to use his hand with too much force during scraping; so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
However, the windbag placed under the chin brings moisture to the mouth and helps with conditions like gingivitis and similar ailments in the mouth; it replaces other bloodletting methods used on both lips.
However, the ventilation of flaps is achieved through a combination of reflection and heat.
The ventilation of the inner parts of both these two vessels provides an aid to phlebotomy of three veins, namely, the Basilica, Fusca, and Cephalica: for it draws blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh; and these small veins draw from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And it is necessary to be careful with the ventilation instrument so that it does not proceed too far in the scarification, for the area has been stripped of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
However, the ventosa that is ventilated over glands causes hemorrhoids in the anus and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary to instruct the ventilation instrument to be strong and made of air, for the location requires a powerful suction, and the delicate ventosas might break, and thus a significant scarification must be performed.
The ventosas of the veins reduce the swelling significantly: for they draw blood from the whole body and bring relief to old pains in the kidneys, ovaries, and vesica; they induce menstruation and relieve congestion and swelling, and take the place of phlebotomy on two saphenous veins and the varicose veins.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many people.
And the opening of the windpipe (trachea) is close to the opening of both pleural cavities.
The quality of the position of the windpipes is to place the open end first in the vacuum and apply a tempered suction; do not prolong the position of the windpipes, but release them swiftly, and move them swiftly so that the humours reach the affected area with equal flow; do not cease repeating this process continuously until you perceive the place to be already red and inflated, and the appearance of blood redness; then make an incision and continue the suction gradually. Then consider the condition of the bodies.
For those of tender flesh, with rare pores, it is necessary to make incisions only once, not repeatedly; so as not to ulcerate the site.
And especially the windpipe (trachea), to enhance the incision, make it deeper; and regulate the suction with ease, swiftness, and its own motion.
If there is thickness in the blood, then it is necessary to make incisions twice. In the first instance, the thin path of blood clarification and absorption opens; and in the second, the precise extraction of thick blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then let there be a third incision in order to reach the ultimate result.
And for the ultimate, when we wish to extract blood gradually or little by little, a single incision is sufficient for us. That said, if we wish for extensive blood extraction, we perform multiple incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it needs to be incised with a deep incision, and the depth of the incision is equal to the termination point in the cutting.
What is that which needs to be administered from oils at the position of the Winds, and what does it caution about the flow of air?
In that case where the skin is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are tight, it is necessary to apply the Wind position places with open oils, soft, smooth: if in summer time, as is the oil of almonds, or whipped oil, or oil from sweet fig seeds, or oil from pumpkin seeds.
And if it is in winter time, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or syrup: and similar ones.
If there is a thick, cold excess, then use amaranth oil or balm of galgal oil or white oil or aniseed oil; and similar ones.
If there is a considerable swelling of soft tissues, then it must be prevented from oil and these places should be washed after venesection with rosy water or cold water or solar water or cucumber water or portulaca water; and similar ones.
He, whose blood is of great moisture, should wash the wounds with vinegar or myrtle water and sumac; and similar ones.
He whose excesses are thick, should wash his wounds with old wine or samach water or anise decoction or chamomile; and similar ones.
And it is necessary to be careful about venesection in a bath or in a bathing place; indeed, after exiting the bath, it is necessary to administer for an hour, or two hours.
And it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after venesection.
§ What is it that must be observed to regulate venesection or phlebotomy before venesecting?
And after that, it is necessary for you to consider first: if he is choleric, either Ventosatus or Phlebotomatus, then sharp acidity and inflammation will attack his blood; then it is necessary to take refrigerants, such as the granatum (pomegranate) peel, and also vinegar, lettuce, and willow bark, and similar things.
And remove his food particles, and the meats he chews, and foods seasoned with herbs; and similar things.
And for one whose condition is cold, it is necessary to take in syrup made from honey, or water, or willow bark powder; and also to consume perfumed wine that is between old and new; and he should be instructed to eat less food. And remove his food particles, and chewing, and birds; that is, small birds; and let the pigeons' chicks leave.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of ventilation and bleeding be more than food; and it is necessary to give certain people in the hours of tyro (cheese) a drink of alfaroch or a remedy of moss, that is, mastic, or asselith before ventilation: and before phlebotomy or after; in order to strengthen the principal members, and purify the blood. And it is not necessary for them to take it in a hot drink.
On chest drains without scarification. The chest drains (ventoses) that are placed without scarification are those put on the epigastrium, spleen, podagra, and over the abdomen, umbilicus, renal regions, and anca; for these parts do not endure scarification.
And they are not sought after except by attraction from a part of the blood to the member, such as we place a chest drain over the nipples in cases of nosebleed. And we use them to remove cold humidity from the member, such as when we place a chest drain over the abdomen and umbilicus. For indeed, it (the chest drain) rarefies the member, warms it up, and removes pain because of that, as it resolves that humidity.
They (chest drains) are also placed over the kidneys when there is an inflammation or a stone in them. By its power of attraction, it may perhaps open an inflammation or remove a stone from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed over the epigastrium and spleen to drain the humidity from them both.
And these wounds are treated with air only when they are cut open. And sometimes they are treated with fire.
And sometimes they are treated with warm water in cases of pleurisy: and that is to fill the wound with a great quantity of warm water alone, or water in which herbs that are suitable have been boiled.
§ Form of the treatment with fire and air.
It should be of such a width as the two fingers can cover, and in depth half a palm, with a small hole on its side, about the middle, through which the instrument may be inserted; it must be made of iron, steel, or brass, smooth and even, so as not to injure the surrounding parts, and in the middle of it let there be a cross-piece of iron or steel, where the candle is placed with fire.
And this air becomes now great, greater than we have described, and sometimes smaller, according to the illness and age of him who uses it.
For the air of boys and emaciated people is different from that of men and robust bodies.
The quality of placing this powerful flame over the member is such that it ignites the linen with a moderate fire, or a small candle from wax; and place it over the middle of the sword which is in the center of the flame, so that the fire is ignited around the lower part of the flame, so as not to burn the body below.
Then place it over the member, and the finger should be on the opening that I mentioned, until we hold the flame; when we no longer need it, remove the finger, and the vapor will exit through that opening, and the flow of air will be immediately resolved.
Then use the flame according to its mode, and repeat it if you need it.
However, in the case of the ventosa used to treat pleurisy with water, there is no crosswise sword or opening; and it is not applied unless the water is filled, and placed only over the member.
And this is its form.
And the ventosa is better the larger it is, as it can hold more water.
## On the Suspension of Sugar-Plums.
Sanguisugae should not be used on many parts of the body unless their small size allows for the placement of veins, such as in the lips, gums, and similar areas. Or in a bare member, such as the finger or nose, and similar areas.
And the quality of their use is as follows: one should come from sanguisuges (leeches) that are in sweet water, clean from putrefaction.
They should then be left in sweet water during the day and night until they become hungry, and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body is drained first with phlebotomy and with veins. Then the infected member is cleaned until it becomes red. Then they are placed back on top of it.
When they are inserted and fall off, and it is possible to suck the place with veins, then this is the greatest relief; and if not, then withdraw the place with vinegar. Then with much water, it is rubbed and squeezed.
If the flow of blood continues after the operation (amputation), and that blood is oozing out, then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top, until the oozing stops.
If the amount of blood is excessive, then apply pressure with a clean cloth or similar materials from the wound dressing until the bleeding stops.
Or they can be placed over the wound with half-boiled fabrics, and then removed until the bandages adhere to the place where the blood has stopped flowing.
And if it is necessary to repeat the amputation, as possible, the wound should be changed.
However, if the amputation cannot be suspended, then the wound should be cleaned with fresh blood. Or fix the bandages at the wound until something comes out of the blood. Then they should be applied, for they adhere immediately when they feel anything from the blood.
When therefore they (bandages) begin to fall off, apply to them something of crushed aloe or salt or ashes, and they will fall off immediately.
**This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, as it deals with the restoration of broken bones and the dislocation of accidents.**
**Know, O Sons, that the foolish doctors throw themselves away on this chapter, and those who have never looked at or read an ancient book from it.**
**And for this reason, this method is kept secret from the sciences in our land.** **And I have never found it at all good, and I have not acquired that from it unless through the length of reading ancient books and studying above their understanding, until I extracted that science from them.**
**Then I adhered to experience and study through the length of my life.**
And now I have described to you from that in this Chapter all that contains my knowledge: and on top of what has passed, after I have abbreviated it for you, and set it free from the occupation of lengthening, and abbreviated it to the end of abbreviation, and shown it to the end of declination: and I formed in it many forms from the forms of the instruments used in it, with it being through the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding Chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the Prologue of this Chapter, the main points of the discourse, and the Chapters to which one must attend for understanding the truth of their content: that you, and those who are eager, may know, or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say, therefore, that when someone experiences a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or some other accident: then it is necessary that the nearest ones attend to him first for bloodletting and cleansing, or both at once: if nothing hinders, like weakness of strength, or he who has suffered the accident is a child, or an old decrepit person, or there is sudden heat, or extreme cold.
Then he should be satisfied with his food, cold odors, and meats of birds and fishes; and abstain from wine, fat meats, and filling up with foods and every kind of food that engorges the veins with blood. Until you are free from the heat of illness and do not suffer from excessive discharge of fluid to the limb; then the patient should return to his usual routine, with which he had previously become accustomed.
When the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient should be fed a nutritious diet with many rich and substantial foods, such as cooked wheat porridge mixed with water, rice, heads of vegetables, feet, entrails, fresh fish, eggs, and similar items. Also, he should drink hearty wine and other beverages like them. With this treatment, the healing of the fracture will occur more quickly and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in young men who are still strong, and in the case of the aged who are weak, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their natural state forever, because of the wasting away of their limbs; but those that are healed at the end of their weakness, such as the bones of children, will consolidate and continue in a similar manner.
However, nature attaches a certain amount of glue-like substance to the broken bone from every side, which increases its thickness and holds it together until they are completely conglutinated and bound together; until they have reached their final strength and firmness, as they were in the beginning, unless something prevents them from performing their functions. And for this reason, it is necessary to provide the patient with nourishing food that contains weight, richness, and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the kinds of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of members; for a fracture of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bones of the skull; and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and so too all the other members exist differently one from another. And I come now with a remembrance of all kinds of fractures exposed in its chapter, distinguished from others. And the kinds of fractures of bones themselves also differ.
Because it becomes an arched fracture, besides what happens in it of stars. And sometimes it becomes a fracture according to the length of the bone; and there are fractures of its splinters, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as they are in a reed when it is bent with a knife for writing. And they do not proceed; and it is a fracture with a notch and disruption at the head: and it is a fracture of a small fissure.
And every kind has its own property, or specific tool for its restoration, according to what comes to mind regarding its remembrance, distinguished in its places.
And from that which is known as the fracture of a bone, there results its twist and eminence; and its appearance to the sense, and the sound it makes when pressed by your hand.
When there is no apparent twist in the place, nor does a sound occur when you touch it with your hand as if there were movement of the bone, and the patient does not experience intense pain: then there is no fracture there, but rather it may be a twist or a small fissure; therefore, it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compression completely, but instead place on it some medicine from what has been recalled, after allowing time for that which has occurred in the place to take effect. Then the tightness will be tightened gently.
And you should know that when the place arches and splits into two, beyond what happens there because of tension, nevertheless every part moves from its comparison; then you must begin from your moment to straighten it, equalizing it before it experiences a hot delay.
However, if it experiences a hot delay, then allow it several days until the delay has ceased. Then equalize it according to any manner that is possible through gentleness and skill.
And know that its restoration and equalization is easier than the bones where tension occurs.
Then tighten it according to what comes to your recall of it.
If indeed there are tensions in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured member from its two parts, if it is a hand or a foot; or with your hand, if the member is small; or with two cords, or with a cord and a hand.
And thus it is your position to place the member over an equal surface according to its natural form until when the parts of the fractured member are extended; then try to return those additions by every means possible and in such a way as you can in their places, and be careful, according to your strength, so that no pain occurs to the weak through your operation, nor any harm. And try, according to your strength, to apply one of the two bones with its companion, according to better forms.
And at that hour, you must try and touch it with your own hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it and equalize it with the measure of your strength.
And be careful of excessive stretching and strong compression, as many foolish people do. For often they cause a hot apostema or contraction in the member through their own operation, as we have seen many times from their operations.
Then connect after equalizing, and applying a proper operation, and tightening that member, and ensuring rest, and tranquility: and warn the weak about it. And make it a priority that it does not move in the hours of its own will, and at its own rotation, agitation, and at its own movement, and all its motions with its utmost strength. And to prevent this, let not the position of the member be such that it causes pain when moved. For this reason, when it feels pain or injury in the position of a member, then it is necessary to change it to another position where it does not feel pain.
And also be careful that its position is equal and straight, so that there is no curvature in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the member's fracture is according to what I have described.
Know that fractured members differ in their weakness, magnitude, and shape.
Therefore, for those that are weak from them, such as the arm, finger, foot, and similar members, then it is necessary to use a soft, thin piece of cloth for their bandage. But for those that are thick from them, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary to have wide, hard bandages on them.
Because the wide ligament connects the great member and tightens it from all sides of equal constriction so that no spot enters into it.
Then, after you have evacuated the wound from the equilibrium, apply a poultice of suitable consistency over the site of the fracture. Then, begin to wrap the bandage over the site of the fracture three or four times, according to the needs of the member, and slightly tighten your hand with the bandage.
Then, move with it to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and tighten less than your previous tightness, which you applied to the fractured place. Then stretch yourself with the bandage at the site of the fracture slightly, and soften the tightness gradually, until you obtain from the healthy place a great relief.
Then take another bandage, and wrap it again over the fractured place with times of wrapping. Then, move with the bandage to the lower part from the fracture. And let your work be in the tightening and softening of the bandage, according to what we said in the first superior wrapping.
Then place between the wrappings a soft pad or cloth, to adjust the curve of the fracture if there is any, and do not put anything on it if there is no curve.
Then insert another stitch above it. Next, equalise the stitches made from the centre, if there is no swelling or heat in that place.
However, if there is swelling or heat in it, then place a stitch above the spot where the swelling or heat sits, and remove the swelling; leave it for a few days. Then tie the thread above those stitches.
And the stitches should be made from the middle of a wide, shaved, and skillfully-formed cane, or from wood where sieves are made, from pine or palm branches, or from a calving hook; and the width of every stitch, according to this form and figure, should be the same.
However, the stitches placed above the track should be somewhat thicker and wider than the rest of the stitches; and the length of the stitch should be according to what is allowed by the member's size and condition.
Then tie the stitches together with another thread, according to the same tension as before. Then bind it from above with threads carefully, according to what I said about tension; and it should be that your tension over the fracture site is greater; and as much as it is elongated from the fracture, so the tension should be less.
And it is necessary that they [the threads] be of medium size in regard to thickness and fineness, and made of soft linen.
For if the threads are too thick, as is often seen in the clumsy work of those who use twisted linen cords, it is a great error, for the tightness does not suit them outside their natural qualities.
And very fine threads do not work either, for you will not achieve with them what you see through tightness.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger's width between one thread and another.
If the thread is weakened at its ends by the tightness of the stitches in healthy places, then place under them a piece of soft cloth or dyed wool until nothing is damaged from that.
When, however, there is a fracture with a wound, and there occurs a disruption in the skin, I come to recall it in Chapter Two according to its particularity.
And know that not every fractured member needs to be bound with threads from the first day. This is because when a member is large, you do not need to put stitches over it until after five or seven or more days, according to your safety from the event of heat removal.
And this is the method of using plasters by which the ancients restored what was broken and dislocated.
The common method of the plaster, restoring a fracture, consisting of many plasters, particularly for women and children, since it is applicable to what neither heat nor cold overcomes.
And take some flour from the mill, and there is a core of flour that hangs on the walls of the mill near the movement of the millstone; and make it as it is, except that sifting it with alum makes it better. And do not make its thickness too thick or too thin. Then use it.
Another method of the plaster, restoring a fracture, dislocation, and torsion. Take almonds, laurel, acacia, enele, and mugath; and honey, of all these in equal parts as myrrh, and aloe half as much; and all these are sifted and mixed with water or alum, if the plaster for the sick is warmed. Then use this plaster. Indeed, it is a good composition, restoring broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another method of applying plaster, which also reinforces fractures and twists. Prepare a mixture of equal parts of myrrh, aloe, and Armenian earth (terra sigillata), all finely crushed and mixed with water or albus (calcium hydroxide). Administer as needed.
A method for applying plaster to joints and separated bones, soothing the pain of their injury, and healing cracks in bones and fractures. Take sucking wool and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil, then place it on the affected area.
And this plaster is not a power of restoration, but it is good for the alleviation of the burning of blisters and it expels pain properly.
A method of plastering that restores a broken bone. Take dried fig leaves and paper from the mulberry tree, mix them well, and make a plaster from both.
A shortened method of plastering, administered during the restoration of a broken bone, and when you see the remaining scar diminishing. Prepare equal parts of the root of ginger, chamomile, flowers of marigold, and herb flour of all kinds; mix them together, and add wine if the member is not already heated.
If the member is indeed heated, then prepare it with moist coriander water or simply with water, and use it accordingly.
Another method for making a stronger plaster for resolving apoplexy, more powerful than the first, when there is a hard fistula near the restoration of the member. Prepare equal parts of the root of ginger, flaxseed, ballist (possibly a type of plant), melilot, samas (a possible spice), marigold flowers, and chamomile, mix them together, and prepare them with willow water, sweet water, or wine. All of it should be according to the warmth of the member and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that anything should be placed on a broken member during its restoration, except for a bandage made of lint and oil; nothing else. He told that it should be a medium between thickness and thinness.
Galen, however, observed that they should place things on a broken member during its restoration to reduce the heat, such as myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, and similar substances that we have mentioned.
Method of applying a plaster that relieves the injury and pain. Mix equal parts of meal, chickpeas, human hair clippings, or bird feathers and alum, grind them, sift them, and prepare them: and thus an emplastrum is made.
The amount, however, should be such that the bandage remains intact, and then it is dissolved when you consider that if the patient does not experience pain, itching, or the broken bone does not move from its place, then it is not necessary to dissolve it for many days. If it happens that he feels an unbearable itching, restless pain, or swelling: then remove and dissolve the emplastrum at once from that place, and take a soft cloth or a wet sponge, dip it in warm water, and wash the affected area with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides.
If it happens that he feels an unbearable itching, restless pain, or swelling: then remove and dissolve the emplastrum at once from that place, and take a soft cloth or a wet sponge, dip it in warm water, and wash the affected area with it until the itching stops and the pain subsides. Then allow the member to rest for one hour. Then place a cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, on top of it and bandage it for one night, until you are free from the heat's discomfort, and the swelling in the member subsides, and its pain is relieved.
Then repeat the process, applying a tighter but milder bandage and a lighter emplastrum, without applying excessive tension with your initial strong bandage, until it is healed.
If you observe that the ulcer, redness, pain, swelling and all other symptoms have completely disappeared, and you now need only a plaster and compression, repeat the process as you did initially.
If none of the aforementioned conditions occur in a member after three, four, five or seven days, then do not drain it unless absolutely necessary. And when after twenty days the entire condition of the member has improved as you observed from its drainage, according to what we said, until the fracture heals and the coagulation of the flesh over it approaches, then at that time add even more compression than your initial compression, and also add in increased intake of low-nutrient food, according to what was mentioned before.
However, if you observe that the site of the fracture is already dried out and contracted more than necessary, then know that nutrition will be prevented from reaching that part. Therefore, drain the member with warm water for all three days of cleaning, and apply relief compression briefly every day.
By this procedure, the member receives nutrition, and healing takes place quickly.
However, what the ignorant healers do by draining another part of the member's fracture, when it does not restore according to what is necessary, and it restores according to its distortion, is an error from their operation, and a great fear; and if it had been right, they would have said so in their old books, and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen their mark anywhere on that at all, and it is better that it not be done.
**On the Handling of Accidental Wounds in the Head.**
**The kinds of fractures are diverse, and their appearances numerous: their causes are distinct.**
**For there is a fracture that occurs from the blow of an axe: the blow removes the bone entirely until it reaches the sinew beneath, just as an ax cuts through wood; and because of this, this type of fracture is called axial.**
**Or, an axe may strike something of the bone itself, and it strikes its surface, and the cut does not penetrate to its end; and this is called a black fracture, that is, complete destruction.**
**And it is a wound of two fractures, either great or small.**
**And there is a fracture that is a crushing or grinding, and its cause is the blow against a stone, or falling upon a stone, or something similar.**
**And this fracture is also one that penetrates to the membrane beneath the bone, or is on the surface of the bone, and it is a wound of these two fractures, either small or large.**
And from this fracture is one that is hidden within the bone, subtle as a hair; and it is a small fissure, hence this type of fracture is called Capillary Fracture.
And from these there arises a fracture due to an accident or the striking of a stone, and similar conditions which cause the penetration of a slice of bone into its insides, creating a concavity; as happens with caldrons of air when struck, and part of them penetrates inward.
And indeed this most commonly occurs in the heads of humid bones, as are the skulls of children.
And all these types of fractures become separated, and I return with the recollection of them all in their proper place.
And we recognize all these types of fractures through the detection upon them, and inquiry with touch, and the removal of corrupted flesh which is upon them.
The true Capillary fracture is recognized by the fact that it is detected upon the bone, cleaned, and bandaged over it with wax; for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture, however, consider first the condition of the patient; for if you see that from the accidents there is a clear indication of fear, as in the case of cholera, prostration, loss of intellect, loss of speech, fainting, acute fever, discharge of the eyes, redness thereof, and similar accidents in many positions, then undoubtedly he will not recover; and if you do not find that the accidents cause you fear, but hope for recovery, then begin his treatment.
What is it if a wounded person comes to you in the initial stages of their injury: and that is, during the colder days, then it is necessary that you should study the removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all arrangements.
And if it is during the warmer days, then you should aim to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the tissue beneath the bone degenerates and that condition we described occurs.
If the fracture of a bone has already reached the point of touching the brain, and it is with minute pieces and attraction: then you should cut into the broken and crushed part, as I have told you.
And you should also clean the head of the wounded person: and remove the tissue above the bone as best as you can; and according to the shape of the wound, and what is weak on top.
If this happens to you during the examination of the bone, such as bleeding or a hot discharge: then oppose it with what is necessary. And you should fill the space with cloth soaked in wine and rose oil: and make the wound rest until the discharge stops, and be secure from bleeding. Then begin the cure of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
The first method is to cut the bone with a sharp blade of straight edge, and this is its form.
Then, apply another blade (more wide) shortly after the first cut, and this is its form.
Next, apply another blade even wider than the second one.
And the second method is to have many blades at hand, some wider and others narrower, all with their tips sharp, made of iron or tempered; and use them with ease by striking upon the blade, so as not to hurt the head or damage itself.
But if the bone is hard and dense, then it is necessary to drill holes around it before applying the blades, using what are called non-drilling chisels; these are not so named unless they do not penetrate beyond the surface of the bone into the softer part beneath. This is because the rounded end of the chisel resembles a margin, and a very small circle prevents it from sinking or penetrating the thickness of the bone.
And it is appropriate for you to have many of these chisels, each suited to the thickness of the bone, so that there is a chisel suitable for every skull; and their acute ends should be in length and brevity according to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the form of three kinds of terrors, or trepans.
The quality of drilling around a broken bone is as follows: you place the trepan over the bone and use your fingers to turn it until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then change the trepan to another place and place what is between every hole and the thickness of the radius, or about that.
Then cut with the incision tools what is between every hole from the bone, and make it thinner than you can from the fine edge, as we said, until the bone is removed, either by hand or with some other tool you have prepared for this purpose, such as pliers or thin saws.
And it is necessary to be careful not to let the trepan or incision tool touch anything that could harm them.
When you have surrounded the bone with drilling and separated it from the surrounding tissue, if it is still attached to it, you should clean and even out its edge that remains in the bone with another similar incision tool. However, it should be thin and subtle more than other incision tools.
If there remains anything of small bones and soft tissue, then take them with ease, as you have at hand from your instruments. Then care for the wound after that with lint and ointments as we have said.
And another way of operating is easy, quite distant from fear: as Galen said and praised it greatly, and this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin detaching the bone part from the place where the fracture is more severe and apparent, until when you detect that part, and position under it the extremity of this lens-shaped incisor, whose form is this.
And the lens-shaped part does not cut anything when it is soft; and its sharp edge on both sides cuts along the length as you can see, so that the lens-shaped part is inserted towards the chisel, with its sharp face cutting into the bone.
Then strike the chisel with a small mallet from one side until you cut through the bone easily, as is desired, and be careful from the cloth to prevent any accident that you might fear.
And if the physician is not more foolish than other men and less ignorant of it, and if he is not sleeping, then if there remains something attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off with the edge of his lens-shaped incisor and free it easily. It is indeed freed from him without harm and without fear.
If a bone fracture does not penetrate to the flesh, and what is detached from the bone is its face, leaving in it roughness and subtle adhesions, then you should smooth that roughness and remove those adhesions with the fine rasors you have prepared in various quantities, so that it is possible for you to apply them in any place more suitable, according to what the operation leads you to, and the shape of the fractured bone itself. And it is necessary that you administer according to your judgment, how much of those rasors you first used on the bone. Then use the finer ones after that.
And it is necessary that you administer according to your judgment, how much of those rasors you first used on the bone. Then use the finer ones after that. And do not cease to do that according to continuity until you reach the point of administering the thinnest and subtlest of them all.
In the case of any remaining small cracks or subtle fractures, you should administer care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that should not be hidden from anyone who has any study in this art, and it stands over what we have written and demonstrated regarding large fractures.
If, however, the skin is detected and retained when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound opening. Then take another cloth, doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, making it as comfortable as possible so that it does not hurt.
Then apply a broad ligature above it, but do not tighten it unless necessary to hold the wound; release it after one or two days of this treatment until you are free from fever's departure. Then loosen it and apply medications such as lily roots, herb flour, turd silk, aristolochia, and similar substances to remove the dryness; make a powder from these drugs that can be applied to the wound like a dry crust.
And universally apply any medicine that has the property of removing it without causing pain or irritation. And be careful according to your ability so that the wound is clean during your treatment; do not allow it to become dirty with ointment or filth.
And be careful according to your ability so that the wound is clean during your treatment; do not allow it to become dirty with ointment or filth. Do not let pus form on it at all; for when pus collects over the skin of the brain, it corrupts and putrefies it, causing great harm afterward; this has already happened in a patient's head when the bone is cleaned by him, especially when his care is neglected, resulting in discoloration on its surface.
Therefore, consider then if an unfortunate accident occurs, as we have described, you should know that it is certainly harmful and likely to cause great damage.
And if blackening does not occur, except due to the medicine placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause that blackening, then you should take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and a cloth with them. Then place it on the wound; afterward, care for the wound with suitable curative agents until it is healed.
§ On the restoration of our body when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except at both its upper parts simultaneously, or at least one of them; for it consists of two bones, and the lower part is cartilaginous, so it does not break, but only suffers from friction, distortion, and compression.
If one of the two parts of the nose breaks, then you should insert a thin finger into the nasal hole and equalize the fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and it should be done skillfully and easily. And moreover, so as not to cause that pain in the patient through your operation.
If there is a fracture in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach the tip of the finger, then it should be adjusted so that it aligns with the end of the radius, where there is a small thickness.
If indeed there is a fracture in both parts, then do it like this: and nearby with its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at the time of the patient's comfort from heat.
Then insert a thin strip of linen into the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or insert two strips if the fracture is in both parts, and let the thickness of the linen be such that it fills the nasal hole.
And some ancient restorers have said that linen should be dipped in butter and changed every day. That does not seem right to me; rather, linen should be soaked in a paste made with ground almonds. Then remove the linen until the bone hardens and the cartilage solidifies.
And sometimes a quill of a duck's wing is introduced into the nose where a thin cloth has been inserted, and it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, so that the patient is not hindered from breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, do the latter.
If, while operating on the nose again, the wound should become infected, apply a warm poultice to the nose with lint or cotton dipped in rose oil or a small amount of ointment.
However, if there is no sign of a hot infection, then it is necessary to apply a poultice with sesame flour and dust from the husk of a date palm. Then place a soft pad over it, and do not tie the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are indeed broken or crushed, then you must cut them apart and extract the pieces with the instruments that are suitable for this purpose. Then use the appropriate cutting tool, and treat it with whatever helps it to heal and solidify from the suitable poultices or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose and eye, then it is necessary to treat it with liniments, and insert a lead cannula until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken.
When the lower jaw is broken, and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: then note if there is merely an external fracture, not splitting into two parts, and it heals from the inside, then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if there is a fracture in the right part of it (the jaw), insert your left index finger into the lower left tooth; likewise, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert the right hand index finger; and push with it the deformity of the fracture inwardly towards the exterior with your other hand from the inner side of the bone correctly and evenly.
If the lower jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer an extension to both parts according to their correct alignment; until it becomes possible to equalize them.
However, if it has already happened that there is a disturbance or dislocation of the teeth: then bind them with what you hope will remain, using gold, silver, or silk thread. Then place a piece of cloth over the broken mandible. Then place over it a doubled cloth, and on top of that a large, neatly made pad: or a piece of skin from the sole of the foot equal in length to the mandible.
Then bind it firmly from above, according to the preparation of its ligature, and let its application continue until it is not destroyed; and especially instruct the patient to use tranquility and quietude, and give him light food.
If, however, you estimate that any change of form has already occurred in some way, then approach it and loosen it on the third day. Then straighten what has been altered from it, and apply a plaster made of ground flour, with albut or sesame flour after you have removed the cloth; and place a soft woolen cloth on top of the plaster.
So long as that plaster remains attached and the arrangement of the bones is not altered, do not loosen it, until healing has occurred; or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened in three weeks.
If, however, an abscess should occur during this time, then administer what we have said many times for its relief, until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider it. If a fragment has become separated from the bone, either a small piece or a large one, then be delicate in this regard, so as to remove those fragments of the bone with the instruments at your disposal.
If the wound opening is tight, then widen it with a phlebotom according to the amount needed by you.
Then, when you have removed those fragments and nothing remains of them, open the wound again if it is wide, and if not, place over it the appropriate dressings and leave it to heal.
§ On the restoration of the furcula (fork) when it is broken.
Indeed, the furcula is most often broken from its anterior part near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it may break and separate into two parts, other than when fractures occur within the bone, and then its restoration is easier.
Or so that fractures occur within the bone: and then its restoration is more difficult.
Thus, in the case of a fracture with an open wound.
And the operation in such a case when there is no open wound is as follows: you must have two assistants, one holding the fractured bone in place while the other extends the neck towards the affected part.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers until its shape is correct, so that there is neither a protrusion nor a depression.
If you need further extension, then you must place a small ball of cloth or wool under the fracture and adjust its size according to your needs, then extend and lift the fractured bone with your hand until it is equalized.
If you cannot pull the end of the bone towards the exterior because it has gone deep inside, then the patient must lie on his side and place a medium-sized pebble under his elbow, and have an assistant press down on his arm until the opening of the fracture moves up to the surface, at which point you can equalize the fracture with your fingers.
However, if you feel that there is a lodged piece of bone from the fracture, which moves, then you must locate it and carefully extract it.
If it is retained in the bone, then use a cutting tool that you have prepared for that purpose, after placing under the furca an instrument that preserves safety; and the instrument is of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It is shaped like a snail shell, without any indentation.
And its width is according to the need of that part from the magnitude of the bones and the thickness of it. However, its length is also according to what is possible for you during the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you can see: one end is wide, and the other is narrow.
If, however, the wound that you made when extracting the bone shard is wide, and you are secure from further damage by heat, then sew together two edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the wound is small or there is no further damage by heat, then fill the wound with cloth and small stitches according to the amount of the wounded cut.
If there is an infection due to heat, then soak a cloth in rose oil, vinegar, and wine and place it on top.
The true stiffness of the bone when it is without a fracture or incision is like placing over the bone a plaster made from ground flour and alum. And place a soft pad over it. Then place a sphere under its swelling, if necessary. Then take a bandage, that is, the long cloth used by the Saracens, which should be at least one palm wide, or somewhat less. Then place a doubled cloth over the swelling and plaster. Then take a star-shaped piece of thin wood, whose width and length are each the size of three fingers. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the star-shaped piece inside, in the appropriate place over the fracture and its area. Then place the plaster over the fracture as desired, and wrap it around the collarbone and under the healthy and weak swellings, and bring it down over all parts, and as you can see, the stiffness holds the fracture firmly in place; and it is not hidden above you, and all together, so that the star-shaped piece does not move from the fractured bone. And for this reason, you must look at the patient every day. Whenever the swelling subsides and you see the joint start to move again, then straighten it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the patient's sleep on his back and put under his pillow a little of warm water by his side at night, so that when he turns, help will come to him from his own side. Thus, the fracture of the fork will be reduced by raising the arm.
Or tie the arm to the collarbone; and do not loosen the ligature unless some accident happens from itching or dislocation, until after twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see it coming off from his face towards that. And add to the compression, and leave it alone until it is restored and coagulated.
And indeed, the fracture of the fork is compressed and healed within twenty-eight days; and it happens in some men more quickly.
# On the Restoration of the Fork Fracture.
The spatula rarely breaks, and only at its wide end; it does not break off from that part unless the edge gives way.
When therefore the part breaks off from that point and breaks in the middle of it, and is not recognized except by touch, then according to the form of the fracture attempt its preparation. And reduce it according to the natural form of every possible skill to you.
Then place a layer of flour on the millstone with alum and a soft cloth, and put a small piece of doubled cloth on top. Then place on top of it a broad lattice made of thin wood according to the size of the spatula or slightly larger.
If indeed there is a hollow in some parts of the spatula, then equalize that hollow with the soft cloth until the lattice descends according to its equality.
Then gently pull it with a long and tight string, until the lattice does not move from its place.
And consider the string every day. Whenever the ligament softens, tighten it and restore it to its original position if it has moved; and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula will be restored in twenty days, or in thirty-five days.
When this number is reached, then loosen the ligament; and you will be in safety. For it is made of bones whose joints are not to be feared, nor their dislocation.
However, if it proceeds from a fractured bone and irritates under the skin, then cut above it and remove it. And do as we said regarding the fracture of the fork from the heat of the fire if something happens from it.
**On the restoration of the fractured chest**
The chest sometimes fractures in the middle of itself, and it rarely happens. Its extremities break most easily and become fractured from its accidents.
When the middle part of his leg, which bends towards the lower part, is broken and causes unbearable pain, as well as difficulty in breathing and coughing, and perhaps he loses blood, and the fragility of the broken bone becomes apparent to the senses, its restoration is such that the patient can rest on his back again, and place a poultice between his legs.
Then press his shoulders and join the ribs to both parts or sides with the hands, and adjust it delicately until its shape returns to the bone's natural form as required.
Then place a plaster and a compress on top of it, and put a lattice made of thin wood from willow or chalk, and similar light materials over it after you wrap it in cloth. Then gently wrap it around the broken bone to prevent movement, and tie it with the bandage according to its curvature towards the back several times, and tighten the knot securely.
Then regularly check the bandage and tighten it whenever it loosens, and if its need prompts its dissolution near the itching or corrosion that occurs at the site, or pain, or swelling, then remove it, loosen the bandage, and correct what has occurred during the course of its cure.
Then reduce the plaster if you see it is bulging, and attach a new bandage to it until it heals.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
You should know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur unless there are significant areas following the spine and extending from their ends towards the front part. And they do not suffer friction unless because they are cartilage-like. And the knowledge of itself is not hidden from sense upon inquiry with fingers.
And its restoration is done in such a way that the fracture is restored with fingers according to the possible manner until it achieves the form, as it should be. Then apply poultices, and tighten the broken bone with strings if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the interior, then a severe pain, as well as a piercing, occurs, similar to that piercing which happens to those who have pleurisy: for the bone pierces the membrane, and also there occurs difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood: and this is a difficult healing.
And the ancients have already devised many ingenious methods for it: and among them are those who say that you should give to the patient foods that produce inflammation and venting, so as to inflame the bowels, and extend them, and drive the fracture out towards the exterior.
We should indeed avoid it, so that a rapid cause for making a hot fistula does not occur, if it is not necessary. However, if it has already occurred, then add to it.
And some of them said: A flow should be placed over the place, then it should be drawn out with force, and it is more in line with reason. However, there is fear that the flow will attract too much to the place due to the weakness of arrangement.
And some of them said: The place should be cooperating with the wool which is already submerged in hot oil: and small pieces should be placed between the bones, until it is filled; so that there is an equal ligature when they insert it according to the curvature.
Then the patient cares for the healing of the pleurisy with food and medicine.
If the patient is in great distress, to such an extent that he does not tolerate it, and the bone pierces the membrane with painful stabbing, and we fear for the patient's condition: then we must break open the place above, and remove the fractured rib. Then we place an instrument that maintains the cure, whose memory preceded: and we cut the bone with ease, and we cut it itself.
Then we will bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large and requires stitching: and we will treat it with bandages until it heals.
If, meanwhile, a hot abscess develops, then apply it with suitable remedies and insert small pieces of rose-colored oil into it, and place a covering over it: and the patient will be cured by what is appropriate for the abscess.
Also, the patient's body should be turned over onto their side where they sleep until they heal.
§ On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Indeed, a fracture of the bones of the neck often occurs and rarely does friction happen to them: likewise, the bones of the spine too. When this happens to someone, and you want to know whether they will heal or not, then consider. For if you see that their hand is already softening, and numb, and dead; and they cannot move it, nor stretch it out, nor contract it; and when you press it with your fingers or prick it with a point, they feel no sensation or pain: then know, that they will not heal, and in many cases it is fatal.
If, when moved, they feel a tightness with the fingers and a puncture, then know that the back of the bone is sound, and that the patient will be healed with treatment.
If it affects the spine in a similar way, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then consider his feet: if you see that they have become soft, and this happens to them as it does to his hands, then when he lies on his back, breathlessness and straining occur without willing; and when he turns over on his belly, the straining occurs without willing; and when he turns over on his back again and wants to move, but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not despair in his treatment.
If indeed nothing of that happens to him, the condition is lighter.
And the treatment for what happens from that is as follows: to apply a poultice of cooled rose oil only on the affected spine; or when the pain has subsided, use a poultice of herbs.
Apply this several times a day until the heat of the apostema subsides. Then place over it one of the emplasters that soothe, draw out, and tighten, and secure it with a bandage; and especially instruct the patient to use rest and tranquility. He should not sleep over the affected part until the pain has subsided.
If this occurs near the friction of a broken bone, or something that has already separated from it: then one should, as it were, cut through the skin and remove that part. Then close the two edges of the wound together with stitches if it is large. Then care for the wound with some medicinal ointment until it heals.
If indeed the last part of a bone breaks and it is at the end of a limb: then one should, with the thumb of the left hand, insert into the opening, and with the other hand, equalize the broken bone as best as possible.
Then place something over it and remove the part that was removed: and care for the wound with the cure that preceded, until it heals.
§ On the restoration of an anchor.
Chapter XI.
The bones of the anchor rarely break. If they are broken, then their fracture is not, except for a comminution at the extremities; and they split along their length, and bend towards the interior, and there occurs pain in the affected area and a puncture, and the leg that breaks becomes stunned.
And its restoration is such that you extend your hand over it until you rest on the fracture as it is shown in the figure.
If the fracture is only at the extremities, then equalize that fracture according to what is prepared for you from the equation until its natural shape is assimilated.
However, if the fracture is along its length, or it has already bent towards the interior, then make the affected person lie on their side until a restoration for that fracture is prepared. When you have equalized it, place a plaster over it, then place a frame made of wood or skin on top of it, and tighten the bandage above it so that you do not fear any change in the fracture, nor the removal of the frame.
And it should be equalized with what fills it, until the bandage takes hold according to its equality; and especially instruct the affected person to sleep on their back or their healthy side.
However, if there occurs a hot apthous ulcer: then stop the extension and restoration of it until the hot apthous ulcer is seated; and place over it what sits on it according to what has been said previously, then return to its restoration, and tighten it as appropriate.
If a fracture occurs in a bone, or it is broken, extract it.
**On the Restoration of Fractures (with the Aid of God)**
That aid is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If therefore it (the aid) is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two ways.
Of these two, one is that you take a flat wood of medium thickness, according to this form that follows.
And two ligaments are bound at both ends.
Then it is suspended from the elevated position, and the weak (part) sits on a support. Then he projects his broken arm over the wood until it reaches its (the wood's) thickness, where a curvature of the wood is attached in the middle.
Then he suspends something heavy from above, so that the helping hand extends down below. Then the physician should reduce the fracture with his hands until it is healed as it ought to be.
There is another method to raise the patient onto his own head: and suspend his hand from his neck with a bandage. Then command two assistants to hold one of them above the fracture with his hands, and let the other hold it below, extending each to their own side.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then tie below the fracture with one bandage and above it with another, and each of the two assistants should extend to their respective sides.
If therefore the fracture is near the end of the humerus, then it is necessary to place one bandage below the joint and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary to place a bandage over that place and above the very elbow.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without strain until it is healed as it ought to be and applied properly: then tie it if there is no risk of fever.
If indeed there is a fever, then release the bandage until the seventh day. And place over it a linen cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the wound rests; then bind it, and the manner of binding it is such that you place a plaster over the fracture.
Then place a new cloth over the plaster. Then bind the arm over itself, and place his open hand upon his shoulder.
And place a cloth, and bind the arm over itself, so that the arm remains in its place as if it were the stars; if nothing prevents you from doing this, or something does not disturb it above the broken bone.
If, however, anything hinders you from doing this, or something disturbs it above the broken bone, then use supports; and these are such that you place over the fracture itself a support which is broader and stronger than the others. And place between every support the breadth of a finger; and the length of the supports according to the fracture, with the addition of three fingers from every side.
Then bind over the supports the tightening as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is such that your tightening over the place of the fracture is tighter. And the more a fracture is elongated, the less is the contraction.
If therefore you see the position of the stars and the contraction, as we said, at the hour when you restore the member immediately, then do this: and if you fear a hot apposition, then release the contraction and let the stars remain until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the ligature for all three days, so that there is no itching, or swelling, or prevention of food reaching the member due to the excess contraction. Therefore correct that whole thing according to what we said.
If indeed you have great confidence that nothing will happen from it: then do not release the ligature, unless after three days or more.
And let the nurse lie on her back, and her hand on her stomach: and place under her a pillow filled with equal wool.
And consider at every hour of the night or day, so that the form of the broken member is not released, or the ligature becomes soft. Therefore correct that whole thing with your strength.
And place food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned, so that it is a subtle food at first, until the mouth begins to tighten; then it is necessary to make the food larger.
For the purpose of aiding and strengthening the leg, it should be tightened for forty days; therefore, it is necessary to loosen it, apply a bath, and treat it with ointments that correct the condition.
If the fracture is severe and dislocated, do not release the ligature from it and do not reduce it until after fifty days, that is, until two months have passed.
**On the Restoration of a Fractured Arm**
The arm is composed of two bones, called the humerus and the radius.
Of which one is smaller: and it follows the thumb. And the other is larger, and it is that which is placed under the smaller one at the lower part.
Therefore, perhaps only the larger bone is broken, or perhaps only the smaller one; and perhaps both are broken at the same time.
When therefore the upper part of the parenchyma is ruptured, its restoration is easy and its healing is more so.
And when the lower part of the parenchyma is ruptured, it is a severe fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are broken at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is broken is a lower parenchyma, then it is fitting for the physician, in its restoration, to apply an extension of the part with ease, until it recovers on its own.
If indeed the large parenchyma is that which is broken: then it is necessary to apply a stronger constriction with force.
And it is necessary to apply the hand's form in its restoration, and the extended extension above the pulse. And the thumb of the hand should be higher than all the other fingers; and the joints lower than all the other fingers, or remaining: and the weakened one sitting square on itself, and the pulse facing it, or straight in front of it, at an altitude so as not to incur weak labor.
Then the assistant should extend the arm from its lower part, or with their own hand, or with a bandage. And another assistant should spread it similarly above.
Then the surgeon should adjust the opening, until it reduces to a form more suitable according to his ability.
If there are jagged edges in the fracture of a bone, then try to reduce all the fragment to its place by your strength.
If indeed it appears separated with a jagged edge that pierces the skin and you have no hope of restoring it: then find above it and remove it according to the manner we have mentioned regarding those things that have been preceded.
However, if the fracture is with a wound, I have already dealt with that particular chapter, so take care of it from there.
If, during the beginning of your restoration, a fever occurs, then prepare a cloth with rose-colored oil and white wax, in the middle between thickness and thinness: and wrap the cloth tightly over it until the swelling is subsided; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster from ground meal with egg white. Then place the staples, and let the staple that is placed over the fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of staples in various dispositions is six; either there is a fracture in one groove or in two grooves at once.
Then place your bandage over the stronger and more firm part of the fracture, and a little higher or lower than the site of the fracture, or place a softer bandage over it for a short time, as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft, wet cloths and not hard or rough. And the thread used to tie it should be made of linen, of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have mentioned.
And consider the member and ligament after days. If something happens that requires correction, such as a itching sensation in the member: then it is necessary to immerse the member in warm water until the itching subsides, and release the tight bandage until it is relieved, then repeat the bandaging.
If the bandage has already become softer, and the bone has already been removed, and similar things have occurred: then correct it all with your strength, and consider again.
For if the nourishment is blocked from reaching the member due to excess bandaging, then it is necessary to soften it a little for some time, and release it for a few days until it receives its nourishment, then tighten it again.
If, however, nothing of what we have said happens to the patient, then it is not necessary for it to be resolved after twenty days or so.
Then the hand of the patient should be suspended over his neck. And his neck should be steady, and held firm against agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture will heal in thirty days, or perhaps in thirty-two days, and possibly even earlier, within twenty-eight days. All of this is according to the arrangements of the humors and the dispositions of strength.
## On the Healing of Fractures of the Hand
Know that a fracture of the hand's joints or the rare separation of the fingers' knots happens. And it does not happen to him unless there has been friction many times.
When therefore there occurs a fracture or contusion of the plantar part, then it is necessary that the patient be seated with his leg raised and in a position parallel to the ground. Then place his hand over it, extended.
Then the assistant should extend the broken bones and adjust them until they are healed properly.
Then it is necessary for him to apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is a risk of a hot ulcer. Then place a splint over it according to the amount of space needed, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
However, if the fracture is around the lower part of the foot, then make a sphere-like shape out of cloth and especially instruct the patient to wrap it with his own fractured foot, then tie it tightly with a long piece of cloth.
And the splint should be made from skin, which has flexibility so that it can be applied with the skin of the foot, and tighten it as necessary.
However, if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a splint above and another below the foot, and keep the hand open and straight. Then he applies a bandage as required by the hand, and extends it between the fingers with a ligament.
If any of the joints of the fingers should break, then if it is the thumb, it should be set as necessary. Then it is bound with the foot, and if necessary, a splint should be placed straight and firm so that the fracture is elevated and does not move.
However, if the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, ring, or little finger, then it should be set and bound with the healthy finger that follows it, or all of them according to their position, and this is better. Or place a firm splint on top of it as we said regarding the thumb.
And consider in your recovery, and after this arrangement of the heat treatment, oppose it as necessary when something happens from it, according to the course of its narrative.
## On the Recovery of Hip Fractures.
The hipbone often breaks, and this is perceived by the senses because it turns towards the inside and rear part.
And its restoration is such that one ligament is tightened above the fracture, and another below the fracture. And the patient lies stretched out on his face.
Then he stretches every supporting ligament to its own side according to equal measure; and this is when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
However, if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one ligament should be pulled towards the pelvis so that the extension goes upwards; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if there is a fracture near the knee, then the ligament close to the knee should be adjusted so that the extension goes downwards.
Then the surgeon aligns the bone with both hands until it is reduced to its natural form; and the bone is joined together with a good union.
Then it is necessary that you apply a plaster and tighten it, if there is no loss of member. If there is such a loss: then leave it for a few days until the wound becomes heated (or infected), after which resume your treatment.
The bandage should be adjusted as follows: You must cover the hard fracture with a bandage; you should wrap it twice or three times and leave excess. Then bandage the leg until you reach the heel near the root of the toe.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts, so that the ends of the thread come out from the upper part of both parts. Then roll up the excess from over the leg and hip.
Then place over the hip at the site of the fracture stars, and from them make one star on top of the leg bone.
Then fill the space between the leg and hip with soft cloth to ensure tightness.
Then begin with strong bandaging from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four turns. And the more it is elongated with the ligament from the site of the fracture, the tighter and softer your bandage will be, and gentler.
Then turn towards the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and leg. Therefore, tie it with both of the three stars that are above. Then insert with both ends of the thread to the lower parts, until you reach the root of the foot. And tie both strings, too, at the ends of the stars from the other side, so that the ligature does not move from its place.
Then leave the ligature over that, as long as it remains, so that there is no corruption, nor ulceration, nor swelling, or similar things to them. If something of that happens. Therefore, with the removal of that, and straightening what happened from it, according to what we have said many times.
If there is indeed a fragment of bone that pierces through the bone, then you should, if possible, remove it completely. And if not, find it above and remove it, and take care of him who preceded in the remembrance until he is healed.
And when this fracture of the hip is constrained, besides adding stars to it as we said in the aid and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of such a severely broken limb, it does not cause the patient to limp. But if it is restored alone, apart from applying another crutch, then it is necessary for the one whose leg it is, to limp forever.
And know that the hip is tightened for fifty days, or added slightly, or reduced slightly; all of this depends on the diversity of complexions and the remaining dispositions.
**On the restoration of a broken knee joint.**
Know that the breaking of the knee joint rarely occurs, but it does experience friction many times.
If indeed it experiences a break, then not only is there a crack, but also a hole in its parts. And it is that, with or without a wound. And it stands over that whole with sensation.
And its restoration is such that it should be adjusted what has been disrupted from its parts with the fingers, until it is gathered and joined according to what is possible from balance and ease, and construction.
Then apply a plaster made of sesame flour or from a mill, mixed with egg white; and place over it a round pad if necessary, and tighten a corresponding ligature above it.
Then consider all the arrangements which we have described for the rest of the fractures, such as a hot apposition and similar ones, so that you oppose to every occurrence what is appropriate for it until healing takes place.
§ On the restoration of a fracture of the thigh.
Know that the thighs are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone, and the other is thin and is called the femur.
And it happens that both kinds of fractures occur in each of the bones of the thigh, and because of this their restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If both bones break simultaneously, the thigh turns into an invalid, affecting all parts.
And if the thinner bone breaks, the thigh turns into an invalid towards the front part.
And if the thicker bone breaks, you will find it below, and they are among those that will not be hidden from you.
Then he administers the extension, equalization, and ligation of the stars according to that equality.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a severe one, having many pieces, then there should be less extension and a gentler relief in your treatment.
And indeed, in the leg, there is something like a lever on the thigh, and it is just as when you equalize the stars and complete all your work, then take two strips of pine wood, which are used in making sun dials that are placed under tables: they are made from the palm of a hand, and choose those with a moderate thickness, not too small, and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap over each cloth with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other part on the other side, so that they extend from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie the two strips at three places from both ends and the middle. For when the tightness is forbidden, the leg bends to the right and left, and stands steadily in place.
And indeed, a cradle should be made of wood according to the length of the leg, and the leg placed in it so that it preserves itself from movement.
And indeed, it is most necessary that you do this in a fracture when there is a proper wound therein.
Then consider the wound every day, and study with it with utmost diligence, from ulceration, or swelling, or any other conditions. If therefore something happens from these, then oppose it with what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
On the fracture of bones of the foot and toes.
A calcaneal fracture does not occur completely.
To the bones of the foot indeed occurs a fracture, and to the toes a fracture occurs rarely: and it does not occur to them unless there is friction in many positions.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs, and you see these bones rising up above each other again, then the patient should put his foot on prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand up, and put your foot on whatever raises these bones; then press, or tread on it; and equalize it, until it returns to its place.
Then apply a plaster and a poultice on top of it. Place a thin board under the sole of the foot, which has two flat ends.
Then bind it tightly with the foot wrapped neatly, after you have covered it with linen and other things it needs.
So, when they have passed three or four days, then untie the ligature. For when you find the bones are either equal [in length], or broken, or out of joint. Therefore, the operation on them is as you see.
However, if some of the fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them equal according to what I have told you about restoring the fingers of the hand. Then place your finger as an asterisk according to the length of the finger, and make it a little wider; then place this board under the foot, which I have told you about, and tie it neatly with a strap.
If indeed it is that two, three, or more bones are broken, then place over every finger an asterisk of its amount, wrapped in linen cloth; and tie the board to the lower part of the foot, and let it stand on one end of the table's cap outside the foot's vent, so as to hold good retention.
And it comes to pass that you do not forget, but consider all that I have told you about the other fractures from accidents that we mentioned, and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
On the fracture of the woman's vulva, the ribs, and the man's penis.
When the woman's vulva is fractured, then make her sit with her legs apart. Then lean her slightly towards the back part of her own body, and hold her rearward.
Then the midwife should fill her vulva with cotton until it is full, and let it be like a sphere.
Then the woman should be made to cough, and slowly raise her back. That cotton will emerge, until the vulva is made to look like a sphere, and the fractured bone returns.
Then place a small piece of cloth on her back. When she feels the need to defecate, remove the cloth with ease, then let her do her business, and bring it out according to the manner in which you first inserted it; then return to her original position.
He should do that in seven days, or approximately, for the bone itself is restored.
And if it is still alive, take a wax-covered thread and tie it tightly over the opening of its wound, and insert the entire needle into its flesh. Then blow into the needle with strength until the thread straightens inside the flesh; for indeed, the fracture is healed.
Then it is wrapped with cloth and left for several days, as we have said, until it heals.
And when a man's chest bone, or a woman's, is broken, then apply for its restoration, and use the same method we have described for the bone of the anchor.
And let the straightening of these close fractures not be hidden from one who is learned or skilled.
And understand my book well, for the fracture itself shows you the way to a straight path in restoring and tightening it. Therefore, understand.
But when a man's staff is broken, take the neck of a goose, and insert the staff into it. Then place a poultice on top of it and leave it to absorb for three or four days, and it will heal if God wills.
On the restoration of a bone fracture when it is accompanied by a wound.
It is advisable for anyone who experiences a fracture with a wound, especially if it is a large bone such as the hipbone or the femur or similar bones, to immediately seek help from phlebotomists. If you are familiar with the procedures of phlebotomy, as we have mentioned, then follow these steps:
If the wound bleeds, then it is necessary to have someone cut it open, so that the pus accumulated on top of it can be drained; if you do not have another option.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the same day; do not delay it unless there is no risk of complications.
If indeed there is a fever, then postpone the restoration of the fracture until the ninth day, unless the abscess subsides. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, lest you cause it to take a turn for the worse.
If, however, a broken bone protrudes above the skin, you must then strive to reduce it and equalize it with your hands easily and with slight extension.
If, however, sufficient extension cannot be prepared and the bone cannot be equalized with your hands, then reduce it using this instrument. And there is an instrument made of iron that is seven or eight fingers in length and as wide as the wound. And for that reason, the physician must take three or four of them, according to the amount needed from each kind of treatment in every type of fracture.
And it should be round, and have a slight thickness so that it does not double up at the time of compression during surgery, and its ends should be sharp with a margin at their extremes. And it should be, from the middle of its thickness up to its lower part, in a slanting manner.
And this is its form.
In this operation, it is necessary to place the sharp end against the prominent extremity of the bone, and push it with one blow until the bone returns and is equalized by itself.
Therefore, strive to equalize and align the ends of the fracture.
If the ends of the fracture are fine and do not accept the instrument well, then it is necessary to cut the end of the bone with a chisel until the instrument has a firm grip.
If you cannot reduce them at all with what we have mentioned, then cut it with the instrument that is suitable for cutting, as we have said; or saw it with any saw that is possible for you to use.
Then smooth the remaining part that is on the bone, due to its roughness and fine chips.
When the bone is reduced and experiences a sudden severe pain after its reduction, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
Do that. Indeed, you provide great assistance to the weak when your restoration of the bone is complete.
Then immerse the cloth in black, astringent wine. And use it appropriately in the summer. And do not place any yellow substance over a wound, nor anything that contains oil, so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption within it.
Then administer stars at the appropriate time for the restoration of the bone. And leave the wound exposed: so that you may cut with scissors a hole into the inflammation according to the amount of the wound.
And take every care not to strain the wound with a fracture. Many times foolish doctors have done this: and they have caused harm to their patients or death, or putrefaction, or gangrene, that is, loss of blood. And let your traction be soft, pliable, unlike the hard tractions of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large, and there is some bad event as we described, and you feel pain at the suspended place, then it is not necessary to put stars over it. And make incisions on them with hard bands at the place of the stars, and tie them tightly to it.
However, if it has been one day or two, and you see that the wound is beginning to form pus, then remove the cloth you placed over it with wine. Then apply poultices and ointments that we usually use to treat wounds, such as the four-ingredient ointment and others like it.
And it often happens that you need to loosen the ligature. And consider the wound every day at morning and evening, until it hardens and heals.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared so that pus can drain from it easily downward.
If many days have passed since the wound, and it does not harden nor does pus drain from it, then know that there are seriously small bones there. Therefore, it is necessary that you examine the wound with care. Indeed, as many of those small bones become separated, remove them, and extract the entire one. And those which are not separated from the others and pierce the member, causing pain, try to cut them off, and remove them in every way possible for you to do so.
If a wound becomes infected or gangrenous, or any other form of corruption and putrefaction arises, then it is necessary to oppose each of these with what is appropriate for its cure, which has been previously described in its chapter.
And from this, where it is necessary for my speech to stand firm, and when you make your present mind when a bone breaks and protrudes beyond the member, such as the hip joint, and similar parts of large members, do not presume its attraction, for often death results from it, indeed, let go of it until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will disappear of itself after twenty or thirty days.
Therefore, cure the wound if it seems suitable to you, otherwise, let it be.
**On the Cure of the Nodule at the Site of a Fracture.**
This nodule often occurs at the site of healing a fracture. Especially, when it occurs near joints, and it corrupts the form of the member. And perhaps it may prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Therefore, at that time, if the swelling is recent, administer medications that have a drying effect, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar substances.
So, take some of these, or all of them, and mix them with astringent wine, or with albumen, or with vinegar, and apply them to the swelling in a poultice, and bind them tightly over the affected area.
And do not remove the bandage for many days. Then loosen it, and apply another one, until the swelling is removed.
Or bind a sheet of lead tightly over it. Lead, indeed, has the property of drawing out whatever is feared from the member.
If however the swelling has already turned into a stone, and it is hard and tight, and urgent need requires its removal: then find a way to remove it from its upper part, and cut off the protruding excess; or rasp it off with rasors until it is removed, and take care of it until it heals.
On healing when a member is restored and remains after that in a subtle state, not according to its own nature.
When a fracture of a bone is restored and the member remains after that in a subtle, weak state, then it does not become healed except because of many causes. One of these is the excessive solution and binding of the ligament, not according to what is needed; either because of an excess of tightness in the ligaments, preventing nutrition from reaching the member; or because of too many applications at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in a weak body, and its debilitation.
And the treatment for this is to feed the weak patient and make his body strong, until blood increases in it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness over him.
Then place a poultice on the member, so that it attracts the poultice to itself, drawing much nutrition to it. And he should continue to apply the hot water bath until nutrition flows and it returns to its natural form.
On the cure of fractured bones when they are healed in a twisted manner.
When a member, having been already restored after its healing, presents itself in a twisted manner or with prominent fractured bones or some deformity, and because of this form the member is disfigured, yet it does not prevent the member from performing its natural functions; then it is not necessary to accept his claim, who considers that the member should be broken again.
And indeed, there have been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed reprehensible, leading to death or a great fear, as it is mortal.
Indeed, if the twisting and deformity are recent: then it is necessary to immerse it in warm water with herbs that soften, such as almond leaves, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones. And let a plaster be made with a softening paste, such as a properly made poultice.
Or take the mucus of the almond root, and mix it with chicken fat, or chickpea oil, and wrap it up with that.
They may be enriched with fat-soluble figs and rubbed with columbine lard or other similar preparations that reduce scarring.
And sometimes the knot is loosened by persistent friction, old and gentle, which is done with moist hands. And the movement of the limb should be administered to every part at all hours.
However, if deformity has already occurred and it has become strong and hardened into a stone, and the need for treatment arises with a knife: then it is necessary to cut off its upper part and dissolve the continuity of the bone and cut away what exceeds from the knot or bone using delicate scissors: and ease should be provided in that place with care and diligence.
**On the Discussion of Dislocation**
Dislocation is the separation of any joint from its position. Therefore it is forbidden from its own motion, and the figure of the limb is disfigured. And it causes painful accidents and severe injuries to the weak.
When someone experiences a dislocation, it is necessary to hurry to restore it; nor should there be any delay at all.
For if there is delay, the place should be changed, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
For this reason, it is not necessary for him to be moved, nor should he be extended in the time of his change of place. Because it often causes spasms to occur, and painful troubles.
Indeed, when that happens, then it is necessary to prepare for bloodletting by the nurse. Then he is released until the dislocation has healed.
Then the member is bathed with warm water and oil. Then it is reduced with ease.
And all the members should be treated as soon as the memory of their condition returns to its place.
I have indeed already outlined the chapters on dislocations, even according to what has come before in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower parts.
On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
The two mandibles rarely dislocate unless, occasionally, they do.
And the dislocation of both [mandibles] occurs according to one of two methods. Or they are indeed removed from their places by a slight dislocation, and they become soft for a little while. Or they may dislocate completely and entirely, until they become soft towards the chest, until the saliva is released, and it cannot hold itself firm, nor can it close its own jaw, and its tongue is drawn in with speech.
When, however, the dislocation is slight, then it returns to many positions on its own with little effort.
If it is indeed a complete, entire dislocation: then it is necessary that its reduction be done quickly, and not delayed thoroughly: and it is as if it should hold the minister's finger below the chin: and the physician should insert one of his hands into the root of the mandible dislocation between the jaw and the tooth, if the dislocation is from one side. If a dislocation occurs in both parts, he should insert both his thumbs simultaneously. And the rest of his hand's fingers should be outside as he requires.
And especially instruct the patient to clean his jaws, and bring them back to normal for chewing on both sides. And the doctor should adjust the jaw, and gently push it back to its normal position until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce it, especially if both jaws are involved simultaneously, then apply a hot water and oil poultice until the reduction becomes easy; never delay reducing the jaws altogether, as we have said.
When they return and align, and the patient's mouth is closed, and they do not open: then place small cloth poultices on them, coated with a paste made from beeswax and rose oil.
Then it should be tied gently with soft ligatures.
And the patient should sleep on his back, with his head elevated between two pillows to prevent him from moving it to the right or left, and he should not try to chew anything or even think about chewing; instead, a soft liquid diet should be provided until the pain subsides and the jaw is flexible. Then he may eat what he likes and swallow it easily.
It should not be difficult to perform surgery on one's own mouth while eating and drinking, and chewing, until the jawbone is detached and healed.
If the reduction of the two jawbones becomes difficult when they are dislocated at some point and do not return to their places, then often fever occurs from there, and persistent vomiting; and perhaps the internal organs are damaged, and perhaps pure cholera is expelled.
So if you see that (the condition) becomes like this, then know that it is a loss, and often he who experiences that dies within ten days.
**On the Reduction of Shoulder Dislocation and the End of the Humerus**
The shoulder blade (furcula) does not dislocate inwardly from its inner side due to its connection with the chest. And it (the shoulder blade) dislocates outward sometimes, and that is indicated to the senses.
And its restoration is that the sick person lies on his back and extends his arms. Then it (the shoulder blade) shortens the space with your strong contraction of the hand, for it will return on its own.
Then place a plaster, and some wool, and bind it.
The extremities indeed, which follow the cubitus, and continue with it, are not dislocated unless rarely so. If it becomes dislocated at any time, then it must be reduced and set in the position that we have said, and what you have prepared.
Then place a plaster, and some wool, and bind it. And especially instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with the same treatment, the end of the arm is reduced when it has been separated from its place as well.
## On the Reduction of Shoulder Dislocation
Know that the shoulder (Humerus) is not dislocated unless according to three modes.
Of which one is that it becomes dislocated towards the lower part of the side (titillicus). The second [method] is to dislocate it towards a part of the chest. And perhaps it will dislocate towards the upper part of the humerus, and that becomes rare.
And it does not dislocate towards the rear, because of the spatula. And it does not dislocate towards the front, because of the nerves.
And indeed, it dislocates and emerges most towards the lower part of the thigh, especially in those whose flesh is scarce. Because it emerges swiftly in those [parts], and enters swiftly.
However, in those whose flesh is abundant, the opposite occurs; that is, it emerges with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men through a blow or accident, and the humerus is dislocated at the joint with heat, and one thinks that's because it's already dislocated.
Therefore, one must experience that, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And a dislocation is known when it affects the lower joints; and you distinguish between the dislocated humerus and the healthy humerus. For you perceive a clear difference between them, and you notice a weakness in the head of the humerus, and near the joint, the head of the humerus feels as if it is another bone; and the infirm person cannot bring their hand back to its own side, nor move it through all its motions.
And similarly, if the joint of the chest or the upper part is dislocated, then you will notice a clear sensation, and it will not be hidden.
And indeed, this dislocation is easily reduced when it is recent or if the patient is a young child.
And its reduction is such that it lifts the patient's hand towards the upper part. Then place your thumbs under the joint and lift the connection with strength towards its proper place; and the patient will raise their hand and extend it upwards. Then place it downwards; for indeed it returns quickly.
If, however, it does not return as we said, and there have been many days since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water, and an application made which softens and relaxes, such as when roots of high quality, fennel, or melilot are steeped in water and applied.
Next, the patient should be placed face up on his back, and under his armpit is placed a sphere and wool that are equal between relaxation and tension.
Then the physician should place his heel on the sphere and raise the head of the humerus with force, and pull the patient's hand downwards.
And if he struggles, bring him back in this manner: and it is as if you make the present man who is stronger than the patient, and stands on his side, and inserts his elbow under the patient's armpit; then lift the armpit towards the upper part until the patient is suspended in the air. And another attendant should pull the patient's hand towards the lower part of his chest. If however the patient is weak, then something else should be suspended with him in order to make him heavier; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is brought down in another manner as well; and a long wooden beam should be fixed in the ground, whose head is round like the handle of a mortar; not too thick nor too thin. Then a cloth should be placed under the patient after it is laid over his head, and the patient should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then he should extend his hand towards the lower part on the other side, and extend his body from the other side with strength; for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this care: and it is as if you take a wood whose length is the amount of two arms, and its width is the amount of four fingers, and its thickness is the amount of two fingers; which has a round head to facilitate its entry into the deep part of the wound, in this form.
Then cloth should be laid over the round head so as not to harm the wooden patient.
Then place the patient under the wound, so that he extends his hand or arm over the wood until below; and bind the wood over the helper and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then place the arm over the step according to its width, and extend the hand below, and let go of the remaining body suspended on the other side. The joint enters immediately.
Thus, when the opening is completed in any way that is possible, it is then necessary to place beneath it a sphere of an equal amount made from wool. Then apply the prepared plaster from ground wool mixed with myrrh and egg white over the entire upper arm as required.
Then tighten the bandage properly; and the ligament is wrapped over the plaster above; and the hand is attached to the neck and released, so that the hand does not move for seven days.
And it is necessary to give light food to the weak patient until the member is strengthened, for this aids its healing.
Then a larger bandage is applied after seven or five days, and it is removed with movement. If it is firmly established and does not relax, then it is already healed.
If the dislocation occurs repeatedly due to moisture or for another reason, then cautery with three incisions should be administered according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
If all this is done, and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not secured, and the plaster and bandage are removed several times, but do not become firm, and fall off, and cannot raise itself up to its original position; then know that the nerves of the shoulder have been cut, or stretched, or relaxed; and know that the joint will never be restored to its place.
However, when dislocation occurs against the chest and breast, or when it is reduced to the rear, this is done with a push and extension using the hands; until it returns, and the remaining tension and care are administered, until healing occurs.
If, after healing, a severe condition occurs in the member and there is delay in its motion, then the patient should use baths frequently until that severity is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
**On the healing of elbow dislocation.**
You should know that the elbow joint can become dislocated with difficulty, and likewise, it returns to its place with difficulty; indeed, it dislocates towards all parts, particularly to the front or rear.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you, for it falls under pressure and touch, according to whatever form it takes. And when you join the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, that becomes clearly evident. The joint is then secured, and the arm cannot be doubled or touched with its own humerus.
And it is necessary that you move towards reducing the dislocation immediately, before a hot apoplessia occurs to it.
For if a hot apoplessia occurs to it, its reduction becomes difficult; and perhaps it will not be cured at all, especially when it affects the posterior parts. It is indeed the worst of all types of dislocations, and causes more severe pain; and often leads to death with it.
And its restoration when it is possible to reduce it is, as he extends his hand with both hands: and his arm is expanded, and the doctor's hand is above his elbow and under it, and he pushes the joint with his thumbs simultaneously, or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Or if the dislocation is to the front, then it returns so that he doubles his hand with his own hand, until he strikes the elbow which is dislocated with the root of his palm.
If the dislocation does not obey to be reduced, then apply a strong, steady extension; and it is as if both arms of the assistants are extended: and even two assistants hold it, so that it does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is moved to all parts after it has been covered with a doubled cloth or a wide ligament.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should grease it with oil so that it becomes from those things that aid in the lubrication of the joint with ease. Then he should push the joint with a firm impulse until it returns to its place.
And after its reduction, it is necessary to place a plaster on top of it, which has a constricting and drying effect with alum, and the tightness should be adjusted appropriately. And the arm should be suspended from the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days.
Then it is removed. If therefore the joint is fixed in its place, then loosen the ligature from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not tightly bound, then repeat the plaster and ligature, and leave it for several days until it tightens. Then remove it.
However, if there is a serious problem after the reduction of the joint and its position is in motion, then apply moisture to the bath, and light friction, and compression until it is lined or place a hot compress on the affected joint, that is, a pinged arrow poultice. Then it is bound, and left upon her day and night. Then remove it and insert the same into a bath. When, therefore, it is sweating, then fear joins friction with moderate pressure. Then repeat over the same the application of the aloe once, and twice, and three times with the entrance into the bath, until it becomes soft.
And if it is necessary, place upon it a hot, moist, greasy compress and tighten it over the same.
Do that several times. It becomes soft and returns to its original position.
§ On the treatment of dislocation according to Al-Mahashem.
Al-Mahashem frequently dislocates the hand, that is, the joint which is between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of its dislocation is easy. In contrast, the remaining joints are connected. However, it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of its dislocation at the time when it becomes dislocated, before the place leaves; or else a hot ulcer occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation is such that you place your weaker hand on the table and have the assistant stretch out his hand, and the doctor places his palm on top of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its place.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already retracted into the hand; then the patient should place the back of his hand on the table at the time of extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be such that the inner part of his hand is placed on the table, so that the doctor's hand can fall upon the very top of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then bind it with a soothing plaster to prevent the ulcer from spreading, and release it, without repeating this.
For if it does not endure, nor can you reduce it further after the passage of days, but the joint remains according to its deformity, and it causes the patient no pain except that the hand becomes soft, and he cannot grasp anything; then know that the nerves are severed or rubbed raw.
There is no skill in it other than to bind with a ligature near the case (wound). And perhaps it does not contribute anything.
If, therefore, it does not return as Almahassem described, then place an ointment (dressing) over it as we have mentioned. Then it should be bound and left for five days; after that, it should be opened and left, and the hand (or wound) should be exercised.
If, however, its (the wound's) movement is restricted and something grave happens: then it should be relaxed with warm water and friction several times until it becomes relaxed.
**On the treatment of finger dislocation.**
When a finger is dislocated from its joint in any direction, towards the back of the hand or between its joints, then extend (the finger) and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns to its place.
Then support the finger's head, and hang it towards the side where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it becomes straight in its own time.
When evening comes, bind it according to that very description; and do not cease to loosen it during the day; and exercise it with motion; and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it is tightened.
And do likewise with it if it becomes dislocated at the wrist; bind it to that very part, and perform your first operation with it until it is healed.
And do likewise with it when it becomes dislocated at other parts.
**On the healing of spinal joint dislocation.**
When anyone suffers from a complete dislocation of the spine or the vertebrae are removed from their places, then there is no cure for it, because death is approaching the sick person.
And the sign of it is that the sick person's strength departs without will, and he cannot hold it; and often some of its members become weak, or both legs, or both arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
Many times that which is removed happens to be separated from those parts four times.
Therefore, that which is removed towards the rear is called gibbousness.
The treatment of it is that you consider at that time if gibbousness occurs from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any recovery from it at all.
For those that occur due to accident or impact, or similar causes, the ancient methods of treatment have been discussed at length. Much of it does not return with success.
I will now briefly depart from that topic, which requires little excuse given its proximity to my intent; and with the exposition I have provided regarding it, and the various ways in which the instrument was shaped, as well as the demonstration of itself, and its application.
Therefore, I say that in the gibbousness that occurs from the anterior part, there is no skill, nor is there recovery from it.
And similarly, for that which occurs on both sides as well.
And it is not treated from them, unless what happens in his own back, because of what I am telling: and it is as if the sick is extended over his face on an equal level with the floor near the wall, and a humid cloth is spread under him, so that his chest is not harmed.
Then a straight board is placed fixed in the fire on the floor at the foot of his head and another board around his feet at the other end of the foot, and the attendant holds the board, and it is not fastened in the fire. And another attendant holds the other.
Then he wraps over the head of the sick person a soft cloth, and fastens it under his armpits firmly, and extends the end of the cloth to the board that is near his head, and ties him to it.
Then he tightens another cloth over his thighs, and above his knees, and near his feet. Then he combines all the cloths, and ties them to the other board that is near his feet.
Then all the attendants stretch out towards the part of the board with the cloths, and do not move the two boards from their places where they are fixed; however, they are not fastened, as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or place a board on top of it. Then he attaches his feet over the board until it returns.
If, however, it does not return through this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms' breadth. And he should choose the place on the wall, as we said, that is near the weak point, where the end of the board will enter. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And the physician should place his feet on the other end. And he should tie it well until the spine is tightened, and return to its place.
Then, if you wish, use a drill that is inserted with your hand: and it is as if you fix two wooden sticks in the ground near the head of the weak foot, whose length is one arm's breadth, and two more near its head.
And the length between all the sticks is one palm; and now a hole has been made at every place where the drill runs: and every stick is firmly fixed in the ground so that it does not move at all.
And a round stick should be inserted; and it is a turn in which the ligament is revolved through two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it there is a hole, in which the stick is fixed, whose length is a palm with which it revolves; and similarly in the other two sticks.
Then tighten the ligaments which you have tightened in the lower chest around the lower turn which is near its head, and the ligaments which you have tightened in its legs around the turn which is near its feet.
Then stand beside each turn that moves the hand with a tie, with which the turn revolves; and the physician adjusts the spine, as we have said.
This is the form of the turn that follows.
Then after the spine returns and the place is adjusted, then you should put a dry plaster with alum and eggwhite. Then apply the poultice. Afterwards, place above the plaster a star-shaped pad from wood, whose width is three fingers, or approximately those dimensions. And its length is the amount that takes up the space of the hernia, and beyond the healthy part of the spine.
Then it is tied with the ligament that we have mentioned. And it should be nourished with delicate food until it is healed.
If there remains something of prominence in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that remedies that soften and relax be administered, along with the application of a poultice as we described in detail during a long time. And now a sheet of lead is administered in that place.
And sometimes there occurs a prominence in the final part of the spine, and it is thought to be due to dislocation, and that bone which already protrudes. Therefore it is not necessary to make such an assumption with this medicine; perhaps indeed it will cause death to occur.
## On the Treatment of a Dislocated Ankle
Know that the ankle and shoulder joints do not become dislocated except due to displacement alone; nor does it happen to them what happens to other joints from a slight removal and pressure.
Indeed, the joint of the anchor is dislocated according to four parts. This is because it is dislocated towards the front and back.
And it is most dislocated towards the interior, and slightly dislocated towards the front and back.
And the treatment for the dislocation towards the interior is as follows: because when you join the healthy leg to the injured one, it is longer; and the knee of the injured leg stands higher than that of the healthy one, and the injured person cannot bend their foot at the groin; and there is a place that follows the groin after the limb is straightened due to heat, because the head of the thigh has already reached there.
And the sign of one who experiences a dislocation towards the exterior is that it is contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of one who experiences a dislocation towards the front is that they stretch their healthy leg to its limit; however, they cannot bend it without pain in the knee; and if they try to walk, they cannot go beyond this point; and they retain urine, and their groin becomes stiff, and during walking, they place weight on their heel.
And the sign of one who experiences a dislocation towards the back is that they do not stretch their leg, and cannot bend it until their groin doubles in size; and their leg is also shorter on the affected side; and the groin is relaxed, and the head of the thigh is at the location mentioned.
The reduction of this type of dislocation is such that you must consider it at that time, if the dislocation is old and has become worn with the passage of time. Then, if you perform the reduction of it and it remains according to its own arrangement, then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore, it is not necessary for a complete assumption to be made about it.
However, in the case of a recent dislocation, which belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you should act appropriately to restore the joint, and stretch it towards the interior and exterior, and move it with your right and left hand: perhaps it will return on its own and no other treatment will be needed.
If, however, it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong helper, and stretch the leg from its lower part: either with their hands or with a bandage that is tied above the knee: and another assistant extends their hand from above, so as to insert their hands beneath his armpits. Then, tie a loose bandage over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the other bandage.
And the extension should be either from the front part of the groin to the part of the femur, or from the back part to the part of the back.
And let their extension be with one motion until the patient is lifted from the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is the common type among the four kinds of species.
If therefore the dislocation returns with what we said, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary for each kind to use that which I will say about its own cure.
In the reduction of it, indeed, when the dislocation affects internal parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his healthy side. Then he should place the ligament over the root of the hip, where it is between the hip joint and the space under the groin. Then extend the ligament upwards from the groin area towards the higher part of the body, towards the part of the fork (of the hip bone).
Then have another assistant take the patient's strong arm and narrow the large space of the weak hip joint, and extend it with a steady motion towards the external extension. For I return it to its place.
And this kind is the easiest among the rest of the cure kinds, through which this member is reduced.
If, however, it turns away from you and does not obey you for entry with this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary that both weak feet be bound simultaneously with a strong ligature, loose over the two calcaneuses and over the two knees; and the length of each one should be from its own comparison to the quantity of four fingers; and the weak leg should be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
Then the weak one should be suspended over the head of the log, which is in the house; and its length from the ground should be the quantity of two arms.
Then command the strong young one to strengthen the head of the thigh; and hang another weak one with the strong one; and push the strong one, strengthening the thigh with force, for the connection returns to its place quickly.
In its return, however, when the dislocation goes to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lies on a bed, according to what we have mentioned in the case of hunchback. And the ligature should be tied over its weak leg, properly, and also over its chest.
Then two logs should be placed, one at his feet and another at the head of him. Then the additional log should be placed in the middle of the foot, fixed well; over which wet cloths should be laid to not harm the weak one; and the log should be between his thighs so as not to be pulled down towards the lower part during extension.
Then each instrument should be extended to its own part, and the surgeon should equalize the reduction with his hand.
If therefore it obeys the return, it will be good.
And if not, place a board over it and press it equally, as we said regarding the hump. However, it is necessary for the sick person to lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front, then it is necessary to quickly extend the sick person's leg, and according to this same description on the bed: and the surgeon should place his right hand's palm over the sick person's inguinal area. Then it tightens itself with the other hand, and with that tightening, place the extended hip towards the lower part of the leg.
And if the dislocation is towards the back, then it is not necessary for the sick person to be extended downwards and lifted up, but rather he should be placed on a hard surface, as it is also done when the wide dislocation is towards the exterior, according to what we said about his position on two surfaces: and it lies on its face, with its ligaments extended, according to what we just said.
And it is necessary that a compression be administered with a board over the place to which the operation extends, when the reduction is completed according as it should be.
And you must not overlook the sign of its return: and it is as if you stretch out the two weak legs; and when you see that they are equal, and the weak one tightens its leg and expands itself without straining, then you know that the member has returned according to what was needed; then join the two thighs, and apply a plaster, and bind with a bandage, so as not to move widely to any part, and let the patient adhere to rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the ligature, and remove the plaster, and compare the leg with the other; and when you see that they are equal in position, then you know that the dislocation is now fixed. Therefore release the patient to walk.
And if you see any sign of softening: then return, and apply that plaster, and bind it according to your first tightening, and release it after three days as well.
Then loosen it and make the healing take place slowly in walking on each for several days until it is well strengthened.
§ On the dislocation of the knee.
The knee dislocates in three ways. It dislocates outwardly, inwardly, and downward, that is, to the rear.
And it does not dislocate toward the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that it causes the patient to bend their leg towards their chest. If, however, it does not adhere to the thigh, then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all three kinds of dislocation is to make the patient sit upright, so that they can extend their leg as much as possible towards it and attach the back of their thigh to the front of yours; and place their foot between your feet.
Then make the knee adhere to your palms, and place them straight between your fingers above the knee. Then apply your palm to both sides of the knee with force. And have another assistant stretch their leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of healing is that the foot adheres to the thigh gently, not painfully.
Then apply a hot poultice, and make the foot adhere to the thigh. Then bind them together with bandages for three or four days. Then loosen them.
And the invalid should not walk for several days until he is healed.
If, however, you do not achieve the return of the limb, then administer a strong extension with ligatures, whose method was previously described in the treatment of the ankle, until it returns.
**On the treatment of calcaneal dislocation**
The calcaneus is sometimes removed by a slight displacement, and sometimes it is dislocated in its full range. And its dislocation occurs either towards the interior or towards the exterior.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will see the calcaneum (heel bone) inflated, extending towards the part to which it is dislocated.
However, the treatment for its reduction is easy: it should be extended with ease using the hands and then adjusted until it returns to its proper place.
However, in its treatment when it is dislocated towards the second position, you should make the infirm sit upright, and have a strong assistant hold them firmly from the rear part of their back, in the middle.
Then hold the foot with your right hand from its upper part, and with your left hand from its lower part, at the level of the toe joint.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand, using two fingers.
Then extend your left hand and push the sole of the foot with your right hand towards the shin without effort.
Do that twice as we have described.
Then push the sole of the foot towards the shin in the third position, and pull the toe joint.
If it returns to its original state once or twice in this manner and you see the foot is even, that is good. If not, then repeat the operation on it, for it recovers.
However, if you are prevented from reducing it in the manner described, then lay the patient down on his back on the ground and fix a very firm pillow on the ground between his thighs so that he falls into a comfortable position; and you have already covered him with a cloth to avoid hurting him.
Then the assistant should take hold of the patient's thigh; afterwards, another assistant extends the leg, either with their hands or using a bandage that is tied around the collar of the foot. Then every assistant should extend it against the extension of his counterpart: and a pillow should stand between the two thighs of the patient, holding him in place so that his body does not tilt downwards during the stretch.
Then the physician should reduce the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg down towards the ground. The dislocation returns with speed.
When the dislocation returns and its restoration is declared to you, then apply a plaster and bandage, tighten it firmly with bands, and tie the leg with a bandage to the shin bone.
And it is necessary that you be careful or fear of the nerves that are above the rear ankle, so that no ligament over them prevails and injures them.
Then allow it to rest for two or three days. If the ligament becomes relaxed, tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day and forbid the disabled person from walking for forty days. If indeed he tries to walk before that space is filled, there is no security unless the dislocation dissolves and heals, and it does not receive treatment afterwards.
If a fever occurs to him, then it is necessary that you administer to his sedative that we mentioned earlier in another place concerning treatment, and embrocation until the fever disappears.
**On the Dislocation of the Toe Joints, and Treatment.**
It is necessary that what is dislocated from them with a slight extension without effort be corrected; and this is not difficult but rather easy.
However, if the dislocation is in any of the knots of the foot, then it is necessary that the disabled person sit on his foot over an equal place to the ground or on a board and stands as if walking.
Then stand you, and place your foot upon that which protrudes from those joints. Then press it firmly with your foot until it returns to its original position, and you will see that the swelling has gone down and no longer appears prominent.
Then place under the foot a board which will take the whole foot, having two ends. Then tighten this restriction for three days. Then loosen it, and make it rest from walking for many days until it is tightened and secured by the reduction.
§ On the kinds of dislocation with the ulna or fracture.
When something of this sort occurs and you attempt its cure and restoration, death often follows many times over: and for that reason one should not presume to undertake such care unless one is skilled in the art, merciful, pious, slow to act, not rash, nor presumptuous: and use only initial medicines which provide merely temporary relief from heat. And let the sick be committed to divine judgment. Unless you have hope, or expect salvation from destruction through the gentleness of illness, and where something of hope appears. Therefore, try to reduce it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot abscess occurs.
If therefore the member returns to its original state, according to what we wish, then administer treatment to soothe the abscess: and care for the wound with what is appropriate for it from dried ointments.
If there is a dislocation with a fracture, and these occur in separated bones of the leg, then try to remove them, and do in that what we said about simple illnesses from what preceded in those places.
And be careful according to your strength, and guard yourself from the entrance of fear: as my previous prediction to you has said.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more beneficial to your body among them during your time.
