Having thus completed this book for you, which is the last on medical knowledge with its additions and having reached the end through his explanations and statements, it has seemed to me fit to complete for you also this treatise, which is part of the operations, that is, surgery with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand is neglected in our area and entirely private in our time, until perhaps knowledge of it perishes and its traces are lost; and nothing remains from it except for small descriptions in ancient books that have been altered by hands; and errors and hesitations occur until intentions are closed and sight of it has faded: It has seemed to me appropriate to revive it with the order of this treatise according to explanations, statements, and abbreviations; and to combine it with the forms of cautery instruments and other work tools; with additions from declarations and necessary elaborations.
However, since a good craftsman of this art with his own hand is not found in our time, it is: for the art of medicine is long, and its author needs to be exercised in anatomy before he relates what Galen narrated, until he knows the members' aids, their forms, their conjunction and separation, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, the number of them, their exit, and the pulsations and quietude of vessels, and the exits of places.
And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name is much with the name and little with the work, and above all in the art of the hand.
We have indeed already spoken of that in the introduction to this book.
For those who are not aware of what we have said about anatomy, they will not benefit from our teachings and may fall into errors that harm people; as I have seen many among them who are proud of this knowledge but lack understanding and experience in it.
This is because I have seen a careless physician cut into a scrofulous nodule on a woman's neck and he pierced some arteries in her neck; consequently, the woman's blood flowed until she died in his hands.
And I have seen another physician who presumptuously tried to extract a stone from a man who was old and the stone was large. He therefore approached him and extracted the stone with a smooth forceps. Why the man died on the third day.
And indeed, I had been called to extract it as well; and I saw from the size of the stone and the frailty of the patient that he would die.
And I have seen another physician who was receiving a fee from a certain duke of our land for his medicine; and it happened to a black eunuch who was with him that there was a fracture in his thigh near the calcaneum: and the physician, because of his ignorance, tightened the fracture over the wound with bandages and tight lacing, and did not allow the wound to heal.
He then completed it according to his desires. After a few days, he sent him away and ordered him not to loosen the ligature. And so it remained until the swelling in his leg and foot went down, and it led to his ruin.
I was therefore summoned to him, and I went to loosen the ligature, and peace came, and he was delivered from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not restrain it.
So the corruption ceased its progression through the member until it led to his demise.
And I saw another physician who continuously perforated the cancerous abscess, and it festered for days until the evil of his disease became magnificent in the presence of its owner.
This is because when cancer is pure from melancholic humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that it may be cut off entirely.
And because of that, it is necessary for you to know that surgery with the hand is divided into two parts: the operation that is associated with safety; and the operation that involves danger in many positions.
And I have already examined in every place of this book, where the operation comes, which holds terror and fear.
Why is it necessary for you to be careful of that and give thought to yourself; so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and dishonor you.
Therefore, take care with caution and protection, and tend to your patients with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading to grace from God for a commendable health and succession: and leave behind terrible afflictions difficult to heal, and free your hearts from what makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter into your faith and convenience.
It is indeed more remaining to your glory, and higher in this world, and finally to your quantities.
Galen indeed said in some of his advice. Do not treat a bad illness; do not call a bad doctor.
But this Treatise is divided into three Chapters.
First Chapter.
On precautions regarding fire, and precautions with acute medicine, chapters, and arranged from head to feet, and forms of tools, and tools for cautery: and everything necessary for the operation.
Second Chapter
On section and perforation, phlebotomy and venipuncture, and wounds: the extraction of arrows and similar objects. And all the chapter, arranged according to the order of instruments.
Third Chapter
On restoration, dislocation, and treatment of twists, and similar conditions: a chapter arranged from head to foot, according to the forms of instruments.
But before we proceed with the details of the operation, it is necessary to speak of the qualities of healing and damaging agents, and in what kind of dressing they should be applied.
I say therefore that speech on the quality of cautery aid and its harm is a long and subtle discourse, a science and a hidden secret.
There was also discourse on this by a multitude of scholars, and they disagreed about it; and for me, their brief statements are sufficient, fearing an extension.
I say therefore that cautery universally affects every condition that is with matter or without matter; excepting two conditions, which are the hot condition without matter, and the dry condition without matter.
However, there is disagreement regarding the hot and dry condition with matter. Some said that cautery is beneficial in this condition. And others said the opposite, namely that cautery is unsuitable for a condition arising from heat and dryness; because fire's nature is heat, and it is unsuitable to be cured by what is hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite said: "Through cautery, a remedy is found for every hot and dry condition that befalls human bodies; because when you compare a human body and its humors to the fire's complexity, you find the human body cold.
And I say this by way of his own words: for he has already withdrawn that from me several times through experiment.
However, one should not approach it unless they have already been proven and exercised in the last chapter of the art of surgery, and have understood the diversity of human complexes, and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, and the accidents that befall them, and the space of time.
However, as for the other complexes, there is no need to be afraid of them, especially in diseases that are cold and moist. For indeed all surgeons have come together on these things, and they do not disagree regarding the treatment with cautery in them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and its goodness over cautery with medicine, is because fire is simple, whose action does not reach unless it is directed to the member to be cauterized; and it does not harm another member connected with it, except for a slight injury.
The action of the medicine that burns does reach what is elongated from the member, and perhaps it causes to occur in the member a disease difficult to heal, or perhaps it kills.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do that unless it exceeds.
Indeed, it has become clear to us through experience, due to the length of the service and study of the art, and the pause over the truth of things; and for that reason I am excusing the length of this discourse.
And if not, because it is not permissible for this book of mine, I will offer you the hidden secret in the fire, and the quality of the operation in the bodies from which it expels diseases, demonstrated by the philosophical discourse that sharpens your minds.
And know, my children, that they disagree in the time when cautery should be performed, and set a better time for the wound.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times; for the damage caused by time is submerged in the healing brought about by cauterization. And especially when cauterization is for pains from necessary pains, strong and urgent ones that do not tolerate delay; for it is feared that from them a greater harm may occur than the minor damage that does not pass due to time.
And let not your minds, my children, be deceived by the fact that they do not understand, except for common and stupid doctors; namely, that the illness that is healed by cauterization does not always return: and they put forth that conclusion, and the matter is not as they think; for cauterization is not unless at the place of medicine that alters the complexion, and dries up humidities that are causes, wherefore pains occur.
However, cauterization surpasses medicine because of the swiftness of its healing, the excellence of its operation, and the authority of its master: and it is possible that the disease will return within a short period of time, according to the constitution of the patient, the location of his illness, and the strength of its effects; and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities therein; and what arrives at itself through the acquisition from food, and similar causes, unless a disease develops for which cauterization is administered.
Subtle pain in a member due to a few superfluities and humors, such as cauterization on the tooth because of pain and similar causes, for it is possible that that pain will not return in it. But that happens rarely.
But the true speech about cauterization as the last resort of medicine is correct: not to what they themselves intend with it; for they believe that there is no cure that can be effected with medicine, or with anything else after the fire has been applied.
But the reality is the opposite of their belief; the intention that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is incorrect, unless we apply methods of treatment to certain illnesses and they do not bring about a cure; then, at the end of the process, we apply cauterization, and it does bring about a cure. Thus, the claim that cauterization is the last resort of medicine arises from the misunderstanding of the common people and many ignorant physicians.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; they did not say this except because of the equal value and superior quality of its substance, and they said that it does not form a crust at the site of cauterization. That is not absolutely true; for I have already tried it and found that it does not work the same way in all bodies without others.
And cauterization with gold itself is good and better than with iron, as they said. However, when you cauterize with fire using gold over fire, it is not clear to you when the burning reaches the desired quantity because of the red color of gold; and when it turns to itself towards cold, if you add more heat on top, it melts into the fire and turns into plates.
That is why the artisan falls away from that work; and because of it, cauterization with iron has become for us more convenient and close at hand, from straightness to operation.
And I myself have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to the chapters; and I have ordered them from head to foot so that anyone seeking something from it will find what they want.
Chapter II.
Here is the translation of the given medieval Latin text:
The method of cauterization is as follows: you should advise the patient to evacuate the wound with medicated solutions that clean the head, three or four times a night, according to the strength of the patient's condition, their age, and their custom.
Then instruct them to make incisions on their head with a scalpel. Then have them sit between your hands with their knees against your chest, so that they have placed their hands on their own breast.
Then place the root of your palm on the root of their nose between their eyes. Whenever therefore your middle finger touches it, mark that place with an unhealed wound.
Then use the cautery iron with oil: this is its form.
Then place the raw side on the marked place with the unhealed wound, slowly drawing your hand down, and you turn it. Then quickly withdraw your hand and look at the place.
If you see that it has detached from the bone, as much as it takes off the head, or as much as the substance of the herb, then withdraw your hand. And if that does not help, repeat the operation with your hand or another instrument if it becomes cold; until you see the bones I told you about.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water, and moisten the cloth with it, and place it on the wound; and leave it for three days.
Then place over it the cloth moistened with butter, and leave it on the wound until the scar from the fire is destroyed. Then treat it with the ointment of four drugs until it is healed.
They also said that the deeper the wound remains open, the more it emits pus; therefore, it is better and more curative.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized from the mouth to the anus; and hold the cautery until something thick from the bones hardens.
Then after that which is hardened from the bone, dig around it; then treat (the wound).
And others say that it is necessary to use a cautery until it leaves an impression in the bone so deep that the bone falls out, making a shape like a horn; or an instrument that women use to deliver children: and they believe that vapors from the head escape through this opening, and the wound heals over time.
He then treats it until it is consolidated.
However, these two types of cautery are not seen at all in some people according to their fear.
And to release it, I find it better for the health of that very person.
For the head is weakened by the loss of its natural continuity; as we have witnessed in the other members; and especially when the nature of a sick head is weak, the first type of cautery (i.e., mild/less destructive) is healthier and better for me, and I use it - so act with that one for the sake of health.
Head III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head and is prolonged in a sick person, using hot compresses, ointments, and purgatives. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one of the cauterizations we have described and does not bring any relief from them, then consider this. For if the nature of a sick head is strong and not weak, and it finds a freezing cold, then cauterize with another cautery under that one, rarely (or gently). Then he cauterizes the very tip of every horn of the skull with a hot iron, so that it does not penetrate the skin and the quantity of bone that we have described is exposed. And he cauterizes the same with a hot iron in the back of the head, in a place called the "vas" (vessel): and this is where blood flows, and you should raise your wound in this and not expose the bone. The patient indeed experiences a severe pain because of it, and a variety of pain from the other cauterizations of all parts of the head.
And I will say about this cauterization in its place: and it is necessary that there be a cauterization for the horns of the head, and the back of it more gently with a cauterization, which is cauterized in the middle of the head.
Head IV.
When there is pain in a part of the head that is acute and intense, or the pain spreads to the eye, and it is relieved by washing with purifying medicines for the head, and the remaining treatment is carried out as I described in the divisions of illness, without removing all of it, then cauterization in that place takes place according to two methods: either cauterization with heated medicine burning, or with iron.
However, when a cautery is performed with an acute medicine burning, it is as if you take one tooth from another and strip its own scales, and sever its ends from both sides. Then cut the place of pain with a phlebotomist's side, until it becomes a place under the skin where the tooth is caught.
Therefore, insert it into that place under the skin until it is hidden: then tie it with a string of moderate tension, and leave it for fifteen hours; afterwards loosen it and extract another one, and leave a gap for two or three days; then put a poultice soaked in butter on top of it until the place forms pus; finally treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to do it with certain burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning drugs, then do so.
The cauterization of it with iron is indeed in this manner. The shape of the cautery fire, which is as follows.
And it is called a claw because its shape is like a claw, which has something of a spark at the tip, and there is a small eminence in the middle.
Then place it (the wound) in the correct position and hold your hand over it; gradually and quickly withdraw the knife, and let the quantity of flesh removed be equal to half of its thickness. And withdraw your hand so as not to damage the artery below, which could cause bleeding.
Then soak the dressing in salt water and place it over the wound, leaving it for three days; then apply butter to the dressing; finally, treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you see that this half-headache has not healed according to the rule of cautery, apply it again with the tip of a knife. And burn from the cut artery in this headache, not too deeply or too shallowly.
§ On the method of cauterizing old headaches.
When treating a headache as we have said in the previous treatment and regarding the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not help; and you see that the disease does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary to apply cautery with a knife until it turns white after drawing a sign on the place of pain with a line, whose length should be the thickness of a finger, or approximately; and hold your hand once over it and squeeze until you reach the artery, and then continue until you reach the mouth.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful not to allow the continuation of the jawbone, which moves during chewing, to become hardened on the side or the nerve that moves it, leading to a spasm.
And it is also important to pay attention and take care of the flow of blood from the artery that has been severed. Indeed, there is fear in its amputation, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is neither diligent nor expert, and thus he abandons the operation with it first.
And I come to remember the management of the flow of blood from the artery according to its way and in the place of this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery is not sufficient for it, and you see the body enduring cautery in the middle of the head, as we have mentioned, care for the wound until it heals.
And if you wish, apply cautery, which we said in the chapter on extracting arteries with a cautery tool having two knives. Cautery is indeed better and more effective with this method.
§ Regarding the method of cauterizing in the pain of gold.
When a painful chill occurs and it is cured with poultices and the remaining treatment as we described in division, but the pain does not leave, then use a burning iron, which is called "Punctum," shaped as follows.
Then the points should be applied around the entire ear after igniting it, as it is necessary; or around both ears if pain is present in both simultaneously. And stretch it with the iron from the root of the ear, after you have marked the areas with wax: and the quantity of the iron should be ten points for every ear, roughly like this.
Then care for the areas until they heal.
# On the Method of Burning in Surgery.
Head VII.
The surgery that is cured with burning (cauterization) is only from certain types of conditions arising from phlegm, as we described in the divisions of diseases.
And the burning (cauterization) for these types of conditions, which occur from desiccation and spasm of a nerve.
When you treat this symptom of pain with burning, washing, gargling, and it does not bring relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cautery instruments: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below its natural position, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery instrument on the opposite side of the injured part. For softening does not occur unless in the part that appears healthy.
And the shape of the cauterization is such that you cauterize with a single cautery instrument at the very end of the upper ear, just below the forehead, and another at a different time, whose length should be according to the length of the thumb. And hold your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the middle part of the thickness of the skin is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind of knife, whose shape is as follows: however, it is not too thin, as you will see, and it should be that there is a little excess thickness in the knife.
Then take care of the place with what has been done until it heals.
On the method of cauterization for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes chronic and your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four burns on every horn of his head, and with a burn in the middle of his head, as we have said, and another burn at the back of his head, according to what has been mentioned before; and the manner of cauterization should be as previously described.
He is also cauterized with a burn over the stomach opening, which is more extreme.
Then he should be cared for according to what has been mentioned before.
**Chapter IX**
It is necessary that the patient receives a large amount of water at first, and purifying pills for the brain.
Then, wash the entire head of the patient and place a plaster of linseed described in the treatise on plasters on his forehead, and apply it several times.
Indeed, this is the method of cautery: perform it according to the same order that I mentioned there.
If therefore it is healed by that, it is good. If not: then perform three cauteries on the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the superior part of the head to the lower part of the eye, and place between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then take care of the cautery, as with what preceded.
If, however, you see the need for an addition, and the patient can bear it: then perform a cautery on him in the middle. If you want an addition: then cauterize the middle on top of both horns.
Then take care of the middle until it is healed: and make the cautery oily according to the form that was mentioned previously.
§ On the method of cauterization in paralysis and softening.
Chapter X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the cleansing of the head with herbs and as I mentioned.
Next, he prepares the patient's head: afterwards, he cauterizes the wound with a hot iron in the middle of the head, and on top of every horn of the head, and on top of its rear part, and three times on the spine of the neck.
However, if you need to alleviate the body's pain in multiple places and the patient can bear it and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four hot irons on the spine of the back, and the last one with a hot iron, until most of its flesh is burned and your hand is withdrawn. Then care for it until it is healed: and thus the cautery is oiled.
§ On the method of cauterization for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless it is from phlegmatic epilepsy.
Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeons to examine his brain first with cauterization and with the rest of the care that we have mentioned in division: when the patient is weak or accepts medicines.
However, if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then gargles and mouthwashes that purify the brain are given for many days prior, along with the improvement of food.
Then he should cut off the head, after that he should burn it with a hot iron in the middle of the head, according to what preceded in the manner: and with another iron burn on the back of his head, and over every horn of his head. If the patient is strong and tolerates it, he should be burned with the irons I mentioned in the case of paralysis, and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back, and the burning should be done with oil according to the manner that preceded.
However, if the patient is a young boy, then place the iron gently, according to this manner.
§ On the method of burning in melancholia.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then burn it with the irons that I mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of tears leading to melancholy, and the body is weak and moistened, then give him something that purifies his brain, according to what preceded in the separation: then cut off the head of the weak person, and afterward make a properly shaped torus from linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head, and the patient, sitting square, should be held from every side.
Then present the ointment. And it is better from an ancient butter. And warm it gently over a moderate fire until the finger can tolerate it when inserted into it. Then make a circle of the ointment in the middle of his head, and leave it until it cools.
Do this for the patient every week, with the rest of his treatment, until he is healed.
Or if not, cauterize it by making small dots on most of it, besides holding the hand with a cautery; indeed, it smells deeply.
This kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat.
§ In the manner of cauterization, descend water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of the water in the eye is declared to you by the signs which I mentioned in the division, then begin and wash the sick person, with that which will cleanse his head.
And guard yourself from all humidities, and make him sit in a bath, for several days of fasting.
Then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize it over the two temporal regions with two cauteries, if there is a simultaneous seizure of the descent of water in both eyes; or from one side, if there is a seizure of water in one eye. And cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin with the cautery, and let the cauteries be long in width across the temporal regions; and cauterize to stop the flow of blood.
If you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries, their cutting off, and guarding against the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized on the skin, under two bones, with the last two cauteries produced.
On the method of cauterization for ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are long-standing and excessive, affecting the veins and arteries clearly visible on the outer part of the head, this is due to the overflow of cold phlegm. Then, cauterize with the same iron used in the beginning for the descent of water (i.e., the nasal passages), with an iron in the middle of the head, and two irons above the two temporal regions, and two irons on the forehead beneath the two bones. And if you need further help, then cauterize the eye itself carefully on both sides, above the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small iron.
On the method of cauterization for nasal pus.
When you treat it with the method we mentioned earlier (i.e., drainage), and treatment does not help: then apply a drink made from weak infusions three nights in a row. Then shave the head and cauterize it with an oil-soaked iron. Then cauterize the base with an iron in the shape of a key using two irons above each eyebrow just beneath the hairline.
And guard against the artery, lest you cut it.
And this is the form of cauterization of Clauile.
§ On the method of cauterization for the softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid is softened from irritation or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery iron, using this cautery in the manner of a crescent moon.
And if you wish, cauterize the very top just above both eyebrows with two iron tools at every part, and they should be extended from two time periods; and the length of each cautery should be according to the length of the eyebrow, and do not apply the final touch with the iron, but rather according to the amount that is hardened on the third eyelid.
§ On the method of cauterization for the eyelids when the hairs turn sharp and harm the eye.
There are two kinds of cauterization in this regard: either cauterization with fire, or cauterization with a burning medicine.
However, in cauterization with fire, first and foremost, the patient should be made to remove any hair that might be burnt, if there are any, until they lengthen and equalize. If, however, they are pricked near their origin: then close the patient's eyes with ointment so that they do not move until they heal.
When they have healed and equalized, then place the patient's head in your lap; then make signs on the eyelids with wax, in the form of a myrtle leaf, indicating that it is according to the figure of the leaf, and let the sign begin near the hair.
Then place a cloth soaked in white of egg or in the mucus of a small grain over the eye.
Then use fire for cauterization, whose form is as follows.
Then cauterize according to the shape that you have marked gradually on many parts, until the surface of the skin is burnt, which appears as a myrtle leaf in its own right.
And the sign of your work's success is that if you notice the eyelids contracting and the hair growing out at the site of the puncture, then it is a sign of health.
Therefore, release your hand at that time; and let it be healed in three days.
Then place a cloth soaked in butter over it until the scar is eradicated. Then apply a treatment for it with ointment until it is healed.
If any of the threads remain after an hour and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization on that spot, as you did at first.
However, if the threads are below: then cauterize it until it returns to its natural place; and ensure that they do not hurt the eye.
It is as if you urge the patient to release the threads until they loosen and equalize. Make a form of a myrtle leaf from cloth.
Then take a known soap, and a piece of unsoaked lime, about an ounce, or something like that; then rub it with gentle pressure at the same time, so as not to chill it. Then take a piece of material from that which you have prepared like the form of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both eyes. And place under the eye a cloth soaked in alum, and let the patient's head rest in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine, and press it gently. And you should move it whenever the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for its sting is like fire.
So long as he continues to feel the sting of the medicine, let it be, and move your finger along with it. When the sting has subsided, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then, if you see the eyelids rising up as they do when a flame or cut is withdrawn, it is good; but if not, repeat the application of medicine over that place where the medicine has not impressed or discolored until your operation is complete and the eye contracted.
Then apply a cloth with butter over it until the burn on the skin is eradicated. Then care for the wound with a salve of myrrh or other, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you, when performing surgery, to be vigilant with the final touch, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If after a day the eyelid softens and something from the hair falls into the eye, then repeat the medicine on that place which softens from the eyelid itself, as you did at first. Then care for the wound until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrrh leaf.
And know that human eyes differ in magnitude and size. Therefore, according to that, your consideration should be: and let the way of righteousness not be hidden from him who studies this art.
# On the method of cauterization in the tear duct fistula.
When you treat a fistula, because of what we mentioned in the divisions of illness, and your treatment does not bring healing, then you should cauterize it according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap and hold it with both hands, ensuring it does not move or be agitated while he holds his head.
Then place the warm compress infused with a mild poultice or mucilage over his eye, followed by a hot caustic iron in the shape mentioned.
The cautery iron should be shaped like the curved end of a reed used for writing, and if it penetrates to the other end or tries to lift up, it is improper.
However, this shape of the cautery iron is better suited for your task.
Then express the abscess if it is open and drain the blood, and dry it; and if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus.
Then place the hot cautery iron over it, which is lit with great flame.
And hold it with your hand close to the cautery iron near the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not stray or disturb the patient; and place the cautery iron on the fat of the eye and destroy it.
If therefore you reach the end of your cautery iron near the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it for three days.
Then apply a poultice with butter and care for it with an drying ointment until it heals.
If after more than forty days it does not heal, then apply to it a sharp, corroding medicine until the bone is exposed; and file it according to its own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which some have mentioned first. Go to the location of the fistula and find it; then insert into that crack a thin needle, that is, a thin cannula, which has this shape. And melt into it a quantity of a drachma of lead, and hold your hand with the needle firmly, so that it does not move at all, nor run, or let the melted lead reach its eye.
And it is necessary that you place over the patient's eye a poultice dipped in albumen or water.
Lead indeed burns the site of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful cure.
If the fistula is healed by cauterization and treatment, as we have said, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to make a nostril opening and reduce the fistula to flow along the course of the nose, according to which it will return to its proper place.
§ On the method of cauterization in lip cracks.
Many times cracks occur on the lip, which are called pilings, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these cracks, as we have said in the division of illness, and cure does not come about, then use a small fire cautery knife, in this form.
And the depth of it should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Then immediately apply the same fire rapidly into those cracks until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
Then apply care with bandage until it heals.
On the manner of cauterizing a mouth fistula.
When an abscess occurs at the root of a tooth, or on the palate, or among the roots of teeth; then pus forms and it ruptures; afterwards it scarifies, and pus flows out, creating a fistula; then one must treat it immediately, and not delay cure, so that with the right amount of heat, cauterization be applied to the fistula. Then insert the same burning instrument into the opening of the fistula and hold your hand until it reaches deep down to its end, and the very last part; do this once or twice.
Then take care of it afterward, as we said about treatment until it is cured.
If therefore the infection is drained and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to remove the place and take away the corrupt bone according to what comes to its head.
**On the manner of cauterizing gingiva and softened teeth.**
When the gum becomes soft due to moisture, and the teeth move and are no longer secure, and treatment with medicines does not help, then place the patient's head in your lap.
Then apply a heated cautery, whose shape will come after these steps, so that you place a cannula over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it; hold your hand for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And withdraw your hand; then repeat the cautery as many times as necessary.
Then have the patient fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour; then spit it out.
The tooth, having moved, becomes fixed; the softened gum tightens, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
# On the Painful Cauterization of Teeth.
When the pain of a tooth is due to coldness, or there is actual frost on it, or the nerve is affected, and treatment with medicines does not help, then the cautery should be applied in two ways: either with butter, or with fire.
However, his cautery with butter is like taking rancid butter and making the wound boil in a metal cauldron or in veins. Then take a cloth and wrap it around the affected part. Then immerse the wound in hot butter: place it eagerly on the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes numb; then repeat this several times until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
If, however, you use a cloth or a bandage in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth, then put a hot iron on top until the fire reaches deep into the cavity of the tooth.
His cauterization with fire is to aim for the air tube or the iron tube. And it should be in the body something of thickness so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the lower jaw.
Then apply the cautery fire, which has come together: place it on that tooth and hold your hand until the cautery becomes numb.
Do this several times, for the pain will be moved, or on that same day or another day.
And for the impression of that cautery, it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good lint and hold it for one hour, after which he should expel it.
And this is the form of cautery.
Cauterize with any available extremity according to what is possible, and this is the form of a cannula.
§ On the method of cauterization in fistulas.
When fistulas are affected by phlegm, and cold humors, and do not respond to treatment with medicines, and the limbs cannot digest them quickly, then apply a cautery of fire, whose form is as follows.
It should have two open extremities so that smoke can escape from the cautery at the other end; and place the flame upon the skin once, and a second time, if needed, until it reaches deeply into the fistula.
If the fistula is shallow, then apply the cautery according to its depth.
Then leave it for three days and apply a compress of butter on top until the charred part is removed by the heat.
Then apply a cure to it with an ointment of the tooth, until the shape of the canal is healed.
In terms of cauterization for hoarseness, and the constriction of the breath.
When moisture accumulates over the lung canal, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be given a solution of medicine first.
Then apply cauterization to it at the base of the throat in a depressed area; and be careful, so as not to come across the cautery with the throat or the skin, unless it is necessary.
Then apply another cautery to it at the joint of the neck on the last spine, completing its final stage; and let the cautery follow the same manner as the one preceding it.
Then apply treatment with what has come before until it is healed.
In the manner of cauterization for lung ailments and coughing.
When cough and pulmonary illness are due to cold moistness, and the patient has neither fever nor phthisis, nor is the disease of long standing, then cauterize him with two instruments above the fork in depressed places with cloth or blades. And with another cautery instrument in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cautery be a tube according to its preceding form.
And if your cautery involves piercing with a cautery instrument called the "Punctum," whose form precedes in the piercing of the ear, then there should be thirty dots or so.
Then take care of him with what precedes until he is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches according to this form. Why should the cautery be performed with him when you make one single cut with three cautery instruments?
Chapter 27.
When the head of the helper (i.e., the shoulder blade) becomes dislocated due to moisture and does not return to its place within a reasonable time, until it develops a habit of returning, then it should be reduced with a slight movement that occurs as we have already witnessed it, at this point, it is necessary for you to reduce the dislocation first. Then the patient should be turned over on their back or side. Then take hold of the skin, which is on the inner side of the joint, with your left hand fingers; and if the dislocation moves to the inner side,
Then take the burning instrument with two jaws. What is this shape?
Then burn the skin until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the burning will have four burns.
And when the burning is done with an instrument having three jaws, then the shape of the burn becomes six, and the jaws are according to the thickness of the skin.
And this is the shape of the burn with three jaws.
And if one is added to this manner, then there are eight burns.
Then put crushed salt on the burn. Then make the patient lie still to prevent any movement of the limb until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is towards the upper parts, and this rarely happens, then cauterize it over the humerus with a hot iron, or with many incisions.
For when the joint is stabilized and the moisture removed, then the patient is healed.
**On the Method of Cauterization of the Stomach.**
When there occurs in the stomach a mixture of cold and great moisture, until they extract it from its condition, and the catarrhs multiply towards it, and persistent treatment does not help; then the patient should lie on his back, stretch out his legs, and extend his hands. Then cauterize it with three hot irons, one under the cochlear breast in the shape of a finger, and two below the two sides of the same iron, until a triangular shape of the cauterized area is obtained. And stretch it between both so that they do not join when they form pus.
And the depth of the cauterization should be the thickness of two-thirds of the skin.
And let the shape of the incisions be as follows without addition: and if you make a deep incision with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form, then let the cautery be made into one cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by making points on it that are burned away by this cautery; and it is as if signs are made on the stomach with a point according to the quantity desired when using encaustic; then it is cauterized again with the cautery point; then it is treated with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
§ On the method of cauterization: Use the cold.
When there is pain in the liver due to cold, moisture, or excessive pressure, until it releases its natural excess and the patient recovers as we said, and does not improve in that condition: then the patient should be placed with his head raised, and three signs made with encaustic cautery according to this form, and the same quantity of burning below the hypogastric region where the elbow of the man reaches; and let there be space between every cautery according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be straight according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And the quantity of it that is burnt should be according to the thickness of the skin, half its quantity not added; and let the patient stand on his feet.
If he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already stretched his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of cauterization.
And it is indeed possible for you to cauterize these wounds with a surgical knife when subtlety and caution are on your side in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too far in cauterization, lest the thickness of the skin throughout becomes severe, affecting the whole body and reaching the intestines; because the skin there is thin, so be aware of that.
# The Method of Cauterization for the Liver.
When there occurs a perforation and you know that this apostema is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic; then if it is in the flesh of the liver, an intense and severe pain appears, without acuity; and if it is in the tunic of the liver, the pain is severe with acuity. And now you see that his treatment has exhausted the doctors.
Therefore, the patient must lie down on his back. Then follows a drawing of the place of the wound with wax, then a flame of cautery which resembles a ray. And this is its form. And it is cauterized with one cautery until the whole skin is burned and it reaches healing, until all the pus is drained; then care is taken for its own cure of the wounds, until it is healed.
And this kind of cautery should not be used unless one's study in the art of medicine is prolonged; and by whose hands these illnesses concur with experience several times, then he may dare to perform such operations.
To be sure, it is better for me to release her.
## On Cauterization in Pleurisy.
The ancients said that cautery with roots of aristolochia is used for cold pleurisy according to this method. And it is, that you receive from the dried roots of aristolochia long roots, one root longer, which is found from that, and it should be like the thickness of a finger. Then immerse it in oil; and light it on fire. Then apply a hot iron to the space between the fork of the bone and its neck, and with two small irons, make slight inclines underneath, towards the part below the beard.
And with two irons, make slight inclines also between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the rear a little; and with another iron in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And with three irons from the rear: one in the space between the two ribs; and with two irons on both sides of the chest, below the iron that is between the two ribs.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the iron; indeed, it should be applied to the skin so that it smells clearly.
And certain ancient writers have said that there are men who use an iron like a ray to burn, and they insert it between the ribs until it reaches the spot, and then let it emerge, so that the pus comes out; as we said about the rib of the liver.
But in this piercing with the iron, there is a danger that either the patient dies immediately, or a fistula occurs at the site, which does not heal.
On the manner of cauterizing the spleen's head (32)
When you treat an illness of the spleen, as we said, by dividing the illness rather than applying treatment directly, then cauterization should be performed on it according to three methods, all of which are correct.
Of these, one involves making three or four incisions along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the smaller livers (the ones preceding it in order).
And for all cauterizations, the thickness should be that of a finger, or slightly more or less.
And the method of cauterization, as we said in the cauterization of the liver, should be equal.
And do not compress your hand with the cauterization; let it be weak, lying upside down on its back.
And another method of cauterization is as follows: having a fire with two burning ends, as we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus, raise the skin that is directly on the spleen where the lower left cubit arrives, and make your elevation such that you raise the skin according to the width of the body, so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body.
Then insert two burning ends into it with great force until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then extract the cautery; thus, four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a caustic agent while holding three wounds,
Then, after releasing the pus for many days, care for the cauterization; for it is more beneficial than any other that preceded from treatment.
§ On the method of cauterization in hydrops.
The cauterization should not fall in hydrops, unless it is properly applied.
When you treat a hydrops with the treatment methods that we mentioned in division, and the treatment does not improve, then you should cauterize the four wounds around the navel, and one wound on the stomach, and another on the epigastrium, and one over the spleen, and two behind the back between the spines, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then, allow the open cauterization to release pus over a long time.
And do not remove the weak from treatment after cauterization, for it is necessary that two intentions be joined to it; and it will speedily recover with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be curved; it should follow the preceding form. And that of the one with which the back is cauterized should be oil-shaped; it should follow its preceding form.
Regarding the method of cauterizing feet and crurs (lower legs).
When they have been bathed in hydrolic water and refilled with citron water: it is necessary that the cautery be applied on the back of the foot at the instep, which is between the big toe and the little finger: then raise your hand with the cautery, without twisting it, and afterward, raise your hand again, without touching it at all.
The citron water will resume its flow, and the cautery should be shaped according to this form.
Then make two cauteries on each of the two crurs (lower legs) all the way through, and let the edge of the cautery knife be the shape of the cautery; and make the cautery according to the length of the leg, one below the knee and another lower down, approximately in the middle of the leg; and make two cauteries over every thigh as well; and leave the open cautery without care for a long time, so that some water may resume from it; then tend to the cautery as we have said regarding the others.
Regarding the method of cauterizing inside the abdomen.
Chapter XXXIV.
When the solution of the entrails is from cold and humors, until the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, it is not cured by usual remedies but only seems to be so; and you see the patient enduring the burning of excessive vitality. Then cauterize him with a great cautery over his own stomach, as was done previously in the cauterization of the stomach with a circular cautery, and with four small cauteries around the navel, using a thin cautery or two. And also with a great cautery above the anus, or with two cauteries.
If you observe excessive humors and the patient endures it, then cauterize him with a cautery over the breast and another over the whole body; and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large one on the stomach.
Indeed, cure is effective whose aid does not err.
**On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.**
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids, or one large one, coming from thick, cold, or corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in division, but the cure does not help, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the lower spine just below the hip bone slightly triangularly, and with a cautery under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and his food is not digested, and you see his face turn pale, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with another cautery over his intestines, and another over his spleen with a key cautery; and leave the open cautery for some time. Then tend to him until he is healed.
Chapter XXXVII
When you remove the athelul, then light the cautery that is similar to a radium. Then insert the ignited cautery into the athelul you have removed; and with your final hand movement, continue until the cautery reaches the venous orifice from which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many athelul, then cauterize each one with a cautery as we have mentioned. Then tend to them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize him with a large cautery over the ulcer, it is the last resort in treatment.
On the method of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the instructions given for the section and operation as described in its place, and is frightened away from it, he may perhaps be healed by cauterization.
When a fistula therefore occurs with someone and becomes old, pus runs from it, and the corrupted humors (fluids) become worse. Therefore, it is more important that you probe it carefully with a delicate instrument. Then, determine the depth of the fistula with the probe.
Then, apply the cautery instrument, which is similar to a knife. Then, introduce the burning instrument itself into the fistula, and determine how far the closure went.
And apply cautery repeatedly to it until all the corrupted parts are healed, once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve, if it is there, or a large vein; or if the fistula extends to the urinary body, or to the intestinal body, then guard yourself from these places altogether.
And do not perform this unless there is a fistula in a fleshy part, and you think that it does not penetrate.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed.
And if materials do not separate from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a deep corruption of its bone, or as if it were those [materials] returning to their place.
§ On cauterizing wounds.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or excessive heat, and they become weakened because of it, then one should cauterize over them with a hot iron on both kidneys, using cautery with a claw-like instrument whose memory precedes it.
And perhaps we cauterize it a second time in the same heat. That is why three lines appear. Therefore they will be the last resort in treatment.
On the method of cauterizing the vesica (bladder).
When debility and relaxation from cold and moisture affect the bladder, until it can no longer retain urine, then cauterize it in its lower part, starting at the place where the hairs begin, with a cautery from above and another from below; and let the length of this cauterization be according to the thickness of a thumb. And cauterize the base with a single cautery or two, as needed, following the same procedure as before.
On the method of cauterizing the matrix (uterus).
When cold and moisture affect the matrix (uterus), preventing it from becoming pregnant, causing its menses to be disturbed and their onset is delayed, resulting in pain during their appearance, then it should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we said regarding the cauterization of the bladder, and with a cautery above the lower back or two cauteries; and let the cauterization be done carefully.
On the method of cauterizing an anch (nerve) in a dislocation.
When the humors of the mucous membrane are discharged into the anch (nerve), they become the cause of its exit from its place; and this is indicated by the foot being prolonged over the other when compared again, and the site of the dislocation is found to be hollow in that place.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weakened anch (nerve) with a similar circle of cauterization over itself: after you have marked with encaustics around the anches, as required; and so that the anch itself falls in the middle of the circle.
If this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize itself with three cauteries, using a large oleary cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be made according to the thickness of the skin throughout all parts.
Then take care of it, until it is healed.
**On the method of cauterizing in Sciatica.**
When pain occurs in the joint due to cold and dampness, and this treatment, as we have mentioned in division, does not bring relief or cure, but rather worsens the condition, then it is necessary to dissolve the patient from thick humors with foul pills, or artificial pills, and similar remedies. Then cauterize it.
The mode of cauterization in such cases is according to two methods: either cauterization with medications that cause burning, or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many methods.
One of these methods is to cauterize the joint itself with three triangular cauteries in this form. And make them deep, either good or bad. And let the space between each cautery be of the thickness of a finger; and the cautery should be olive-shaped.
However, when a cautery is made in the middle on top of the joint itself. Why are there four incisions?
And if you use a circular incision, whose shape precedes the displacement of the ankle bone in the incision, there should be one: so as to make a circle that contains the entire ankle bone.
And burn the thickness of the skin throughout.
This is the method of incision in sciatica, when the pain is attached to the bone itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends to the thigh and leg, then make two incisions above the coxa, over the place where the patient feels pain, and a third incision with your four fingers at the inner part of the calf; this is a scalpel incision.
And the depth of the incision should be according to the depth of the skin's thickness.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends almost to the toes, then make an incision there where he feels it, with a point, or three points, or four, or as many as needed.
And if he indicates that the pain is below the knee towards the leg, then make an incision there with a single scalpel.
And for this reason, in all your cauterizations, take care so that you do not burn the last nerves or a large artery, and draw it up to the damaged part of the body, or cause contraction.
And I myself have seen one and another who cauterized on the surface of the wound and ended up in cauterization, so that the foot was swelled until the tumor spread to it and perforation occurred throughout, and the entire foot became corrupt: then there was a rupture of the abdomen, and death followed.
If there is pain in both parts at the same time, cauterize them both according to this manner.
And certain wise ones have spoken about cauterizing the ankle, of which this is the manner. Make a similar one from iron, whose diameter is half the palm: and it should be near its opening according to the thickness of the finger, or a little less; and within that, a third of its size.
And the space that is between every joint should be of the thickness of a thumb; and the joints should be open from both sides; and their height should be about a knot, or two knots; and make them handles out of well-suited iron within the joints.
Then it is ignited in fire until it blazes and throws off sparks. Then it should be placed over the wounds of the ill-lying patient on his healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round burns in one application.
Then allow it to heal for three days. After that, apply a butter poultice and allow the open wound to heal over many days. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Says Albucasis, of this kind of cauterization, we make use little because of the appearance of fear towards it and also because we find few who expect from it.
However, it is from good cauterization that he who endures finds relief and discovers his place with it.
But when cauterization is combined with medicines, as you make two identical ones having a perforated armillar key, into which descends the hinge of its gate made of iron or metal, in length corresponding to the wall, there are two knots, or rather like them at its height.
And there should be a space between both that is as thick as the finger, open below and above, and it should contain itself inwardly according to this form.
Then he places it on top of a pillow, with the sick person lying on their healthy side. And press your hand firmly on the pillow. Then make a paste between two circles of warm water heated with fire slightly, and hold it for the duration of an hour: and the patient will bear the bite and its burning, because he himself finds a bite like fire until it subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from the wound entirely with sweet water; then leave it for three days.
And place butter on it until the burn's blackness is removed; and leave it for several days, and pus will flow from it. It is indeed the last resort in healing.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or the leg: make for it a support that holds water equally as you did for the wound.
And this is the way of hot water; and I have already written about it in the book on rectifying medicines. Take some alkali and unburned limestone, each one-half part; wash both, and put them into a new pot, whose lower part is perforated with a small hole, according to the amount that will enter itself into the radius: and place under the bottom of the pot another pot drained; and throw over the alkali and lime from sweet water, which will submerge both by the finger: after which compress them well with your hand, and leave the pot until sharp water descends to the lower part of the drained pot.
Then add all that water and throw it over another lime; and continue until it renews itself.
For at that time it will be very sharp and acute, which is administered in many medical operations, and in the cauterization of the other members. Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And there are medicines with which large burns are cauterized, such as pitch, and myrrh, and oak calx with soap, so that both are mixed.
And Galen indeed relates that an ancient man had a cure for the pain of the hip and sciatic nerve, and he praised it very highly. And he said that it did not need any other cure, and that he was healed at once, until he returned, because perhaps he had gone into the bath to be washed, and came out of it already healthy.
And it is taken from the green of a fresh wound; if not found fresh, it is taken dry and raw. It is then heated with some fat and placed over the aching spot, in the thigh or elsewhere, and bound, and left for three hours, or as much or little time as the patient feels relief from the heat. Then introduce it into the bath.
When therefore the body is cooled, introduce it into the bed. For the pain withdraws, and it is healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines unless after evacuating the body.
And Dioscorides said that when the vein of a sciatic condition is cauterized with goat dung, it brings relief; and so the cauterization is made in this manner. Take the wool and imbibe it with ancient oil, and place it over the deep spot that lies between the big toe and the toe next to it, closer to the latter.
Then take the dry goat dung and burn it on fire until it becomes a charcoal.
Then place it upon the wound and leave it until it heals. Then repeat this process. Therefore continue doing this until sensation returns to the middle and the pain ceases.
And this method of burning is called the vaccine burn.
**On the burning of the back's pain.**
Sometimes pain occurs in the back for many reasons, whether from accident or chance, or due to excessive evacuation or similar conditions, through the infusion of cold and moist matter; and a burn does not occur unless only in this particular way, which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the infection with foul pills and similar remedies, three lines should be made on the back where there is pain, according to its width, after marking signs with encaustics along every line, five or more cauterizations, according to the quantity that has come from the nurse's tolerance, and then the cauterization is performed at the site of the cauterization point.
And if you wish, cauterize three times with cautery, or four times, using a cautery on the mid-clasp, in this form.
**On the method of cauterization in the treatment of gangrene.**
This illness often occurs in small children.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that a tightness occurs in their breathing at the elevation, and movement; and you will find it in the lowest vertebrae of the back and the knots of its tendons, which have already begun to protrude above the other vertebrae.
When you therefore see that, and wish to do that, then cauterize the same with a circular cautery in this form.
And let the cautery take hold over all parts of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a point cautery, make two or three lines, and the points should be close together.
Then take care of the place until it heals as we said.
And beware, do not administer cautery on the curvature that occurs in nerve spasm.
On the method of cauterization for podagra and joint pains.
When joint pains are caused by cold moistures that extend to any part of the body, and there are pains in the feet, it is commonly called podagra by physicians.
When podagra is caused by cold and the pains do not disappear with usual treatments, then cauterization should be applied to alleviate the pains.
And it is done by cauterizing the area around the joint of the foot after draining it with many cauterizations, and the cautery should be olive oil.
And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then make them with a cautery point. If the pains rise up to the knees or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize the entire knee with three or four cauterizations from every side using the same cautery (a claw).
However, if more of this cautery is necessary for you, then cauterize the whole part. And do not immerse your hand in the cautery, but rather it should be placed around the thickness of the skin only.
However, if the pains rise to the knees and back, then administer what we have said from the cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then make dots around the instrument with a fire, as two lines are resolved.
However, if there remains pain in the fingers, then make dots on them, over every knot and over the palm of the hand.
If however the pains rise after days to the cubits or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not force the weak from good regulation, from receiving medicines. For if good regulation is done, and the phlegm yields, it will be healed with God's help through this cautery.
# Regarding the Method of Cauterization in Ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine descends or moves towards the testicle, and it begins to cause pain, then it is necessary that you order the patient to stop eating on that day. And it should be treated with gentle means so that the faeces can descend from their abdomen.
Then make the patient sit between your hands on their back, and order them to hold their breath until the wind or intestine is discharged.
Then use your fingers to reduce the swelling, and make a mark with hot wax below the rupture across the rib cage, where the end of the mark resembles half of a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then use a hot iron with this shape until it turns white and discharges pus. Then reduce the intestine or wind to its normal state. Then the assistant should place their hand over the area to prevent the intestine from escaping, and you, having already opened between the patient's legs and placed a poultice there, should put another on top of it, and another one across their legs and another across their chest holding the hands.
Then place the hot iron over the mark, with your hand holding the cautery tool upright. And hold it firmly until you gain access to the mouth with it; or use it again with another application if you have not gained access to the mouth with it at first.
And observe carefully from the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization to avoid burning it, and let it heal through that, over the sick or death, or a great evil.
And know that when you do not gain access to the mouth with your cautery, your operation will not succeed.
And it is necessary that the cautery of infants be subtle, according to their measure.
Then take care with the rest of the ointments until it heals.
And the sick person should lie on their back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to provide his nourishment for the duration of his healing time, so as to soothe his bowels; that the intestine does not come out at the effort and expulsion.
Then, when you want to rise after forty days, then administer a well-made ligature and hold it for another forty days.
And it becomes smaller from labor, and from the fullness of food and drink, and from restless conversations.
For when this regime is used, thus is healed with complete healing.
And I will speak of the cure for ruptures with an incision in its chapter.
When ruptures occur in the remainder of the stomach, and they are incipient, and you see that they do not add up, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and it should be treated as if it were a third of its original size from then on. Then, the cure itself, with what we have said: and it does not add up.
And some have said before: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
Afterward, it is sealed with wax, and a line is placed that goes across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line downwards. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery clamp.
But the first cautery is easier and better.
On the method of cauterizing wounds due to trauma or impact.
**Chapter XLVIII**
When, in certain parts of the body, pain occurs due to a wound or impact and it persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medications, then it should be cauterized with a point cautery.
And the cautery of every member should be according to its size, and its thinness or thickness, and its strength, and its position in torsion, and the pain from it.
If it is cured from the first cauterization, then it is good. If not: then repeat the cauterization on top of it.
Because, according to the custom of these pains, they should be transferred from one member to that which is nearest. Therefore, it is necessary to follow this with cauterization until the sick member is cured.
**On the method of cauterizing leprosy.**
But sometimes lepers may be cured by the greatest means of cautery. And in particular, the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy: so consider how to cauterize this very condition.
If leprosy is beginning to appear and you have cured it as we stated before, but it does not disappear or recede, and you fear that the corruption has spread over all his skin, then cauterize him with five wounds: one in the center of the forehead, a second below it facing the front near the ends of the hair, two above the horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And with your last hand, apply the cautery for a short while until it leaves a slight mark on the bone and the flesh is dislodged from it, so that the expulsion of the gross humors may be facilitated, and cauterize it again over the spleen, as has been mentioned before.
But if leprosy has now spread over the body and appears clearly manifest, then it is necessary to cauterize with these very wounds that we have mentioned on the head, and over the ends of the nose, and two on each cheekbone, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one at the place called the great buttock, and one above it, in the same breast, and two over both breasts, one over each shoulder, and two over the elbows, and two over the softness of his chest: and cauterize him also over every joint, from the joints of his fingers and toes; and cauterize him over every heel of his feet, and the soles of his hands.
And be aware of the nerves that are above the last part of the heel, so as not to burn them.
And sometimes when a burn is caused by a hot iron on the rib bone, another on the stomach bone, and yet another on the epigastrium.
And know that the more you apply heat, the greater the relief and the better the outcome.
And know that the sick person does not experience pain from a burn as those who are healthy do; this is because their body is already numbed.
And the burns should be of the appropriate size and depth according to the members and joints; according to what has been mentioned regarding the types of instruments.
Then care for the burns with flour and herb paste with honey, and continue healing until it is cured.
**On the method of burning in stupor.**
When a member is stupored and cured with drugs, oils, and plasters but does not heal, then burn that stupefied member with hot irons according to the degree of severity of the member or its lightness.
And let your cauterization be made through the thickness of the skin somewhat. Then apply the cure with ointment until it is healed.
And when it is cauterized to something that causes a loss of sensation, which happens to the hand and foot, on the spinal bones near the exit of the nerves that move that limb; then the sensation returns.
Indeed, one should not presume over it unless they are wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter LI.
When Albucasis is outdated and does not offer anything new from the art of medicine; then cauterize over that cautery deeply somewhat, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
Then apply the cure with flour of herbs, and meal of lentil with rose oil, and leaves of arni, and blood of pigeon, and blood of hind: take a part from each; mix all these together, and spread them on a cloth, and let it adhere to the place until it is healed.
On the method of cauterization for cancer.
When cancer is just beginning and the ulcer itself is not too large, cauterize it with a hot iron following its curve, as is customary.
However, some have said that it should be cauterized with the final iron in the middle.
But I do not find that to be the case, for I fear it might ulcerate, and I have already seen it several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized along its circumference with a circle, as we said, or with many hot irons.
On the method of cauterization for gangrene.
When anyone has gangrene and its healing is delayed because of excessive moisture or old age when the blood supply is scanty, or because of time, and one wishes to hasten the maturation of the gangrene, then cauterize it along its circumference with many small hot irons puncturing it. Then release her. She will grow eager as the healing progresses.
If, however, you see an opening in the wound after applying a caustic, then use fire to cauterize it, which has this form.
And place it (the caustic) in the middle of the ulcer until it penetrates the skin; and let the cauterization follow from this, as the disease permits, to free the flow of pure blood.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
§ Regarding cauterization in minor corrosions.
Head (of the cautery instrument)
The corrosion is nothing but the destruction in a moving member, and it corrupts itself; just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see corrosion in a place that can tolerate cauterization with fire, then use many small and large cauteries, according to what is suitable for the place where the corrosion exists.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the entire corruption is eradicated and nothing remains of it deeply.
Then leave it for three days, and place over the burned areas finely ground sulfur mixed with oil, until all the scabs and every corruption are eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that nourish the flesh.
So if you see that after three days the flesh grows with a healthy newness in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization over what remains from the corrupted places.
And the corrosive (ulcer) is sometimes treated with sharp medicine. It (the healing) itself arises at the site of cauterization.
However, cauterization with fire is more useful for rapid healing: and indeed I have already said that cauterization should be done with sharp medicine in division; so take it there when you need it.
§ On the method of cauterization in claws, and warts.
Chapter LVII.
This affliction often occurs in the lower parts of the foot; it is a serious, deep matter that affects the foot.
And indeed, there is cautery in them according to two methods: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
As for when using fire, it is like a heated cautery pen; it should be made of iron, according to the amount that contains the claw from all sides, and it should have thin margins.
Then place the heated iron on top of the claw. Then take the hand with the cautery around the claw, until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw, and leave it for three days, until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply it with a paste made from crushed garlic mixed with salt, and leave the paste on top overnight. It will indeed be eradicated from its roots.
Then take care of the place with a healing ointment made from meat until it is healed.
If they are not improved, and this often happens on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then apply cautery to them with hot water. And it is as if you take a tube made of copper, or iron, or from a duck's quill, and place it over the claw, or whatever else. Then he pushes a small amount of warm water into the tube. Hold your hand and twist it slightly with the pressure of your hand so that the edge of the tube is pressed against the root of the nail, and the warm water finds its way down to the root of the nail. The patient should wait for about an hour after the application of the warm water.
Then release it, for the nail is eradicated along with its roots.
Do this with each one after the other until you have passed over all that are in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been eradicated, using what generates flesh from ointments.
§ On the method of cauterizing in tremor.
When someone experiences tremor due to cold in a nerve, or from quartan fever, or any other cause: then it is necessary to cauterize the tremor with four or five burns on the spine, and between each vertebra with a cautery, and over the breast with a cautery, and over the stomach with a cautery.
For tremor ceases with hot cautery, and hastens the health of cold disease.
On the method of cauterization, Al-Battar.
Head (Chapter) LVII.
Sometimes, the body expels impurities, that is, pustules caused by corrupted coarse materials.
Therefore, when appearing, it is necessary to cauterize each head of the pustules with a thin iron, the end of which is heated by fire, in the first instance. Or with the root of the long aristolochi. Or with a lens cautery.
And when they (the pustules) are cauterized in this way, after being expelled initially, they do not increase, and the excess is broken off, making them heal.
However, it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
On the method of cauterization in the flow of blood from an artery in the vein.
Many times there occurs a flow of blood from an artery that has been cut near the wound, which happens externally or near the incision of the scar tissue or cauterization of the member, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to sever it.
Therefore, if this should happen to anyone, then apply with your proper hand to the opening of the artery, and place over it your index finger: and tighten it much, until the blood is obstructed under your finger, and nothing escapes from it.
Then place in fire small pieces of oil-soaked material, and many more in great numbers: and blow over them until they become very hot.
Then take from them one, or a few, or a large one, according to the wound and place where the artery is broken, and apply the cautery over the vein, after which you remove your finger quickly: and hold the cautery until the blood stops.
Which if it is expelled with the removal of the finger from the opening of the artery, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another cautery from the cauteries that are prepared over fire.
Do not therefore stop doing this with one after another until the blood stops.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and let not another harm come to the weak.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to cut off the same; especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods. Or when using cauterization, as we said. Or when using extraction, if it cannot be extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends contort and the blood cuts off. Or it is tied with a strong ligature thread. Or they place over it medicines that stop the flow of blood and tighten it with a suitable constriction.
He who performs the cutting with a ligature and tightness with cloth, or by positioning things that burn and similar things, does not do it thoroughly, but rarely.
If it happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine: then he should begin by positioning his index finger over the wound's vein opening as we described, and tightening it strongly until the blood stops from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be moved from its position until the blood cools and thickens, and is cut off.
And meanwhile, he should consider what is needed from cauterization or medicine for that.
**On Incision, Puncture, and Phlebotomy in Wounds and Similar Conditions**
As we said in Chapter One, every sickness that involves the use of fire for cauterization and burning medicine, along with its occasions, causes, instruments, and types of cauterization.
And I have placed chapters there from head to foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path: so that it may be clear to those who seek knowledge about these topics.
And before I begin that, it is necessary for you, my child, to learn from the fear that is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, it requires greater caution, since in the operation that is in this chapter, many times there is a loss of blood when opening a vein, or making an incision over a tumor, or opening an exit, or healing a wound, or extracting an arrowhead, or cutting on stone, and similar things; from all of which trembling and fear arise, and in many cases, death results.
And I warn you, let not that which causes hesitation fall upon you, for at some point they will come to you in this art of human conditions with the conditions of illnesses. For some, when afflicted by their illness, they become angry, and for them, death is gentle; because of the remedies they find from their illness and the duration of their malady. And when illness is from fear that signifies death.
And there are those who give their doctor his due and trust him with themselves, hoping for health, but their illness is destructive.
Therefore, it is not necessary that you give consent to him who comes to you from those whose way is such. And let your caution be more vigilant than your greed and ravenousness. And do not presume over anything from that, unless after certain knowledge which verifies with you the admirable outcome of what has come to pass.
And apply yourselves to the care of all your sick, with prognosis and indication for what is fitting for health.
In that, indeed, lies your aid in acquiring fame and glory, as well as memory and praise.
God inspire you, his children, with His wisdom, and do not take away from you guidance and inspiration, for it is in His hands.
And I have indeed arranged this chapter by distinguishing it into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the head down to the feet: so that you may find whatever you seek from it, and whatever you need.
§ On the healing of water gathered in the heads of children.
HEAD I.
Know that this condition often occurs in children at birth, or when the midwife tightens the child's head without ease.
And whenever it happens, even due to hidden causes that are unknown.
And I myself have not seen this affliction in others as much as in children, and to every one of them death has followed: therefore it has been necessary for me to abandon the procedure regarding it.
And I indeed saw from them a boy, whose head was filled with water, and his head was magnified every day until he could not sit on himself because of the magnitude of his head; and the humidity increased until he died.
And this humidity, indeed, is either aggregated between the skin and bone or aggregated under the bone on the surface.
And the operation in that case, if there is humidity between the skin and bone and an aperture is formed, then you need to make a crack of one length across the middle of the head, and its width should be as two knots, until the humidity flows.
And this is the form of a fracture.
If the humidity is therefore increased even more, and the aperture becomes larger, then place these two cracks according to this form.
And if the humidity is under the bone and its sign is that you see the openings of the head commissures from every side, and the water sinks down when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and it does not disappear from your sight, then you need to make three cracks in the middle of the head according to this mode.
And after the cut, extract all the humidity. Then tighten the wounds with cloth and bandages. Then sew it up from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.
Then loosen the ligature, treat the wound with bandages and ointments.
And do not forget to tie the head with equal tension. And feed the weak with dry food slightly moistened, until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another way of making an incision, so that you consider where the extent of the abscess appears and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is in the nape, or at the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore, ascend with the incision where you see the abscess and the gathering of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And beware, do not cut the artery, and let there be no flow of blood, and the weak one may die from that flow with the evacuation of humidity.
On the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
**Chapter II.**
When anyone suffers from cataracts in the eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic and does not respond to medical treatment, then the final remedy is through the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one decides to incise them, they should remove the sick head. Then, using a rough cloth, prepare the area so that the arteries become visible. Then the patient should tighten their weak neck with any cloth they have. Then, consider where the pulse of the vein is. And the locations of both [arteries] are the areas that are behind the depressed ears: and they are rarely obscured, except in certain individuals.
Then mark them with wax on both sides; and incise each one with a sharp blade on both sides accurately to the depth of the bone: and it should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, introduce a small spatula under the artery and cut it towards the upper parts with the incision.
And the length of the incision should be like two joined fingers.
For when an artery is incised, blood gushes out with a pulsating force, rising into the inside with frequent jumps.
However, if the artery is not visible to the eye, then it is necessary that the measurements from gold should be three fingers' width in quantity of space. Then mark with wax and find until it reaches the bone.
And that which needs to be released from blood is six ounces and perhaps you release more or less from it. All of it according to the amount that appears to you from the condition of the patient and the fullness of the artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if there remains something to the bone from the surgery, cut it so that it does not cause a hot abscess; then bind the wound with linen bandages.
Then, apply a poultice to it and continue to do so until it heals.
On the extraction of arteries, which are found in certain places (the body).
Head III.
When an old hemicranea (migraine) or sudden acute catarrh occurs because of sharp humors and heat in the brain's sinuses, or scrofula, a hard and painful swelling, and similar ailments, and the usual medical treatments do not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries from these parts or cauterizing them, as we have described.
And the method of extraction is to remove the weak hair from these parts and draw out the visible artery. Indeed, it (the pulse) reveals itself to you through its own rhythm, and is rarely hidden except in a few people or during sudden chills.
If it (the pulse) is hidden from you, then press your weak head with any cloth you have; then, place a rough cloth in the fearful spot. Or apply steam to the place with hot water until it (the pulse) appears manifestly to you. Then take a spatula that I formed a little while ago. Then use it to scrape the skin easily until you reach the artery. Then insert a hook into it and pull it towards the upper parts until you extract it from the skin, and make it glide out of the tunics that are under it from all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then insert it with the tip of the hook. Then make an incision from that part according to the amount that its ends are elongated and contract, so as not to cause a flow of blood. For if it is not incised and not severed, the blood will not flow completely.
Then pour out the blood from the wound six times using a cup, up to three times daily.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread made of silk or sheepgut, so that it does not flow into putrefaction before the wound has healed, and causes a flow of blood.
Then make an incision over the surplus, which is between the two ligatures. Perform that operation at that time, or after another hour.
And if you see it, cauterize it with a cautery up to the mouth, with a cautery knife; until its ends are exposed and it remains in place for the same operation.
And it is better work unless the patient has fever or is of heated complexion. Since the cautery is one of those things that help end moisture. Therefore it is better to drain it.
And after the arteries are extracted, the place should be filled with cooked old flesh; and small neatly made pieces of it should be placed on top of it.
And after the swelling is gone, it should be treated with dried medicines that make the flesh heal, and with liniments, until it is healed.
If meanwhile, while operating, a flow of blood from an artery occurs, then quickly proceed to cut it off with cautery, or fill the place with a pad; and hold your hand tightly until the blood stops. If none of those things is present to you, then put your finger on the place until the blood clots. And with a gentle application of water to the affected area, wait until the acute pain subsides and it tightens as necessary.
And because it is softer and easier to extract the artery, it is necessary to cauterize the vein with this cautery that has two knives; and the sharpness of both knives should be similar. However, they have much less sharpness than the two knives. Because if they are as sharp as the two knives, both cause cold; and they do not cut into the flesh quickly. Therefore, since there is a little less hardness in them, heat from fire is retained in them, and flesh is cut off quickly; so with this, it is necessary for every work, and better and easier.
And this is the form of the cautery.
And there should be a space between the two knives equal to the thickness of a finger, after you mark the two places with encaustic; and place both hot instruments vigorously until they reach the vein, and cut into the vein at two places: so that what is between its extremities will be elongated. For they do not solidify completely with this cautery.
**Chapter IV**
On the treatment of persistent acute tearing from the eyes.
When tears are persistent and flow from the eyes, which are situated on the outer part of the skull, and when medical treatments offer no relief; as the patient's face turns red and they experience a tremor similar to that of ants, and their eyes become weakened and watery, indeed, to the point that their hairs are damaged by the constant watering, and the eyelids are inflamed from the acuteness of the tears—then the ancient ones devised a treatment for them, which they called "the knife" (cum Ense).
And it is as if you urge the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead. Then, make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead; the length of each incision should be about two fingers, and one incision should be placed at the middle of the forehead, parallel to the nose, while the second should be a little below the movement of the eyebrows, and the third on the other side. Take care to avoid cutting into the arteries located on both sides. Extend your hand from the continuation of the lower jaw, and the distance between each incision should be about three fingers; prepare a piece of sponge or a dry cloth to absorb the blood.
Then, insert the sharp end of the instrument (spatumile) between the two incisions, which will then take on the desired shape. From the incision which is from the temporal part, to the second incision: and the scar tissue, together with it, all the skin which is between the two incisions, with the sutures which are on top of the mouth. Then do this also from the median incision to the second incision. Then extract this spatule, and insert another instrument into the first incision again, which is called a sharp knife, one side blunt, not sharp on the other side. And this is its form.
And place its sharp side against the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the mouth; and push it until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut away with it all the tendons that descend from the head to the eyes: except that the incision should be continued until what appears of the skin.
Then do that in the middle fissure until another fissure.
And when it flows from blood in equal quantity, express the places from which the clot of blood has formed.
Then put into each fissure lint made from old cloth, and place over them small pieces soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar. And observe that a fever does not occur.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large amount of the warm water infusion. Then apply that care using basilicon ointment to the wounds, and all other remedies as necessary; until they are healed.
Head V.
§ Regarding the treatment of acute tears and catarrhs affecting the eyes, from internal head conditions.
When someone experiences acute, severe, and persistent catarrh, you will observe their eyes to be weakened, hazy, and appearing exhausted; the eyelids are ulcerated, hair falls out of them, and there is a sharp, painful, deep ache in the head, followed by sneezing. In such cases, take from these occurrences that these materials do not appear from the nose unless from many sources.
And the better treatment for them is this. And it is that you should advise the sick person to scrub their face. Then make an incision in that groove located in the middle of the forehead or slightly broader across its width, and start from the time on the left to the right temple; and continue the incision until it reaches the bone; and stretch your hand away from the temporalis muscles, which move during mastication, until the incision is complete; and absorb all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate it between the two lips of the fissure with a hot iron or with linen lint. Then fasten it from above with strings; and moisten the strings with wine and oil so that there is no risk of a hot ulcer.
And when you loosen it and see that the hot ulcer is already approaching; then you should bite your lip until flesh begins to grow back in it.
Then take care of it with a regimens of excision that promotes the growth of flesh; such as if you take two parts from flour of wheat and four parts from colophony, and prepare a paste from them, and apply it to these wounds to promote the birth of flesh.
Chapter VI.
§ On the care of what falls into the gold.
Everything that falls into the gold belongs to one of four types: mineral stone or something similar to a rock, like iron and ore; from plants, such as chickpeas and beans; fluid substances, such as water, vinegar, and others similar to them; or some kind of animal.
When therefore something that resembles a stone or a kind of stone that does not combine with gold nor grows in it falls into the gold, expose the gold to the sun alone; if you then see the stone, some oil or resin from it will distil into the gold. Then he should administer the extraction of it and make a sneeze when you are ready, and press the nostrils with your fingers upon the onset of sneezing, after you place a piece of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear towards the upper parts.
Indeed, this treatment is often effective.
However, if it does not emerge, then administer the extraction with a gest (i.e., a subtle pizigarol): its form is as follows.
If therefore it emerges with the gest, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction with a subtle, slightly curved hook.
If therefore it does not emerge through that (method), then make a tube from metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole deeply, and press the matter around the tube with softened cerumen mixed with oil, so that there is no passage for air except through the tube; then extract it with your strong drawing force.
Indeed, it often emerges with what we described. However, if it does not emerge in that way: then take from helcalimbs or from viscose (i.e., prepared glue), with which birds are caught, a small amount; and place it on the end of a radius after you have wrapped it neatly with a cloth: then insert it into the ear hole easily, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If it does not exit with all that we have mentioned, then proceed to cut it before a hot apoplexy or spasm occurs.
The method of the incision is as follows: for an weak vein, especially in the head, the phlebotomist should draw blood according to the strength of the vein. Then place the infirm part between your hands, turn its ear towards the upper part, and find a small incision at the base of the ear, near its fat, in a depressed area. The incision should be in the shape of a crescent until you reach the stone, then remove it with whatever tools are available to you.
Then use your finger to make that incision with speed and care for it until it heals.
If the object that fell into the ear is one of those small grains that grow and inflate, then perform its extraction.
If it does not obey you for its exit, then take a thin, delicate spatula with this shape.
And use it to make an incision of that kind from the falling grains in the ear, and do not think that the grain is already moistened by the ear's vapor until you apply many strikes with the frusta, then remove it with hooks or with a delicate gesture or by suction, as we said, for its extraction to be alleviated.
When water is introduced into the ear, the patient must use a sneeze to expel it when it has been warmed and softened at first; and then he should lie down over that part of the ear where the water is. If it exits through that [way], then it is good.
And if it does not [exit], then take many small stones, as thin and light as a finger, warm them with fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of them into his ear opening; and pull out one from that part on his foot, striking with another stone the one inside his ear. He should therefore continue doing this with stones until all the water has exited.
And the water will exit so that you can take one part from the fire or from a wick and insert its tip into the ear; and light the other tip with fire until it burns most of it. Then he should repeat the process with another wick, doing this many times until all the water has exited; and then remove it with a tube as mentioned before using the stone.
When removing the animal that has entered it, if it is a small body, like a flea or something similar, treat it with care as I said in the division.
But if the body is large and appears to the senses, then perform its extraction with a gesture and hooks; and it will be easier than all that is held in the hand.
However, when dealing with the extraction of a bone inserted into the ear, since you address it as you did in the division and treatment of distillation, and your care does not bring about improvement, then you should look at the ear in the sun. If something appears there among the nerves, then extract it with a gesture or with delicate hooks.
If nothing appears there among the nerves, then take a tube whose form is narrow below and wide above, and insert its fine end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it using strong suction. Do that many times until all the nerves emerge.
If, however, they do not obey you for the exit, then press the area around the tube with wax, as I said on the stone.
If they do not emerge with what I said, then perform the distillations that the ancients have already been skilled in for the extraction of nerves, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your discharge be like pouring oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is depicted here. As you can see, make it like this from silver or brass, tightly wound below, with a small opening above and a larger one below.
It should therefore be made so that it can drive what is in the cavity of the tube, and it must be carefully made of brass. And if you wish, take a radium (or similar) instrument and insert its heated tip into the ear with careful insertion; then pour oil or succus or any of these medicines into the tube, and it should be in the ear. Then introduce the radium with the tip up and compress it gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the cavity of the ear, and it feels relieved inside. The substance inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire; beware that nothing cold distills into it, for medicines do not tolerate that.
**Chapter VII.**
**On the care of the surgical wound in the ear.**
Sometimes certain infants emerge from their mother's wombs unpierced.
And it has also happened to some people that the wound in the ear is born with them from a cut or flesh in it.
And this operation is sometimes performed in a deep hole in the ear, which does not follow the usual course; and sometimes it occurs on the outer part of the opening of the ear, and follows that course.
Therefore, what happens in the deep ear, and which does not fit the usual course of healing, is difficult to heal in many cases.
And in those that follow the usual course of healing, it is necessary to place a warm compress over the ear and examine it; then, if you see an opening appearing, open it with a fine instrument whose shape follows this (the description), so that its end has some slight width and one of its sides is sharp, while the rest of the instrument has two soft edges, in order not to harm the ear.
If the operation is caused by tissue grown within the ear canal, then hold it with a fine hook and cut it away easily until all the flesh is removed.
If the operation is in the deep ear, then take a thin, soft radium and heat it slightly with fire; thereafter, insert it into the ear canal.
Therefore, if you feel the operation with that which the patient presents with regarding hearing impairment, try to open it easily; however, be careful not to injure the ear's nerves.
Next, place a quantity of balm in the wound according to its size, which you have prepared in the Egyptian ointment: do this for several days until you are free from the healing of the wound.
Or take the balm, and mix it with rosewater, sprinkle it over the wound with powdered zinc, and use it.
If you see that the wound has already healed: then it is necessary to remove the balm and allow it with another balm that you apply in the bandage made with rose oil, until the heat of the healing subsides: then treat it until it is completely cured.
If, however, bleeding occurs: then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the wound: and use the remaining treatment, which stops the predicted blood flow as described in the distillation process.
**On the care of the eyelids.**
**Chapter VIII.**
These are the conditions that occur in the eyelids of the eye when they are sometimes humid and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezers or a hook, and cut them with a scalpel from their roots. Next, place a third layer of cloth over the wound.
However, if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a delicate lens-shaped hot iron.
And cauterizing them is better after an incision. Indeed, they often return when there is something left of their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn up, and they do not return.
**On the care of the eyelids of the eye.**
**Head IX.**
Often, something happens to the eyelids that resembles a grain (or stone) in its strength and hardness, and for that reason it is called "grandin": and it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation on them is therefore to consider at that time, if a grandin (or stone) is proceeding from it, which appears from the eyelid, and moves to every part, then its condition is easy.
Therefore, find the gap (fissure) above it through its width (latitude). Then, scrape it gently from all sides until it is smooth. Then, hang it with a hook and cut it off.
However, if you do not prepare to cut it, except after you have penetrated the eyelid with a slight cut, then it will cause harm to that weak part in some way.
If the gap (fissure) is large: then join it with stitches and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, it will not cause you any harm from that. Blood will indeed restore it and make it flesh again.
And if it declines greatly towards the inner part of the ear away from the surface, then turn the eyelid inside out and hang the lump with a hook; besides needing a cut, press it gently from all sides.
If the eyelid is elongated with a cut, it will not harm that part in any way.
Then wash the eye after making an incision with a saline water solution, and dress it with something that promotes healing until the patient recovers.
**On the care of eye sockets.**
**Chapter X.**
The lacrimal gland is a substance produced in the upper eyelid's tunic; indeed, it most commonly occurs in children, causing their eyes to water, and they suffer from cataracts in the morning, preventing them from seeing sunlight, due to tears flowing towards them, and you can see them always resting their faces and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are under the eyebrows humid, which has already been affected by swelling. The prominent appearance of the lacrimal gland is evident to the eye, and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the gland between them.
**And the method of its operation is that it places the patient's head in your lap.**
Then take a linen cloth and prepare it with a solution, and make a circle from it according to the quantity that contains the lacrimal gland from all sides. Then place it over the gland and press from all sides with your fingers to collect the lacrimal gland in the center of the circle.
Then he finds in the middle of that moisture, when the spatula is inserted, cracks that extend across the width, and there is no greater crack than that made in phlebotomy in deep tissues.
He must then find the whole skin, until he reaches the axilla, for Axilla proceeds from the crack according to the shape of the white, fatty edge.
Therefore, extract it with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers towards the exterior, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to add to the crack so as not to reach the eye with the spatula and injure it.
If, however, the axilla does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, add a little to the crack with ease until the axilla proceeds. Then extract it as we said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the area, and tighten them with bandages.
And there are people who rub salt on them and put it into the depth of the crack so that what remains of that moisture becomes liquid.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
If, however, a fever occurs at the site of an ulcer, treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the ways to restore vision, that is, when the eyelid becomes softened towards the eye, resulting in it not closing properly as it should.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the skin, and they become old: then they harm the eye and cause various diseases, such as frequent tears, eyelid softening, and whiteness, until it leads to the destruction of the eye.
And indeed, the restoration of the eye is done according to four methods. Or through cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or the restoration of the eye is done through incision and stitching. Or through tubes, as I will say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap. Then, with your left hand, turn the eyelids of the eye.
If it turns, then that is good. And if it does not turn: insert the needle into the fold where the lash of the lower part of the eyelid is located, and make it penetrate upwards with the thread, and place it near the hair itself, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with the radius.
Then, find the inner part of the eyelid beneath the added hairs with a spatula that cuts from the larger tear gland to the smaller one.
Then extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton or cloth beneath the eyelid; then mark the eyelid with wax in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be made in a shape according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid, since that varies in humans.
From these, there are some who require that the eyelid be cut away in great quantity, according to the amount that becomes soft from the eyelid.
Then, with the scalpel, find the two lines which you have marked, and begin from the larger tear to the smaller one, and let there be one fissure near the natural hairs, as is the thickness of the radius.
Then introduce the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape the entire area. Then sew together the two edges with a needle and fine thread, and blot the blood, and cause what is left of the hair to adhere above the two eyebrows, where some things may be sticking out, if you want to do that; and if not, take no concern.
Then leave the suture and thread until three or four days; after that, take care of it.
And if you want to leave the wound unsutured, take care of it so that it dries and shrinks. For the eyelid is lifted at the sealing of the wound and its healing; but it will be better in the future.
These methods of care were taught by the ancients.
However, there is concern about the weak, and it comes from good work, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method in ataxmia: it is such that signs on the eyelids form a figure like a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then, separate or join the three eyelids according to this form, and then cut away the excess with small scissors in accordance with this shape, with equal cuts.
If, however, it is not possible for you to hold the hook or if it does not match, then take a sharp instrument with which there is a thread, and insert it in the middle of the figure, and insert another thread near the larger tear, and the second thread near the smaller tear, and join the threads between your fingers equally.
Then, position your hand with an equal elevation, and raise the skin above which the mark is located, as we have described.
Then, join the two wounds of the lip with stitches, and take care of it until it heals.
If, indeed, an abscess occurs near your cut or crack, apply it with a poultice and similar treatments from healing ointments.
And when the eyelids also turn, as if their hair is turning.
Therefore, you must use what we have said about incisions, but the stitching of both is more artificial. On the care of the eye with dogs.
And it is done, as you turn the eyelids and split the gap within, according to what I have described. Then make two tubes, or two thin sticks: their length should be according to the length of the eyelid, and their width less than the width of the gap; and you have already made incisions at both ends on either side where you hold the threads.
Then join both with care over the excess from the eyelid, and tighten the two tubes on either side with a strong tie, and leave it for several days. For the skin will tighten and wither, and rot, until it falls away of itself.
If it delays, then cut it with scissors. Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has hardened, raise the eyelid; and do not pull the hairs.
And this is the form of the two tubes, which you make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
On the elevation of the piercing pilons in the eye with a hook.
The operation is as follows: take a fine, sharp hook and insert it into the eye with a thin silk thread, gently. Then gather its ends together, and tie each with a very fine knot; the length of the threads should be one palm.
Then take another fine thread and compose it beneath the first in a small loop, and tie the ends of it if you see fit.
Then the patient should lay their head in your lap, close to the light, so that the operation may be seen, for it is a delicate one.
Then insert the hook with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate quickly until you extract it above the natural hair.
Then pull the hair up to above the thread and insert that hair into the thread; if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out completely from the root in the eyelid with the natural hair.
However, if the hair does not come out with it, draw the ingrown hair towards the bottom, using the thread that you have woven into it, until the ingrown hair comes out from the upper opening, and you see it with your eye; then draw the ingrown hair and the thread, and extract both of them, and close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair attaches to its place and grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either associate a longer hair with it from the natural hairs, and it will be pulled out with it; or leave it alone until it grows out, and then pull it out.
**Chapter XIII.**
When this Alxatration (or ingrown hair) happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatration is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, accidental Alxatration occurs from the healing of a wound, or its cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of operation in this is that you find that consolidation, and separate its lips, and place in it what is between them, a linen thread, and bind it until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that drain and contract, for if you do that, it will return to Al-Qabisi's condition worse than before; on the contrary, use things that soften, such as chamomile; apply it with water in which cooked althae seed has been steeped; and anoint it with a liquid made from any oil. And wrap the linen thread in it and treat it accordingly.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you preserve every intelligence so that it does not harden according to its original form.
And this operation that we have described is nothing but a certain correction of Al-Qabisi, so that the shape of the place does not return to what it was at all.
§ Regarding the treatment of Al-Qabisi for the lower eyelid, which is either a bulge or contraction upwards towards the right and left.
Chapter XIV.
This treatment that Al-Qabisi does below is what is truly called Al-Qabisi. And it is natural, and it is accidental.
And accidental is made from a wound, or fracture, or burn, and similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a pair of scissors, where there is a double thread, and you insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear to the right tear, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh towards the upper parts with a knife, and cut it with a broad spatula. If it thus returns to the form of the eyelid as it should be, it is good.
And if not, take a radius and put it into the fissure, and convert the eyelid with it; and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of the two fissures be from the two angles of the incision, until they meet and form an angle; until when they are joined, this figure is restored, and it is a Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh as much as the side of it is acute below, from what follows the eyelid. Then join the separate parts; use that with a woolen thread.
Then he should care for them with the soothing medicines and bandages that we mentioned, until they heal.
And if an injury to the eyelid occurs from a cut, stitch, or cauterization, then it is necessary to find the wound's plane beneath the eyelashes, even as it was before. Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, as we mentioned.
And in summary, regarding the care of an eyelid, whether it is above or below, the operation should proceed as prepared according to the form of Albucasis.
Indeed, it (the eyelid) presents many differences in form: and a prudent artisan prepares the skill to adapt to any way possible, until he returns the shape to its natural or nearly natural form, and himself, as the patient, according to what is appropriate for him from the operation and tools in numerous arrangements.
Head XV.
§ On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion occurs in many people, such that the upper eyelid becomes consolidated with the whiteness of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the tip of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then incise the adhesion with a thin spatula, which should not be sharp like the spatumils, but rather obtuse slightly; so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula without causing any harm to the eye with its sharpness, and make your incision as if you were easily scraping away that adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural form, and the adhesion is healed entirely.
Then apply to the eye a mixture of salt water, washing it with water; or distil it directly into the eye using a sieve made from a soft fabric soaked in water.
Then separate the eyelid and the eye using a clean linen thread; place a cloth soaked in alum on top of the eye, and use a sieve and solid bandages after three days, until it heals.
§ On the cutting of the fingernail and the prominent part of the meat of the tears.
Chapter XVI.
Know that the fingernail is of two kinds. It is either nervy or similar to hard, thin bone. It is not a nerve, but similar to frozen white humidity: when it comes into contact with hot iron or tries to grasp it with a hook, it separates and the hook does not stick to it.
And neither of these conditions begins unless it is preceded by a greater tear, which gradually increases until it obstructs vision and blocks light and eye movement.
And the method of operation for this cut is to place the patient's head in your lap. Then open the patient's eyes and lift their eyelids with your hand. Then take a hook with a slightly curved claw and extend it towards the upper part. Then take a needle, and insert a hair from a horse's bristle, or a downy feather, into it: and let the thread be strong, and make both ends of the needle slightly curved, and fix it in the middle of the claw; then pierce the skin with the needle and tie the thread to the claw, and extend it towards the upper part. And scrape the side of the claw that follows the pupil, as if you were holding it with the hair until its very end.
Then make a cut in the remaining part at the base of the tear gland with a delicate scalpel or small scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the tear gland intact so that it does not cause continuous tearing after the cut.
And sometimes the nail extends with a single hook; or with a thread, as we said. Then it will be scraped with a soft spatula, which has this form.
And be careful, let the spatula not touch the corneal tunic, and it should not cause a tear in it, or the pupil will be perforated.
Then after the cut, put something salty crushed into the eye, or from a mixture of herbs, and leave it until another day. Then take care of it as necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not bony, and you cannot insert a hook into it, nor does it have a hook on it, then this type of nail often heals with medicine, and is cured as described in division.
If you need to cut it, then open the eye with a soft spatula, thin, weak in sharpness, according to this form. And shave the nail from above with care and precision. If you see that it thins and breaks, and the cut is made, then from this moment on, pour into the eye some of the mixture prepared from herbs, or red ochre, or finely ground salt; and bandage the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation over the same area until all of it is removed. Unless there is no sign of heat in the affected eye, then let it be and treat the ulcer until it heals.
Then repeat the operation over it with reason until it heals.
However, if the bulge of flesh over the eye causes great injury, it should be suspended with a hook and cut from that part, but not the final cut, so as not to disrupt the flow of tears.
Then stop the tear flow if it is red or caused by inflammation, until it heals.
§ From the incisions of Alguarden (and the flesh grown in the eye).
Head XVII.
Sometimes in certain human eyes, red flesh grows or is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or tightens around the eyelids, and perhaps even turns the eyelids outward: and it resembles a rose bud.
And the operation on it is also such that it places the weak head in your lap. Then he opens her eyes and collects all that flesh with hooks attached to it; and holds it with one forceps or by gesture.
Then he cuts the flesh in the first place until it is completely finished with an incision. And he makes a hole from the eye, so as not to damage it during the operation; and let your cut be where you are cutting it, or with a spatula, which we mentioned in the chapter on nail incisions, or with small forceps, with which the wound is collected, according to its shape after this chapter.
When your incision is complete and all the blood has been drained, then fill the eye with crushed salt or sprinkle it with red powder and other astringent medicines; and place a hot compress with white clay on top of the eye to protect it from further damage by heat.
If there remains any blood after the draining and you feel a hot surge, and fear a hot apoplessia, then release the eye and care for it with what soothes the apoplessia.
Then he repeats the procedure on it until it heals.
And likewise, do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye from this same kind.
However, it is necessary that with every weak eye, cure should be sought either from the natural way or from an accidental way, by operating with a tool; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you understand that that member can endure that operation.
§ On the removal of a sebum from the eye.
**Head XVIII.**
Sebum is red veins that are situated over the eye and prevent the eye from performing its function; it weakens the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, you must first consider if the eye with sebum in it is strong and free from any illness other than the sebum, then remove the sebum from it.
And it is advisable for the weak one to place his head in your lap.
Then suspend those veins with a hook or two, according to your discretion; the hook should be thin and folded twice, in this form, or there could be two hooks placed in one body, in this way.
Then remove them carefully with fine forceps and wipe away the blood every hour until you see the veins moving out of the eye and they are resolved; be careful not to hurt the eye with the ends of the forceps.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation very much: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have finished, then it will drip into the eye either with a green or red color: so that its sharpness corrodes what remains of the grease.
However, if it is not possible for you to collect all of that at that time, then apply a plaster to the eye with something that soothes the pain of the eye and leave it for several days until the pain subsides; then protect it from further heat and afterward repeat over it in the same manner until it heals.
And this is the form of the forceps.
§ On the reduction of Arissati (a medical instrument) to the nose.
Chapter XIX.
The doctors call the Arissati forceps, which they use for incisions with cautery or sharp medicine, as described in the preceding account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it; except to find the aperture next to its origin and extract all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
If, therefore, the bone is detected and you see corruption or blackening in it, then cut it with this instrument, whose form is as follows.
And it is called the "Asperi capitis," or the scalpel.
Let it be made from steel, and let its head be round like an azir (a type of ancient coin), with a fine point formed by either the edge of a chisel or a sharp aliskilfer (an old tool). Place this over the corrupted bone.
Then hold it between your fingers and gently press with your hand until you know that corruption is no longer present, and do this several times.
Then restore the area with cauterizing medicinal poultices.
If, therefore, the area is consolidated and flesh grows, and the flow of pus stops, and it does not fester or worsen, and no other incident occurs for forty days, then know that it is already healed.
And if this does not happen, then there is no skill in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nasal opening, according to this form.
And it is as if you remove the bone with a steel instrument or a sharp medicine: and when the bone is detected, then take this drill according to this form, let its end be triangular, and the wood of it be a tapered pyramid up to the tip, as you see.
Then place it on top of the eye itself: and let it be near the tear; and stretch your hand away from the eye slightly. Then you should bend your hand with the knife, until it penetrates the bone and you feel the weakness of it; through which it finds power to exit from that place when it holds its own hand over its nose.
Therefore, at that time, restore the place with astringent medicines as I taught you.
When the flesh is formed and the place hardens, then the matter that was exuded to the outside returns to the nose; it becomes lighter over the weak part.
## On the Reduction of Eye Protrusion
**Chapter XX.**
When the eye protrudes with its entire force, and no injury occurs to sight, nor any diminution; then you should relieve the weak part; then use phlebotomes on it; afterwards place blood-letting cups on the cheek without scarring, but with suction.
Then place on the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and sarkocolla. Then, tighten the eye above the plaster with many little threads.
And the manner of the threads is as follows: take many soft cloths, and double each cloth four times; make many from them, then place one upon another according to the need of the eye, and finally tighten them with a strong hard cloth.
And repeat the process with suction without scarring.
Then remove the suction and leave the eye tightened day and night.
However, if the ligament softens again, it should be tightened much more; then, after a day and night, remove the ligament as we said.
If therefore you see that the eye has regained its new skin, it is good; and if not, repeat the plaster, threads, tightening, and suction until it heals.
# On the Incision of the Skin's Layer
Chapter XXI.
When there is a rupture in the skin's layer, it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelids like a grain, causing disfigurement to the face due to that, and one should cut it; then the operation on it is as I describe: it is necessary to insert a sharp instrument into the root of the eyelid from below upwards.
Then introduce another needle through which a double thread is passed from the tearful side, and cause it to penetrate. And leave the first needle according to its arrangement.
Then cut the place where the double thread is located, and tie with it the edge of the skin around the needle: and tighten it greatly.
Then extract the needle, and place on it a woolen thread soaked in alum: and leave it until the thread falls off with the skin.
Then take care of the eye with it, so that it is healed until the wound is cured.
And when the skin is tightened from all sides in a circular shape with cloth, until the eye gains great prominence.
Then it is pierced with a fine spatula that reaches the depth of the eye, and the moisture of the alum runs down, and the eye falls out and enters immediately: then tighten it until it heals.
**Of the cure of alum.**
**Head XXII.**
This affliction called alum is not, but a health that is gathered in the eye, similar to water running down, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation is such that you make the invalid sit on a prepared or straight seat.
Then take the head in both of your hands and move it until you feel that the blood has reached the lower part of your eyes. Then it is fixed so that it does not fall, and the light is restored; and the invalid sees things as he used to see them: and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
However, if the descent of the blood is not prepared as we said, then make the invalid sit between your hands. Then take a thin spatula and find it above the corny membrane slightly near the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic in the crown, until the blood flows out.
When the blood has flowed out, then drop into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey; or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey: then it is treated with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
§ On the care of water that flows into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter XXIII.
We have previously discussed the types of water in division, and those that are suitable for perforation according to the statement and explanation of the topic, then take it the same way according to health.
Therefore, you must make the patient sit with their infirm eye squared between your hands, opposite to the light, towards the sun, and bind its healthy eye, holding it tightly. Then, with your right hand, if the eye with water is the left one, press the right eye, or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
Then take your right hand with the almug (instrument), if the eye is on the left, or your left hand, if the eye is on the right.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the edge of the cornea, according to its thickness, on the white part of the eye that is visible, where the smallest tear duct is located; then push the instrument with strength, and you turn it with your hand until it penetrates into the cornea, and you will feel that the instrument has reached the hollow space.
And it must be that the depth of the instrument's journey is measured according to the space from the pupil to the end of the blackness: and this is the cornea of the eye. You will indeed see that in the very pupil of the eye, due to the clarity of the cornea's tunic.
Then place the almagest until the place where water is. Then press the same downward, one after another.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the sick person will see it above which he opens his wound immediately, and the almagest in his eye.
Then rest for a little while. If therefore the water descends, then deposit it a second time, besides what the almagest emerges.
When therefore it is fixed, and does not ascend: then extract the almagest easily: and you return your hand gradually.
Then dissolve in water some of the clear salt of the gemstone: and wash with it the inside of the eye. Then place over the eye the whole poultice, or cloth soaked in rose oil and alum: and bind it with a healthy eye.
But we, and those of our time, place on it ground cinnamon crushed with alum.
If the surgeon does not obey you and enters the eye due to its hardness, since it is an eye of a human being, whose eye is very hard, then you should take a small instrument called an Alberid, which has this form.
Therefore, when performing this operation, only join the specific junction and do not insert your entire hand into the opening; it is only necessary to create a narrow space for the surgeon's instrument.
Then insert the surgeon's instrument, as we have said.
And for the completion of your work, prepare a comfortable sleeping place for the patient in a dark room, where he sleeps on his back; and forbid all movements and coughing; and give him that food which soothes his nature; and do not allow him to move his head to the right or left at all.
And the bandage should be left according to its arrangement until the third day.
Then remove it in that dark room and examine his sight; and make him see things. Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do that during the time of healing or immediately after the incision; on the contrary, he should leave it for someone else, because water rises quickly through the fresh wound.
If, however, a hot aphtha occurs: then it is necessary to wash the eye before the seventh day; and straighten it with what calms the aphtha until it is calm, then remove the bandage, and place over its face an oral agent to regulate its vision for several days while it remains in that dark house.
Then it should gradually leave the house and return to its case.
And know that in zeal the student is not excused from seeing several times; then indeed he dares to engage in surgery.
And indeed, some of those from Al-Andalus have now reached us, who said that a certain procedure was done in Al-Andalus, through which water is drawn out.
Therefore, no one has ever been seen in our land to have done that; nor is it written about in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it be new.
And these are the forms of species from the magus, so that he may stand on them who is ignorant of them.
They should be made of proper air; and their ends should be triangular with the same subtlety, and the tip acute.
**Chapter XXIV**
On the care of flesh grown in the nose.
Sometimes various types of flesh grow in the nose, some resembling a scorpion with many feet, from which comes cancerous, pebble-like flesh, of a dark color; and from it comes soft flesh, not dark colored.
Therefore, regarding the soft flesh which is neither frail nor cancerous, you should place it between your hands and open the nostrils, then insert an hook into that flesh; afterwards, pull it out towards the exterior and cut what you have grasped with a thin, sharp, curved blade, until you know that all the flesh has been entirely removed.
If anything remains from that which cannot be cut away, then cut it with a thin tool easily until nothing remains of it. If, however, blood predominates or a hot ulcer occurs, then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant ulcers, then apply cauterization until the blood stops and all flesh is removed.
Afterward, throw vinegar or water into the nose after the cut has been made. If, however, the nose is opened and moisture flows from it until it reaches the palate, then know that it is already healed.
If, however, moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is a carnal growth within the upper bones of the nose to which the instrument did not reach with the cut.
Then you should introduce a line of thread with some thickness and knots in it; and put between each knot the size of a finger, or less: then make the sick person pass one end of the thread into the nose with a hook, or whatever possible after he has made it similar to a cat's claw; and draw out its smell until it reaches the cavity, and comes out above his throat.
And indeed, many children do this like atoms in schools; and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to.
Then place both ends of the thread: one end that emerges above the nose, and the other end remaining inside the nose. Then, using the assistance of the knots in the thread, apply pressure to the flesh where they are located. Do this until you know that the flesh is now pressed against the knots of the thread.
Then extract the thread and place it in the nose after the blood has stopped flowing, which you have absorbed into the Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has completely dissolved what remains of the flesh.
Then, after some days, insert a lead pipe into the nose until the condition improves.
If, however, further treatment is required to drain it, use it.
For making the head purgative, through which oils and other medicines flow into the nose, make it of silver or brass; it should be similar to a small lamp, open like a conch shell, and its passageway likewise.
And if you make the pipe closed like a reed.
And the instrument's conch shell for the head purgative should be full and open: it should have a handle at the end, with which you can hold it when you heat oil in it, or anything else that you want to express or make flowable.
Chapter XXV.
Many times it is born at the end of the nose, and it becomes magnificent and increases with days until a final shape is formed.
And because of that, it is necessary to remove it from the beginning of its appearance and uproot all of it. Then place over the site, or a caustic application, or a burning medicine that takes its place.
If the incision is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it is hard, firm, of a dark colour, and has few sensations; then do not touch it with iron, because it is a malignant ulcer.
Many times it is seen that those who have an ulceration also suffer from great evil because of it;
And if the ulcer is soft to the touch, not dark coloured, and you see that an incision can be made throughout all of it, then encourage the weak and make the incision without fear, without hesitation; and treat the site with what draws out and constricts until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
§ On the stitching of the nose, lip, and ear.
You should know that when there is a rupture of the continuity of one of these cartilage structures, the operation confers little benefit to it, except in certain cases.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone of them, you should consider whether there is a recent wound with its own blood; then gather the two parts of the wounded area together and sew them up; afterwards, take care of it until it heals.
And if the continuity of the lips has already been separated and one part is healthy, then you should cauterize all parts that are detached from their skin until they bleed. Then gather the two lips together with sutures and tighten them, and apply a dragon's blood poultice on top, and crushed olibanum; place a fragment of a clean plaster over it, and use another consolidating plaster; and leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it and change the medicine; and leave it until the threads come out on their own. Then take care of it with an ointment until it heals.
The method of stitching is to gather the continuity of the wound, or with a pad, as we have described for the stitches on the abdomen; or to gather the wound together with threads, as you know.
**Chapter XXVII**
On the extraction of lip nodules.
Many people suffer from hard protrusions inside their lips, often resembling small or large grains of herb, and some have both kinds.
Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip and find each node, and hang it with a hook, and cut it off from every part.
Then, after the cut, apply pressure with a clean cloth until the bleeding stops.
Then it should be washed with vinegar, and the place treated with it where there is stiffness, until the wounds heal.
**Chapter XXVIII**
On the cut of flesh grown over the gum.
Flesh often grows over the gums, which the ancients called abscesses.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang it with a hook or hold it with pincers and cut it near its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow out.
Then place over the wound a third covering, or other suitable, absorptive dressings.
If the flesh returns to its original state after treatment, as it often does, then cut it away a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
§ On the use of iron in tooth extraction.
They (teeth) sometimes adhere to the surfaces from both the inner and outer parts, and between the gums, becoming rough, painful, and sometimes yellowish and green, until they are finally destroyed by the gum and become foul-smelling teeth.
Therefore, you should make the infirm (tooth) sit between your hands and its head in your armpit, and rub it with a stone or tooth, where you can see the rough parts, just like sand; until nothing of that remains, and do likewise for blackness, whiteness, yellowness, and others until they are cleaned.
If what is in them from the beginning of their condition can be removed, that is good; and if not, then repeat the treatment on them another day, second, third, until you reach the end of your study regarding what you wish.
And you should know that the tooth requires various forms of razors, many shapes, according to what is prepared for your operation; because the razor that cuts through the tooth from below is different from the razor that cuts between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors should be prepared for you as you see them.
Chapter XXX.
§ On the Extraction of Teeth Pain.
You must cure the tooth from its pain with all diligence, and do not delay in extracting it. For indeed, its pain does not subside when it is extracted, as it is a noble substance; however, until there is no excuse for avoiding the extraction, then when the patient is compelled to extract it, it should be done firmly and certified by you as the painful tooth.
Many times the patient is deceived by pain, and thinks that it is gone from the tooth and extracts it; then the pain does not retreat until the sick tooth is extracted.
We have already seen that from the work of bloodletting.
When therefore the aching tooth is certified to be sound by you, then it is necessary that you make incisions around the tooth with a scalpel, in which there should be something of virtue, until the gum is solved from every part; then move it yourself with your fingers, or gradually with fine forceps at first, until it comes loose.
Then take a large forceps with good grip and place it on the tooth's head between your legs; hold it firmly so that it does not move. Then pull the tooth straight, without breaking it.
If it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and insert them under it from every side with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If, however, the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill that hole with cloth and tie it with a fine ray's end so that it does not break during your squeezing on top of it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you be very careful with the incision around the gum from every side a lot.
And guard your strength so that you do not break it, and let a part of it remain, and return to the sick from that malice which causes the most pain in the first place.
And beware, do not do what ignorant bloodletters do in their haste and arrogance regarding its removal, except that they administer what we have mentioned.
Many times they cause great infirmities in men that are hard to break, and all the roots of such remain, or some of them, or so as to extract it with certain bones of the mandible, as we have often witnessed.
It is then bound after its eradication with wine, or vinegar, and salt.
If there is a flow of blood from the wounds (which often happens), then press something onto it and fill the area with it; otherwise, cauterize them if they do not stop bleeding.
The pliers should have long handles, a short grip, and be made of thick iron or good-quality steel; their ends should not overlap when pressed against a tooth, but rather be straight as you can see here. They should have narrow tips that enter into certain teeth and hold them fast with strong pressure.
And when the ends take on the shape of the bird's beak, which is called a crowbar, they become strong tools for gripping.
Chapter 31
**On the Eradication of Teeth and the Extraction of Mandibular Bones**
When there remains, at the removal of a tooth that breaks something, then it is necessary to place over the site a custom poultice with butter for one or two days, until the site softens; then insert the forceps or pliers, whose ends conform to the shape of the beak called the ciconia. The form of these forceps is as follows:
The ends of these are made like a sawtooth or like a chisel.
If, therefore, it does not yield to you when using these forceps, then you must apply leverage over the root and remove all the tissue, and insert an instrument called a small lever, which has this form.
It has a short but thick end; it should not be soaked to avoid breaking.
If, therefore, the root comes out through that, it is good; but if not, it must be dislodged with other instruments of this shape.
The shape of the first end is triangular, with some thickness.
The triangular end is delicate.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded it in terms of teeth.
It is also a cut with this instrument that resembles a large hook, with curved ends and a certain thickness to prevent breaking, and it should not be soaked.
And you should know that there are many instruments for teeth, and similarly, other tools are not counted; a skilled artisan, subtle in his art, found this instrument himself, according to which he names the operation and the illness itself.
Because they come from illnesses to which the ancient instruments did not refer, due to the diversity of their kinds.
However, if a bone breaks from the jaw or any other bone of the mouth, or decays; then examine it at its place with what is appropriate for it from the instruments and pincers I mentioned in the extraction of roots, and cut with gestures, whose form is as follows.
It should have some thickness gradually applied to it, so that it tightens or holds the bone, and does not escape or gush out, until the bone is extracted; then restore the place with appropriate medicines for it.
If there is a small putrefied part in a bone, then cut it away from its putridity and treat it until it heals.
Head XXXII.
On the prominent teeth surpassing others.
When teeth protrude not according to their natural growth, an unsightly form results from it: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, the vulgar (common) ones.
Therefore, it is necessary that you should consider. For if a tooth grows after another, and is not mobile or its root is impossible to extract, then it should be cut out; and if it is attached to another tooth, then it should be cut with this instrument, whose form is as follows.
It has a similar appearance to a small face, and is made of iron, with very acute ends.
And your incision should be how you cut it over many days, and because of the tooth's hardness, and so that no other tooth moves.
However, if it is prominent and exposed, its cutting edge should be filed with this file made of iron, whose form is as follows.
Sit entirely from the indus, and its handle of minute punctures of various sizes, like a limas with which needles are made; with it the tooth is smoothed little by little over many days with ease, so that the tooth does not move and falls out; then make it soft, finally smooth it with certain rasors.
If there is a tooth from which a part breaks off and injures the tongue, then it is necessary to smooth it with a limas until the roughness of that fracture is removed and it becomes even; and apply it, so as not to injure the tongue or corrupt speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
§ On the relationship of teeth with golden threads.
When the front teeth suffer a shock or displacement from impact or accident and the weak patient cannot hold them firmly enough to prevent loss, and treatment with astringent medicines has not been effective, then the cure lies in binding them with golden threads; for silver turns green and decays over time, but gold never changes.
And the thread should be of intermediate thickness according to the amount that it can hold between the teeth.
And the method of the arrangement is as follows: take the thread and insert its double length between two healthy teeth; then weave it with both ends of the thread between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the mesh all the way to the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the texture until you reach the part from which you began, and hold your hand firmly but gently, until it is not moved at all, and let your compression be where you tighten the thread, near the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip.
Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors; gather them together and twist them with your fingers; insert them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so as not to harm the tongue; then release it so that the knot remains tight.
However, if it becomes loose or cut, tighten them with another thread and secure it in that way for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two moving teeth, as you can see.
And when it happens that a tooth or two return to their original place after the fall, and are retained as we have described, then this can only be done by an artist, prudent and skilled.
And when some suitable bone is obtained from a fresh wound, it is shaped like a tooth and placed in the position where the tooth is missing and held in place, as we have said; then it remains and serves with it for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes this condition that occurs under the tongue is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the lower jaw at its base in your hand, and raise his tongue; then cut through that nervous ligament across its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
If there is something of hardness and knotting in it, resulting from the healing of a wound, then throw an hook into it and find its width, until you cut through the ligament and release the knot.
And be careful, so that there is no fracture in the deep flesh, and cut through the artery there, and let not blood flow.
Then it is washed at the site of the cut with pink water, or vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a piece of linen that holds it open at night so that it does not harden again.
If, however, bleeding occurs, then apply a crushed sponge over the site. If indeed the blood seeps, then cauterize the site with a hot iron, which is appropriate for it; then tend to it as you would tend to the rest, until it heals.
Head XXXIV.
Sometimes a depression occurs beneath the tongue that resembles a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural movements; and it may become so swollen that it fills the mouth.
And the treatment for this is to open the lower jaw before the sun and consider the depression.
If therefore you see that it has a dull colour, either black or dark, and there is no feeling of pain in it; then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it becomes depressed and white, in which there is moisture, then throw a hook at it and cut it away with a thin blade, freeing it from every part. If indeed the blood seeps during your treatment, then place a crushed crust over it and wait until the blood stops; then resume your treatment until you have completely extracted it.
Then it is wrapped with vinegar and salt, and the treatment itself remains as part of the cure until it is healed.
§ On the cure of an apsema (ulcer) between two tonsils.
Head XXXVI.
Sometimes there occur between the throat (i.e., the glands) resembling small cotton balls, which occur outside, and these are called two tonsils (amygdales), which, when treated as we said in division, and do not heal, then consider them.
If therefore the apsema is of a dark colour, has little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red colour, and its root is thick, then do not touch it with iron even, fearing blood flow, rather leave it until it heals naturally. And then either pierce it yourself, or it will break open of itself.
And if it is of a white colour, round, and its root is thin, then you should cut into it.
And the operation on it is such that you consider before your operation, if the apsema's heat is calm and complete, or diminishes in any way, then therefore make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head in your lap, and open his mouth, and with a slave holding him, press his tongue below with the instrument, which has this form.
Make it from silver or brass, so that it is as thin as a blade.
So, when you have positioned it with the tongue and the fistula is visible to you and your finger drops onto it, then take a hook and fix it into the fistula, and extract it as far as possible, except for something of the cloth remaining on it.
Then cut it with the instrument, whose form this follows. It is shaped like a fork; however, its ends should be protected so that the opening of each is sharp and direct, from which it is necessary to take care that it is made of iron or otherwise coated.
If, however, this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spoon, whose form this follows. It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after you have cut one fistula, cut the other according to this same form of cutting.
Then after cutting, the patient should rinse with cold water or with vinegar and water.
If, however, there is a flow of blood, gargle with water in which the cortex of granate has been boiled, or myrtle leaves and similar astringents, until the flow of blood stops; then care for the wound until it heals.
And sometimes other spots appear in the throat, apart from the two tonsils. Therefore, cut them according to what I said about the incision of the two tonsils equally.
And indeed I have already treated a woman from whose throat a growth had emerged, which turned dark, with little sensation, almost closing her throat; and she was breathing heavily through a narrow opening, and I had forbidden her food and water, and she had already reached the edge of death, if she had not been saved within one or two days.
And the growth would only protrude enough to extend beyond the two nasal openings until it emerged from them.
I therefore acted more urgently, and fixed a hook into one of them. Then I pulled it, and a large part came out from it.
Then I cut it off where it was caught in the nasal opening.
Then I did that which proceeds from the second nostril opening.
Then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue; then I fixed a hook into that very aperture. Afterwards, I removed a part of it, and from that place nothing but a little blood came out; thus the woman's throat was healed, and she began to drink water immediately, and afterwards she took food.
I did not stop making incisions from that opening for a very long time; and an aperture succeeded the place where I made the incision, until it became too prolonged and when that happened to her.
I then devised and cauterized the aperture between the throat.
She stopped from adding more; then I moved from that place, and I did not know what God had done to her after me.
## On the Incision of the Uveal Apperture
HEAD XXXVII
When the mucus descends to the uvula and becomes prolonged, and an aperture is formed (in it), then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick, round, then it is called uvula.
When treatment is accomplished with that which we have mentioned in division, and the cure does not progress, you will see that the abscess has grown hot and is soft; then it is necessary to incise it.
And if a round lump has formed from it, which does not extend in length, and is of a blood-red, brownish, or black color, without sensation, then it is necessary to carefully incise it. For indeed, there is fear of complication with the wound.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have mentioned in terms of its whiteness and length, you should position the patient before the sun, and press its tongue with the instrument whose description preceded this: then fix a hook in it and pull it downward, and incise it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the tonsils.
And it is necessary not to incise from that unless the part added to the natural limit without addition.
For if you cut from it any more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the incision of the tonsils, and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the patient is disturbed by the incision, then it is necessary to use skill in cauterizing him without fear and anxiety.
The method of cauterization is not otherwise effective than with sharp water: and it is as if you place the patient's head in your lap. Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take water as I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make a paste with it that is neither too thick nor too thin, and fill this cavity of the instrument whose form is as follows.
Place the extremity of the instrument where the medicine is to be applied, just as the cavity of the radius of a shell.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same ulcer: and have the patient lying on his side, so that the salt from his mouth flows out due to the inherent medicine, so that nothing descends from it into his throat and hurts him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And from the first, apply it to the ulcer with a quantity that is half an hour, until you perceive that it has already become darkened and the pain of the medicine has subsided.
And if you wish to take a poultice and cover it over the extremity of the radius, and insert the poultice with medicine inside a tube on top, until the poultice adheres to the skin.
Do this many times, until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound. Then allow it to stay: for indeed it withers and falls off after three or four days.
If you need to apply more medicine, do so; after cauterization, clean around the wound with a cloth soaked in butter, and then cleanse it with what is around it from the medicine; and wash it with cold water.
And it should be treated externally with bandages, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This, therefore, is the kind of cure that involves a cleaner cut and extends freedom from fear.
And sometimes the wound is cured even better than with cauterization and incision; for it is cured with smoke, in this way. Take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, parsley, chamomile, and black-eye, and similar herbs; mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and submerge with vinegar until they bubble: the pot should be sealed well with fine mud; and there should be an opening in the middle of the pot for placing the heated instrument, as described.
Make it from silver or brass, and insert the tip with the pomegranate into the lower mouth until the vapor rises to the top over the pipe, until the eye is much obscured.
Then repeat this over the same area many times until it heals.
And be careful not to perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of the apsema. For indeed, it adds pleasure to the apsema, and you should not perform that unless at the decline of its heat.
If, however, you do not have this instrument, then take a pipe and attach a piece of bark to its end, so that it does not burn the lower jawbone, because the bark prevents the vapor from burning the bone, and this is from good healing with health.
§ On the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Head 38.
Often, a bone adheres in the throat, or a fish spine, or something else.
Therefore, you must extract what is apparent from them, after pressing the tongue with an instrument near the light, and it will be declared to you whether it is in the throat or not.
And if something is not visible to you and remains hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the foreign body will exit through vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a fragment of raw naphtes, or a root of lettuce, or a dry crumb of bread, or takes a piece of soft, dried sea sponge and ties it with a thread before swallowing it. When it reaches the location where there are spines or bones, and they are extracted, then it exits.
If it does not exit with what I said, then use an instrument made of lead in this form.
It should be slightly thicker than the radius bone, and have a sharp end that easily enters the throat; it should also keep its head elevated upwards.
And it should be careful not to touch its epiglottis, so as not to cause coughing, and push with it a bone, or a spine, or have the doctor insert it with his hand.
Indeed, it is better for the patient to insert it, because of his knowledge of the location of the foreign body, and push it downwards, or pull his hand upwards with the instrument, according to the amount that was prepared for him, until it exits.
On the extraction of the phlebotom (bloodsucker)
**Chapter XXXIX**
When the phlebotom is treated with what I have mentioned regarding division from cure with medicines, and it does not improve, then consider the condition of its drop under the sun, or near the sun after you have placed its tongue with the instrument that I told you.
If therefore your wound over the phlebotom has fallen, extract it with a small hook, or with careful gestures appropriately.
If it is not possible with them: then take a hollow tube and insert it into the phlebotom's droplet as close to the droplet as possible: then insert into the hollowness of the tube a heated iron with fire. Do that many times, and have the patient abstain from water throughout the day.
Then take a full cup of cold water and open the patient's mouth with it: and have them drink their own saliva from it, without swallowing anything from it: then move the water every hour afterward with their hand. The phlebotom indeed falls immediately when it feels the water.
If, however, it does not exit with what we have described, then suffocate the patient with fumes, or with wings and an instrument, as I described for the suffocation of a fly.
Do that many times, because it will fall on its own.
And the method of suffocation is as follows: take a bowl, into which are placed burning coals and a few live coarsely cut hairs; cover the bowl with a lid that has a hole in it; and place the end of the instrument inside that hole.
Then release the suffocation and have the patient place their mouth at the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation does not escape, until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood vessel. Because the blood vessel will immediately burst.
If it does not burst, then repeat the suffocation many times.
And the patient should endure thirst, eat spicy foods, and other things, but not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary to exit with this treatment.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the blood vessel is extracted from the throat when it bursts on that surface.
It is similar to forceps, as you can see; except that it has a curved tip that extends to the throat. And its tip resembles the beak of a crow, which has a rough edge; when it grasps something, it does not let go entirely.
§ On the opening of fistulas, their cutting, and general care.
Head XL.
There are many kinds of fistulas, varying according to their origin and recall, namely, one kind, and this book will describe one; they differ in their perforation and cutting in two ways.
One kind is among the species of fistulas, which itself grasps from humors.
The second manner is according to the places where it happens from the body.
Since the fistula happening in the head is different from the one happening in the anus; and the fistula happening in a fleshy place is different from that happening in the joints; each of them has its judgment according to its operation.
And there are fistulas that should not be cut unless after the purifying of the humor within them and its completion; and among these are those that should be cut while they are still raw and do not complete their purification according to the balance.
As the openings that are close to the joints.
Since the opening, when it occurs near a joint and extends to be of greater extent until the putrefaction that surrounds it, perhaps corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which is why it becomes the cause for the closer contraction of that member.
Or it is an opening near the main member; for if you delay its piercing until it matures, it will harm either that one or through that main member.
Or it is near anus, so pierce the one when it is immature; and it is not necessary to pierce a crude opening, not yet completed digestion, unless it is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deeply, and extends to the internal parts of the anus, and becomes a fistula, or in its term where it is not healed.
You should know the time of piercing the opening, which has matured according to its completion; and it is near the cessation of pain, decrease of fever, and pallor, and pulse, and sharpness of the head of the opening; and other signs.
And you should make the same piercing at a lower place of the opening, and of greater eminence; and the piercing should be perpendicular to the length of the body, if the openings are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of the tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that are reflected, incise with a perforation according to that member.
When there is a true abscess in fleshy parts: then it is better to leave the perforation of it until its healing is confirmed, as we said according to completion.
Since if you perforate it before that, the course of the pus is prolonged from it, and there is much irritation and adhesions, and perhaps the edges of it harden, and its depth increases.
And certain abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body where it is necessary, or according to that which the member requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small perforation in small abscesses and a large perforation in large abscesses, or many sections according to the similarity of their size.
And there are abscesses where it is necessary to make an incision in the skin, and when it has already formed like a cloth, and has become firm, as it often does in many cases, as in buboes and gangrenes.
And from them are those that are cut with a section having three angles. And among them is one where it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As for the hernia of the groin.
And from them, a round cut is made, and a half-moon cut; and similar cuts are made from them.
But for those who lack a head, as with loose, superficial hernias, it is necessary to perforate them with a single superficial piercing, or only cut them flatly.
And when the hernia is thick, and has already collected a great deal of blood, and you pierce it, so as not to draw out and remove all the pus at that moment: on the contrary, remove part of it from that itself. Then cover the hernia until the next day. Then remove something from the pus again.
Do this many times according to the degree, until it comes out; especially if the patient is weak of strength, or a pregnant woman, or a very young child, or an old person who has weakened; for the animal spirit often leaves the body with the discharge of blood, and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not notice.
Therefore, this chapter requires great caution.
And after your incision, through which you make these incisions, you must cleanse the wound, and consider it. If therefore the wound of the aposteme is small, or it is a flat cut, then apply a poultice of linen or an ancient cloth. And if the aposteme is great, and there are many cracks from the incision, then you must insert a poultice into every crack until they heal again.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin in the aposteme, or made a deep groove around it, then you must fill it with an old cloth, or as when a garment is woven, or brushed linen without moisture, and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove the bandage and care for it as needed with ointment until it is healed.
If however there is a flow of blood during your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after it has been soaked in them a cloth: and place it over the place where the blood flow is multiple times.
If however the flow of blood persists, then you must apply a treatment, and care, and cleansers, which I have described in many places in this book, and from division.
If, however, it is during the winter season and the affected area involves many nerves, then you should insert small pieces of cotton soaked in wine and hot oil, and place them on top of the affected area.
And if it is during the summer season and the affected area is fleshy, then you should place cotton pieces soaked in water, oil, or a mixture of wine and oil, and keep the entire area cold. Until the third day, as we have said, you should then open up the abscess, clean it, and administer whatever is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
This is therefore what is necessary for the general understanding of treating abscesses.
According to the path of distinction, as I have already discussed about every abscess, how the way to its healing is described individually.
Head 41.
**On the Abscesses Occurring on the Skin of the Head.**
Small abscesses occur on the skin of the head and are of a type that involves bags contained within layers of skin, which resemble the sacs of a hen's eggs.
And there are many kinds of them.
From them come rich ones and those that hold a humidity similar to clay; and from them (come) those that hold a humidity similar to dough and pastes, and others like them, and from them are those that are hard stones.
And in all cases, there is no fear of their extraction as long as the artery does not oppose their section.
And the operation in their section is such that you experience it with an instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if there is that which contains humidity, then dry it with the section according to the length of the surface section: according to this form.
And begin with the section from line B to line G. When the humidity is exhausted, then scrape off the crust that contains that humidity, and do not leave anything completely intact from it.
Indeed, it often returns if anything remains of it.
Then immerse the bandage in Egyptian ointment if it is available; and if not, in water and salt: and apply it to the wound, and leave it until another day. Indeed, it corrodes what remains from a cyst.
Then it applies a poultice over it with Egyptian lint, second and third times, and if you need to do this more often, until you are confident that nothing remains from the cyst, then indeed treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If it contains a large nodule: then dry it in this manner, making a cut in the shape of a cross and pulling the hooks between the two parts of the cut, and scraping it from all sides, and using your strength to remove the garment that contains it.
However, if it causes opposition for you, then do what I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly, for an abscess, if it is hard like stone, through cutting and the same cure, as we said.
And the cut over a hard abscess is easier, because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are certain abscesses on the head of some men, where there is no moisture at all.
This is because I followed an abscess on the head of a young woman, and I found the abscess like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed: and if anyone throws something at it, it hurts.
Indeed, in other types of accidents affecting the head, except for these rashes that occur on the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, all of them should be cut through a superficial incision.
Or make a puncture in them always from the lower part, so that the flow of cleanliness goes downwards.
Then take care of them as it suits from the cure they get.
§ On the incision of strophules (fleshy growths) on the neck.
Head (section) 42.
Many times these rashes occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur elsewhere on the body.
And on those that occur from them on the neck, there is one and many; they are generated from each other; and every strophule of them is within its own tunic, as in the nodes and rashes of the head, as we have said.
And the kinds of these strophules are many. And indeed, there are some that are rocky; and some that contain humors (fluids); and others that are malignant, which do not obey cure.
In that part, therefore, which you see to be of good disposition in the touch, and whose proximity to the skin's color is evident, and it moves towards all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the guidage (tendons), nor to the artery, and it is not deep: it is necessary that you cut it with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, b. to the line, g., and remove the skin from all sides, and extend two folds of the skin with a hook, or with many hooks if needed, as we said in the appendages of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is especially careful not to harm any vein or nerve.
And do not use a sharp blade excessively; so that you do not strain your hand with the cut, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary.
If however you cut a vein, or an artery, and it prevents you from operating, then apply a crushed cauterizing pad, or some powder that cuts off the blood, and bind the wound, and release it until the sharpness of the abscess subsides, and the wound becomes softer; otherwise it will begin to putrefy and rot.
Because the blood is cut off; therefore return to your operation until it is completed.
Then, with your index finger, feel if any of the smaller stumps remain; then cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the base of a strophula, then you should not cut it from its base; instead, you must tie it with a strong doubled thread and release it until it falls off by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with more of the Egyptian ointment that you have already applied. Then take care of yourself.
If the strophula is completely incised, then you should gather the two lips of the wound and close them immediately after you see that the excess has disappeared.
However, if you see that the excess remains due to the size of the strophula, then you should intend to incise its root and extract it; and apply the suture as we have said.
And for those strophulas that contain moisture, make a superficial perforation in them so that you can see the place of their maturity; and put the perforation below as we have said, following the course of the body below.
Then after the perforation, apply a dressing with lint and ointment similar to it, in order to corrode what remains of the corruption, until you see that the wound is already cleansed; then take care of yourself with a meat-based ointment until it heals.
**Chapter XLIII**
On the division of the epiglottis following an opening within the throat by accident.
The ancients spoke of this division of the epiglottis, and they knew of no one in our land who had performed it; and this is the record of their words.
In cases of strangulation, it is necessary that the division of the epiglottis be made with care: if it is not done through that passage: for all the veins and the lung are below.
In those who have a hot apostema (ulcer) in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no pain in the channels, it is necessary to use the division of the epiglottis, to avoid the destruction that occurs from this position.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must make a small cut with three or four incisions across its width, in the space between the two circles, so that the section is done on the side (not through the cartilage), and this place is suitable for the section because it is enclosed by flesh, and the blood vessels are distant from there.
If the surgeon is timid, then he should use a hook to stretch the skin of the throat. Then he finds the wound, until it reaches the canal: it should be washed with blood, if something is seen to come out of them.
Then he cuts the tissue as we described; and it is said over the section of the canal from the phlegm that comes out of it, when it breaks off and falls away.
And leave the open wound at some time.
When therefore the time comes when it is feared that the inflammation will become severe, two layers of skin around the wound are removed, and only the flesh itself without cartilage.
Then he applies medicines that cause the flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis. In conclusion, as we have described, the exposure is not done unless they see that one of these ulcers has already soaked the throat of the patient; and the patient, having been elevated above death, desires to be cut open so that he may breathe through the wound in some way and be saved from death. And therefore they proceed to cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound in the place where it was injured, and thus is saved. And for this reason they hasten to leave the open wound until the malady consumes its evil, and the malady lasts for three days, and almost as if it were itself; then they proceed to close the wound and take care of themselves until they are healed.
And what I have seen myself is that a nurse takes up the knife and sends it into her throat, and cuts with it part of the pulmonary artery.
And I have been called upon to treat it, and I found it making a sound like the moaning of the dead.
I therefore examined the wound and found blood that had exited from the wound of the lung. I am therefore convinced that she did not sever the vein, nor tie it off; and the flow was coming out from the wound.
I therefore prepared, and treated my own wound, until it was healed; and the nurse suffered nothing but a hoarse voice: and after several days she returned for better treatment.
From this, therefore, I say that there is no fear in the dissection of the epiglottis.
## On the Dissection of the Hernia of the Throat.
Head 44.
This condition, called the hernia of the throat (apostema herniae gutturis), is a large hiatus, according to the colour of the skin, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is according to two modes: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
Certainly there is no skill in what is natural.
Accidental, indeed, it is according to two modes: of which one is similar to thick knots. And the other mode is similar to an aposteme that results from the knotting of an artery. And therein lies the fear, and it is not necessary to make a presumptive judgment about it with the iron, unless it be in what is barely perceptible: and you should try it yourself, and investigate it with an introduction. If therefore you find it similar to a thick knot, and it is not suspended with any of the veins, then cut it as knots are cut, and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if there be a cyst; and if not, then examine all of it carefully. Then take care of the place with what is necessary from treatment, until it is healed.
Head XLV.
§ On the section regarding types of knots.
There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already discussed all their types in division; and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a nodule and an exitum, as it creates doubt.
I say therefore that when the exitum (abscess) is characterized by heat, fever, and persistent pain, until the overflowing suppuration has subsided and putrefaction is complete, then indeed the fever and heat subside.
However, the nodule is not characterized by heat, fever, or pain, and it contains a cystic sac that is its own bag, and it takes on the color of the body; and it captures them as peas do, and it hardens like a nut, and there are both large and small ones.
And they are according to two types: either fatty or containing moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I have discussed in division.
Therefore, when you encounter a nodule and wish to treat it, you must feel it and examine it with the first instrument called an intromissum, according to the shape that comes after this one in the chapter.
And the manner of examining the apothema and all nodules is to take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place that you find in the apothema; and you gradually push your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then, with your last hand, conform it to the measure of the size of the wound.
Then, extract the foreign body, and consider what emerges with it.
If therefore a moist exudate flows, whatever its color may be; then dry it with a superficial section, according to what I have said in the other wounds.
And if no moist exudate emerges with the foreign body, then know that it is fatty; so dry it above by making a section in the form of a cross, according to this form as I have taught you, and pull it out with hooks, and peel the skin from all sides easily, and guard the bag if you can above it, so as to extract it whole with the knot.
If, however, the cyst breaks apart during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, this often happens; then pull out parts of it until nothing remains.
For if anything remains of it, whether little or much, the knot should be drawn back according to the greatest amount.
If it binds you and leaves little of it behind, then fill the wound at the completion of your work with some sharp, dry dust; and tie it tightly, and place a hot compress over it, and care for it as with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If there is a large node, then both its lips and its cure must be taken into account, together with what it encloses.
However, if the vein is pulsating or not pulsating, then prepare and fill the space with a third layer of protection, and leave it for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies and the bleeding stops: then return to incising what remains of the node.
Head 46.
§ On external instruments for cutting and piercing.
From these are the forms of introitions, and there are three types.
Indeed, there is a great one, and a medium one, and a small one among them.
They should be made of iron, square at both ends, so as to retain the opening in the wound.
And these are the forms of experience, or rather, piercing, and one of them is called a drill, that is, piercing; and there are three types.
Indeed, there is a great one, and a medium one, and a small one among them.
They should investigate through those openings, and their exits, and fistulas, and buboes that lie between them due to the bones.
Others become round, smooth, soft, like the large needle that they are inserted into, of citron, or bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the best of them are those that are made from citron.
And there are also experiments to be made with black lead, which they use to test fistulas, whose emptiness is reflected back, as it softly conforms to those reflections.
And there are again three kinds. Because they are long, medium, and short from those [elements], according to the amount of the width and tightness of the fistula.
The shapes of the punctures, and they are of many kinds.
Because they are simple, that is, with only one curvature; and there are three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And from them are blind punctures: and they are of three kinds.
And from them come hooks with two curettes, and there are three types, and from them come hooks with three curettes, and there are three types, and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels by which knots and stitches are cut and torn, and there are three types, since there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
The ends by which they make a cut are sharp, and the other ends are not sharp; and they are not used like this unless there is a firm grip in the lancing of knots at the site of a vein or nerve, so that the patient recovers from it and finds some peace from the burning for a little while after the excision of a knot.
They are made of linen, and they are similar to rags used for alcohol: at the end, a small point is hidden, through which it runs inside and outside when willed, as you see.
The shape of the spatums hidden among the fingers at the piercing of a knot; the patients do not feel them, and they come in three types, large, medium, and small.
The shapes of the windpipes by which the flow of blood is severed; they come in three types, large, medium, and small.
Let them be made round and somewhat longer from air or citron, as you see, and they should be thin.
And you should have these two kinds of vents with you, large and small, so that you can drain blood quickly when necessary, and then when you do not have any medicine at hand.
However, do not use them for draining blood in every part of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as the thigh, coxa, arm, mammilla, entrail, inguinal region, and similar parts from fleshy, moist flaps.
And when they are made into small tools similar to the shape of cherry pits, they can be used to drain blood when it flows from a phlebotomy site or near a vein or artery cut, and also when made round in this form.
Head XLVII.
**On the care of human mammilla (teats) which resemble the mammillas of women.**
Sometimes the mammillas of certain men swell up at the time of sleep's completion (that is, when they begin to be aroused in sleep) until they resemble the mammillas of women, and remain so for a long time after.
He who therefore rejects that (method), it is necessary for him to cut above the breasts with a lunar section, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape the entire fatty tissue. Then fill the wound with an ointment made from incarnate medicine. Then join the two edges of the wound with a stitch and take care of it until it heals.
However, if the breast points downwards and softens due to its own size, as happens with women, then it must be secured on both upper sides with two similar lunar-shaped cuts, of which each is contained with the other at their edges until a larger line contains the smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape the skin between the two edges and remove the fat, and apply what we said about stitching and poultices, which is necessary for healing, until it is cured.
However, if you do not complete the incision that you need to make because of the patient's restlessness or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a submerged corrosive ointment and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the fat. Then take care of it until it heals.
§ On the perforation of the apothecary, which happens under the titill (a type of fabric or bandage).
Chapter XLVIII. Head.
The conditions that occur under this heading are of the hard varieties of strokes (strophula), which contain a cyst and from them originate those that contain moistures.
What are derived from those that contain moistures, these should be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to line g. When all that is in the cyst has been drained out, then fill it with some clean wool and leave it until another day.
Then the wool should be removed and the wound should be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the cyst is of the type of hard strophula, then cut into it as we have said regarding cutting into equal parts of the strophula.
However, if the wound extends to the point of emitting pus, then apply a caustic agent to it as we have said regarding what has been mentioned above.
Chapter XLIX. Head.
§ On the section of the cyst that occurs due to an artery and vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, a gangrenous condition often results from this; and the same occurs with veins, leading to gangrene and swelling.
And the signs by which it is recognized that gangrene and swelling are due to an artery or vein are: for when gangrene is due to an artery, it is long and compact in depth in the body; and when you push your fingers into the gangrenous area, you feel a kind of hissing.
And that which is due to a vein is round and prominent on the body.
And amputation above this gangrenous area is erroneous, particularly when it is under the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is a very great risk. Therefore, it is necessary to treat it with care using a knife, and even what remains at the extremities or in the head should be treated accordingly.
Therefore, over what remains from these after the swelling of the arterial opening, make an incision in the skin along its length. Then open the incision with hooks, after which free the artery from its tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a knife under it and cause it to penetrate until it reaches the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, as I taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then make an incision where the two ligaments meet with a spatula, until all the blood that is within it flows out and the wound is healed.
Then apply treatment that produces pus until the ligaments shrink; afterwards, care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the cutting of a vein, then you must hold with your hand as best you can the part that is causing the abscess with the skin. Then insert a knife under the place that you held with your hand, and cause it to penetrate until you extract it from the other side. And put a double thread in it until you remove it from its other part. Then bind the abscess tightly with a good ligament: as I told you about the new ligament, from both parts with both ends of the thread.
If, however, you fear that the thread will come out, then insert another knife with a different thread under the entire abscess near the place of the needle wound; press and tie your threads at four places.
Then make an incision through the center of the abscess until the contents are exposed. Then cut away the excess skin and release what is bound within it.
Then place upon it the little piece that you have soaked in wine and oil. Then apply the dressing, which is done with lint and ointment until it heals.
Head (L.)
§ On the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
As the abscess occurs in an artery and vein, so it occurs in a nerve; this happens through beating or excessive strain, and similar causes, and is most common in the joints, or the sole of the foot, and every place where there are junctions that move: and it is a severe abscess.
It resembles the color of the rest of the body, and is present in many dispositions without pain; and when it contracts with movement, the patient feels a weakness similar to numbness.
And it is not a deep abscess in the body, but rather under the skin, and it moves to all parts, and does not extend forward or backward, nor to the sides.
Therefore, what exists among them (the joints) should not be attacked with a sword. Perhaps, then, a contraction might occur.
However, where it (the condition) exists in the head or on the forehead, find the skin with a scalpel. If, therefore, there is an abscess of the skin, then hold it with tweezers and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it, and dress the wound with a bandage; and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter LI.
§ On the incision of an abscess, which occurs in the abdomen.
Certain men suffer from numerous growths in their vessels and other parts of their bodies, which are called "Fungalia", due to their resemblance to fungi.
Whose root is thin, and whose head is large, and their edges are turned inward. And among them is a few, and among them is what is greatly admired.
And indeed I have seen a man whose stomach had two openings, more similar to other organs than anything else; there was no difference between them, they were white and small, and their edges turned inward, fusing together, and moisture always flowed from them.
Therefore, cut them and you will find that one weighs as much as one and eight ounces, and the other as much as six ounces. The treatment in their incision is as you will consider then: if the patient is weak and moist, and has a pale, white, thin root, then cut it with a wide blade, and there will be cauterization in your presence over fire.
For often much blood is expelled during the section; therefore, if it afflicts you with blood, then cauterize it.
If you see that the patient is weak and fearful from the cut with iron, then take a well-made lead thread and tie it around it; in this way as I have said, and leave it for two days.
Then add to the tension of the lead. Do not therefore cease to tighten the lead whenever it presses against the flesh until it is completely removed and falls by itself without effort.
However, if the swelling of the root is great, then there is something to be afraid of and fearful in making an incision, especially when it is within the abdomen.
However, it is possible to make an incision through its middle. Then cauterize it thoroughly so that it does not reopen.
Then care for it until the wound is healed.
And do not be led to think that you should make an incision on a lump that is of a dark colour, has little sensation, and looks putrid; for this is indeed a cancerous ulcer, and I shall return to speak about cancer afterwards.
Chapter LII.
§ On the care of the tumor in the groin.
The tumor in the groin should be treated with urgency for many reasons. Or from the cracks if they are near the abdomen, the outlet should be through that or the intestine, according to what happens in other breaks. Or from the blood that flows from a vein or an artery, as mentioned above. It is constrained by its violence in that.
However, if it is due to a crack and the outlet is inflamed, then it resembles the colour of the patient's body, and it is soft without pain, and its position appears different. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then its position corresponds to what we have described, with a greater diversity. So when you press it with your fingers, it disappears, then returns and may make a sound, and it is very prominent at the entrance of the bath, causing great effort.
If it is indeed due to moisture, it is soft, then it does not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor is there any constriction or addition.
Which, if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears blackened on the skin.
However, if it is due to newly formed flesh: then the abscess is grey, swollen, hard, and takes on a shape according to its quantity.
If it is indeed due to heat, then its touch is soft.
And the operation in that case is to consider whether there is an eminence of the navel due to blood from an artery, or vein, or vitality; then it is necessary to prevent treatment of it. For in that case there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of the apostemata due to the artery and vein.
If the eminence of the navel is due to an intestine or a stone, then it is necessary to urge the patient to keep their breath and remain standing extended. Then make signs with wax around the navel of the whole body. Then instruct him to lie back between your hands on his back. Then make circles with the hot spatula around the navel above the place you marked with wax. Then extend the opening of the apostema upwards with a large hook. Then tie him around the strong circumference with thread or a firm silk string; and let the knot of the ligament be loose.
Then open the extended opening of the apostema above the ligament. If you find that the organ is already captured by a ligature, then extract it, and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine towards the interior of the abdomen; and if you find the gallbladder, then take hold of it with a hook and cut off its excess.
However, if it is an artery or vein that opposes you, then surround it extensively. Then prepare for your operation. And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles into the circle that you made around the wound in the form of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tie the wound in four places over the needles: and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the space until the flesh is putrefied and falls off on its own; or cut it when it becomes thin and putrefies.
Then care for it with what is necessary from ointments until it is healed.
If the hernia is of hard flesh within it, or due to moisture, then it is necessary to make an incision into the wound as we said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find within it.
Then he treats the wound with what strengthens the place.
**Head III.**
**On the treatment of cancer.**
We have described the division of the types of cancer and how the way to its cure is with medicines: and caution must be taken from it regarding its healing with iron, so as not to ulcerate; and we have described that cancer is generated in the matrix, and care must be taken from its cure.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as cancer that is in the breasts, or the thigh, and similar places, from the body to be extracted whole; especially when it is beginning to grow small.
When it becomes very old and is large, it is not necessary to approach it closely.
For I myself could not heal anyone from it; nor have I seen another before me who has succeeded in dealing with it.
And the operation on it, when located as we have described, is, as I have said before, to precede and free the patient from the black plague several times. Then, if you notice a notable fullness in the phlebotomy itself.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is spoken to about the operation.
Then insert into the cancer hooks that are suitable for it. Then make an incision in it from all sides with the skin, according to the examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and allow the blood to flow, do not cut off the wound quickly or sharply, but carefully clean out the gross blood with your hand or, if possible, with instruments there.
If, however, the flow of thick blood from an artery or vein causes you difficulty, then cauterize the vein until the blood stops. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
**On the care of Hydrops.**
Head (IV) We have described in detail the division of types of hydrops and how the accumulation of water occurs; also, the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines.
And those that are treated with iron are nothing but a mere imitation of surgery; and they do not approach the true nature of tympanitis with iron, nor do they fully embrace the essence of hysarca. For that is deadly.
When you have already treated this condition as hydropisis (a type of tympanitis) with medicine, and your treatment has not improved it, then consider this: For if the weakness has already taken hold or there is another illness alongside hydropisis—such as cough, chest congestion, and similar conditions—then be cautious not to treat it with iron, for that is a danger.
However, if you see that the patient is full of vitality and does not have any other illness besides hydropisis, and they are neither a child nor an elderly person: then the mode of treatment is as follows: you should take the patient in your hands, and the assistant should press the abdomen after you, by pushing water downward with their hand.
Then take a thin, sharp knife, according to this form. It should have two sharp points, elongated, with a sharp end similar to the spatumile. However, it should have a certain degree of flexibility so that it does not penetrate too deeply during the operation, reaching the intestines, and causing harm to them.
Then consider. If there is a collection of fluid (hydropisi) from the intestinal tract, then it is necessary to extend with a cut from the navel three fingers in length downwards towards the groin, above the pubic bone.
If indeed the collection of fluid (hydropisi) is due to liver disease, then your cut should be from the left side, starting at the navel with three fingers.
And if the cause of this is the spleen, then the cut should be on the right side, and it is not necessary for the cut to be made also on the left side where the patient lies, so as not to allow excess fluid to flow to that weak area.
Then perforate the entire skin with an instrument. Then insert your hand into the incision and use a forceps between the skin, and extract it, as if you were peeling an orange, so that the amount removed is about the size of a fingernail or slightly more.
Then perforate the extracted part until the forceps reach the empty space, and this is the place where water lies. Then extract the tissue, and insert into the opening (foramen) an instrument of this shape. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or bronze, or brass, soft and smooth, with a small opening at its lower part, and three openings on its sides, two from one side and one from the other: and its end is cut in the form of a pen's incision, as you will see; there is an armlet at its upper end.
Now when the instrument reaches water, then it immediately descends over the instrument, thus drawing water at that moment to a medium quantity.
For if you draw water from it more than necessary, perhaps the patient will die at that moment due to the resolution of his animal spirit; or he might suffer a fainting spell that brings him close to death.
Indeed, draw water from it according to its strength and according to what is suitable for you, based on the condition of the patient's pulse, and according to its goodness.
Then remove the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is immediately retained by the skin that has a hole above it, of which I spoke; about which I said, pierce it according to that manner.
Then repeat the process with the second instrument, if you see that the patient can bear it; and also extract a small amount of water from it.
In those days, perform that operation without fear and guard yourself against error; until there remains no water except a small amount.
However, if the patient is weak and has removed a great deal of water, then care for him with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and under the sun, and let him rest over thirst; and treat himself with drying medicines until he recovers; and cauterize the stomach, and (perform) lancing and (treat) according to what I have mentioned above.
§ On the care of infants who are born in places where their urinary passages are not perforated.
Head 50.
When an infant issues from its mother's womb, and the opening of its head is not perforated, or the orifice is narrow or in the wrong place.
Therefore, it is necessary to assist with the perforation immediately after birth with a delicate spatula, according to this form.
Then place a thin lead claw in the opening and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When the child, therefore, wants to pass urine, it should be moved and allowed to pass. Then reduce the swelling.
And if you do not apply lead (plaster), it is possible that the urine flowing over the place will not allow the swelling to close.
But he whose opening (wound) is narrow is treated with lead, as we have said, for many days, until it widens.
But those in which there is an opening in an inappropriate place are damaged. This is because the opening (wound) is near the end of the handle of the scythe; therefore, it cannot heal towards the front until the patient raises the scythe with their hand to higher levels. It is also not born in a normal way, because the sperm cannot reach the matrix (womb) straight; and it is a severe illness.
And the method of treatment in that case is for the patient to lie on their back. Then extend the scythe's head with your left hand, stretching it greatly, and cut the head of the scythe from its previous place with a sharp point or chisel, similar to cutting a calamus or a radish, so that an opening is created in the middle as needed.
And be aware of blood flow during your operation. This often happens. Therefore, oppose it with what separates the blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
§ Regarding those that occur in the foreskin and scrotum, and corruption, blackening, and adhesions.
Head LVI.
These Albather occurrences often happen in the body, and it is a great evil for flesh.
And from these, some are malicious, and others are not.
Therefore, the non-malicious one should be suspended with a delicate hook and separated until it is completely clean. Then place over it a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat the same wound after that with dyafinic ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is malignant, with a discoloured pus, then after incising and draining it, cauterize the wound.
However, if the abscess is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and it extends both inside and outside the foreskin, then you must remove the abscess that is inside first, until it heals, before caring for the outer part, because when you treat it at the same time, the foreskin will not be secure unless it is perforated.
And it also happens in the testicles, with the foreskin turning black and decaying. Therefore, you must cauterize everything that has already turned black and wants to decay, or is already decaying.
Then apply a line over it after that with honey mixed with flour and ground herbs.
Then tend to that with the rest of the cure until it heals.
However, if there is bleeding, then administer cauterization with a lunar cautery in this form.
Cauterization is indeed a combination of two dispositions at the same time, namely to stop bleeding and to heal a wound when it decays.
If the head of the hammer is corroded and destroyed completely in an instant, then you should insert a small leaden tube into the meatus so that the weak flow can pass over it.
In the true adhesion of the prepuce to the hammer head, and this adhesion does not occur unless in one whose prepuce is healthy, and no circumcision is required over it; and sometimes adhesion occurs due to a wound or ulcer: therefore, it is necessary to scrape off the adhesion with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the hammer head is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to discern the precise location, then you should scrape off a little from the hammer head and also from the prepuce. This is because when the prepuce is thin, it may be easily pierced due to its own thinness.
Then separate the prepuce from the hammer head using a thin piece of linen cloth that has been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then it should be treated with a sharp wine until it heals.
Chapter LVII.
§ On the purification of infants and the treatment of errors that occur with them.
Circumcision is not a remedy for all wounds, but when it is performed by our own hand, according to our will, and its use is appropriate for boys, it is necessary that we perform the operation in a better way, leading to a milder path to health.
I say therefore that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not follow it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired through experience.
This is because I find that a greater part of the work of surgeons and blood-letters involves circumcision with a needle and with scissors, and they use cauterization, ligatures with thread, and incisions with nails.
And I myself have already tried all these methods, and I do not find a better form of purification with scissors and threading.
Because in purification with nails, the skin often slips away. Since the skin of the prepuce has two layers, therefore sometimes the upper skin is cut and the lower layer is torn; so it is compelled to incise again to cut another one, and future pain is inevitable. And when purification is done through the use of alkahest, that is, the digitus (the finger) used by surgeons, it does not ensure the safety of the incision at the extremity of the male member, since perhaps it enters his orifice.
However, in the case of purification with a fingernail, it may straighten the iron and corrupt your operation, and the skin of a boy is naturally thin, and many are born like this so that they do not need purification. And you will see this.
However, with purification using shears and binding with thread, I have gained a good experience: because the shears are proportional to the incision, therefore, the sharpness above is like the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand, the two sharp edges are aligned and cut according to a single operation at the same time, and they form a compression with a similar shape, containing the skin of the shaft from all sides, so that no mistake is made in any way.
And the method of operation is such that you can estimate a boy, especially if he is among those who understand a little, except for tying the thread to his shaft only; and leave it until another day.
Then make him happy and joyful in every possible way from the fact that he receives understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and let him not sit down. Keep the hidden scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor anything of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his groin, and blow on the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the penis emerges. Then cleanse that part from the filth it has accumulated.
Then bind the designated place with a double thread. Then bind the lower part with a slight turn of the second ligature. Then hold with your index finger and thumb, securing the lower ligature's place well, and cut between the two ligaments. Then quickly lift the skin upwards and extract the penis head. Then allow the blood to flow slowly (it is better this way), and put a poultice on top; and over the poultice, place a cloth in which the cooked ointment has been spread in rosewater, and press it with oil of roses. Lastly, apply it well and leave it on until the next day; then tend to the rest of the wound until it heals.
The form of the scalpel for purification is as follows.
There should be two sharp points at the end, and they should meet; let no branch of the claw protrude outward; and the length of both edges should be equal to the length of both handles.
An error indeed occurs during purification, because perhaps the entire inner skin or a part of it flees from the cut.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it out from the moment you mark the place with your fingernail and then cut it equally.
If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
If, however, they exceed three days and there remains something under the hook that is inflamed and marked, then leave it until the mark becomes hot and easily removed, and cut it according to what you have prepared, and be careful from the head of the hook. It will not harm him indeed.
Take care of it with what strengthens the wound from the dust we discussed in the treatise on dust, and if it is cut into the skin beyond the required depth and widens towards above, it will not harm it either.
Therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
**Chapter LVIII.**
**On the Extraction of Retained Urine in the Bladder**
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by congestion from stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh, or similar conditions resulting from the modalities of treatment we have described in division.
And if the bladder is not relieved and you see that the retention is due to a stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then he should be laid on his knees for treatment. Then his feet are placed on his back, and he extends his breath from the upper part of his back, and tightens his weak breath as much as possible. Therefore, it is constrained with the neck of the bladder to expel the stone to the rear, wherefore the bladder is relieved.
If it does not relieve with what we have said and the condition of the patient is critical, then you should perform the extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: made of silver, and very thin, flexible like the quill of a bird's feather in thinness, similar in length to the palm of one hand. It has a fine cannula at its tip.
And the manner of exiting the wound through it is to take a doubled thread and ties at its end wool or cloth, a good ligature; and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe; and cut with scissors if any excess of wool remains, and insert it into the tube with caution as before.
Then moisten the syringe with oil or butter and alum; and make the patient sit down on a seat, and insert the vesica, and the patient's penis with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syringe into the penis with ease until it reaches the root of the penis.
Then double the same part above the navel.
Then push the syringe inside until it reaches the vesica, and the patient feels that it has reached the empty place; and this is not done according to this order unless the passage through which it passes is narrow and twisted.
Then extend the thread with the wool gradually. For the wound will follow the wool.
Then extract it and make the wound flow through the urethra; and repeat with the syringe, and do not stop doing this until the vesica is emptied and the patient finds relief.
On the quality of enemas using a clepsydra.
**Chapter LIX**
When a ulcer occurs in the urethra, or blood is congealed within it, or pus is formed and water and medications need to be introduced into it, then an instrument called a clepsydra should be used, and this is its form.
It is indeed closed, that is, obstructed. And it has three openings, two from one side and one from the other, as you can see.
And the concave place where it is pressed should be according to the amount that fills it without adding anything, until something is pulled through it, then it is attracted by humidity; and when it is pressed, it expels it far away, according to how a clepsydra releases oil, that is, Greek fire in martial engagements.
Therefore, when you want to release humidity into the urethra, insert the end of the clepsydra into the humidity and pull it with what presses it towards the upper parts, for humidity is drawn into the concave part of the clepsydra.
Then insert the end of it into the syphon as we described in the syringe. Then he drives away the moisture with what drives it, for the moisture reaches the wound immediately, and the patient feels it.
The form of a delicate enema by which the wound is enemasated.
Let it be made of silver or gilded copper; let the head be higher like an almond-shaped bowl, and beneath it, a cavity through which the ligament falls.
Then take the wound of an arrow, and place in it the moisture with which you are to enemasate the wound. Then bind it between two cavities with a strong ligature of double thread, and heat the moisture slightly over fire.
Then insert the end of the enema into the wound, afterward, squeeze your hand over the wound with a firm grasp holding the moisture, until the patient feels that this moisture has now reached the wound.
If, however, the wound is not immediately available, then take a fragment of parchment, and make from it a circle, and perforate it so that all its roundness is removed. Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they unfold. Then add a circle around it, as you would with a wound: after you have placed in it what you wish to remove from humours, oils, and water.
Then bind it tightly with the instrument and perform on it as you did with the wound from expression with your hand, until the moisture reaches the wound.
Chapter 60.
§ On the extraction of stones.
We have discussed the division of stone types and their treatment with medicines, and I mentioned the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, those in the bladder, and their signs; also, the stone on which the operation is performed with the hand and incision, which is a stone that forms naturally in the bladder, as well as one fixed in a urinary catheter, and I am recounting all this with clear exposition and abridged explanation.
I say therefore that stones formed in the bladder most often occur in children.
And among its signs, urine exits the bladder similar to water in its fineness; it appears with white sand, and the weak man rubs his catheter and struggles with it, and often hangs from it. Then it protrudes, and the anus is expelled with it in many of them.
And the cure of children is easy up to the age of fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. But in young people it is intermediate, for it lies between these two [extremes], and the treatment is easier in those whose condition is better; but if their condition is poor, then the cure becomes a concern for them.
When, therefore, we come to the cure, it is first necessary that we cleanse the sick with a clister, which will draw out all filth that is in his intestines; for this itself sometimes prevents the stone from being seen during the examination.
Then the patient must be taken with his feet up and shaken and moved down to the lower parts [of the body], so that the stone will fall into the deep part of the urethra or come out from its high position several times.
Then make him sit between your hands, with his hands under his buttocks, so that the urethra is entirely inclined downwards.
Then examine him and feel him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in the urethra, then immediately approach with the surgical instrument above it.
If it does not come off completely under your touch, then you should use the index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a young boy; or the middle finger if he is a fully grown man: and insert it into his anus and apply pressure from the stone, until it rests under your finger, and gradually turn it towards the base of the urethra.
Then press it with your finger and push it towards the outside, against the place where you have made the incision; and tell the attendant to press the urethra with his hand, and instruct another assistant to stretch the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand to move away the skin that is over the testicles in the area around the incision.
Then insert the speculum, which is shaped like this. And find the space between the anus and testicles, not in the middle but on one side, towards the left side of birth; and make the incision above the stone, and place your finger inside the anus: and make a transverse cut so that the outer part is wide and inner part narrow, according to the amount that it is possible for the stone to come out from there without being too large.
Perhaps the finger that is inside the anus, near the stone at the site of the incision, will press against it and cause the stone to come out without difficulty.
And know that since the stone has angles and edges, it is difficult for it to come out because of that.
And from it comes a soft part, resembling a gland, and round in shape, making its exit easy.
Therefore, those who have angles and margins add them to the fissure.
If it does not exit thus, then one must use skill over it: either tie it with a string carefully, whose end is like the Moon, which ties around the stone and does not slip away from it; or insert beneath it a fine instrument, with careful ends.
If, however, you cannot do the above, then widen the opening slightly. If something catches you with blood, cut it off with a knife.
If indeed the stone is more than one, then push the largest first towards the opening of the urethra. Then cut above it. Then push the smaller ones after it; and do likewise if there are more than two.
If it is very large, then ignorance is such that one must cut above it with a great section. Since it happens that a sick person suffers from one of two things, either he will die or he experiences constant urination; in the first case, since the wound does not heal at all, ...
Indeed, administration of expulsion should be done until it is released; or, with forceps, the fracture should be manipulated until it is extracted piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpentine, aloe, and dragon's blood; tighten it and place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water to cool the hot abscess.
Then place the sick person on their back, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day. When you have loosened it, then wash the place with water and much oil.
Then care for the wound with a salve of dyaphricon and basilicon until it is healed.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs in the wound, and there is suppuration and similar things; as if blood becomes congealed in the veins and urine is prevented from passing through it; then that is known from the discharge of blood with urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood from it. For if it remains, it causes the vein to corrupt and its putrefaction.
Then rinse the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; apply to it whatever is appropriate from treatment, until it heals.
And during the whole course of treatment, it is necessary to bind both thighs and groins together because of the medicines placed on the site.
If a stone is too small and is caught in the urethra, and it becomes fixed there, preventing urine from flowing out; then treat it with what I have mentioned before you reach the sectioning stage. Indeed, I have often avoided surgery through this treatment, as I have already tried it.
And it is, as you take a perforator of iron, whose form is triangular with sharp ends, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie the urethra to the stone beneath the skin so that it does not return to its original path.
Then insert the piercing iron into the wound with ease, until it reaches the perforator on that very stone; and then move the perforator with your hand slowly over the stone, and cover its perforation, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
It is immediately emptied (or cleared).
Then press your hand over what remains of the stone from the external side of the weapon. It breaks itself, and is expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed of his illness.
If, however, this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from doing so, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread over the stone. Then dry the stone on the weapon itself between the two threads. Then extract it (the stone). Then loosen the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a thread of the thread under the stone unless it does not return to the wound; and another thread above the stone, unless when the thread below is loosened after the stone's removal, the skin returns to its place, and closes the wound; and for that reason, when you tie the upper thread, you must draw the skin up towards the higher parts, so that it returns to your completeness, and closes the wound, as we said.
Head LXI.
On the extraction of the female stone.
The stone is rarely found in women.
However, if such a stone occurs in any of them, then treatment is difficult and prohibited due to its many modes.
One of them is: that a woman might be a virgin.
And the second is that you will not find a woman who conceals herself from the physician when she is chaste or has a husband.
The third is that you will not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially the manual operations.
And the fourth is the remoteness of the location of the stone: for it requires deep incision, and there is fear in that.
Which if necessary provokes that, then you should take a woman physician, well-versed, and she is hard to find.
If indeed you desire this, then seek a chaste physician, subtle, and a well-taught woman obstetrician in matters of women, or a woman who has learned this art; so do make her present, and especially to her, so that she does all that you command her regarding the inquiry about the stone.
Firstly, one must check if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to insert a finger into her vagina and feel for a stone.
If he finds the stone, he should press it with his finger and then immediately summon the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone. After that, he places his left hand over the opening and applies gentle pressure.
If the stone is found, then it is necessary to gently move it away from the vagina opening towards the lower parts with the utmost care until it reaches the root of the hip.
Then he should cut it off near the middle of the thigh at the root of the hip, from whichever side it presents itself, and feel for the stone in that area. His finger should not move away from beneath the stone, and the initial cut should be small. Then he should insert the knife blade over that cut.
Then he should insert the knife blade over that cut. If he feels the stone, then he should add to the cut according to the amount that the stone emerges from it.
And you should know that there are many types of stones. From it is a small and great one, soft and harsh, long and round having branches.
Therefore know the kind of it, as it will be shown to you by this over that which you see.
If therefore blood seeps into you, then add to the place three layers of bandages, and keep it tight for a time until the blood stops.
Then prepare for your operation until the stone is removed: and do, as you prepare with the instruments I mentioned for the extraction of stones from men, to help you with them in your operation.
If blood flow seizes you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut; then put powder on the place, and tighten it with small bandages suitable; and do not leave it unbound: and release the stone, but do not extract it yourself. Perhaps the sick woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When therefore the acuteness of the blood subsides after days, and the place putrefies, then prepare for your operation until the stone is removed.
**Head of Chapter LXII**
On cutting through a watery hernia.
A watery hernia occurs only when there is an accumulation of moisture behind the peritoneum, which is beneath the skin and contains the testicle; it is called a hernia.
And sometimes it is enclosed within its own sac, which nature has prepared for it in a certain part, until it can be extracted; this is another testicle, and it lies beneath the skin of the scrotum, as we have said, and this happens rarely.
The cause of this condition is the weakness that occurs in the testicles, which allows this material to flow towards them. And it can also occur due to a blow to the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or it may be of a declining colour to yellow, or red-brown, or putrid, black, or water-white; and this is the most desirable.
And the signs by which one knows where the accumulation of water is, are these. If there is any problem in the operation as we have mentioned, then the aperture (incision) is round and of a length somewhat greater than that of the figure; and the testicle is not visible since it is contained within by the fluid.
And if there is fluid in the pouch itself, then the aperture (incision) is round and bulges a little, and because of this, someone might think that it is another testicle.
And if there is fluid between the skin of the testicles and the white (scrotum), then it falls under the sense (of an operation).
When one has perceived the colour of the fluid, then examine the colour of the fluid in the aperture with a square instrument, whose form precedes (the operation). Accordingly, according to what emerges from the sign of the instrument, judge what is between them (the testicles).
When we come to cure with the iron (scalpel), then one must urge the patient, if possible, to have blood drawn from him so that you may see his body full of it.
Then he should be laid on his back on a high place slightly, and many cloths should be placed under him.
Then sit you on his left side, and bid the helper to sit on his right side, who shall stretch his patient's arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the part of the lower abdomen.
Then take a wide spatula and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, almost to the chest: and make the incision according to the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white part that surrounds them: and clean and observe, or be careful from this, so as to cut yourself: and let your excoriation be where you cut yourself, from the part that hangs with the egg more: and delicately examine the excoriation according to what is possible for you.
Then make a wide hole through the white part with pure water and extract all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the white part towards the upper parts, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that surrounds it: and cut the white part however you can cut yourself, either in its entirety or partially, especially its thin side. For if you do not carefully examine the incision, there will be no security, and water may remain.
However, if the egg proceeds from its skin during your surgical hour: then when you have completed the incision of the white part, bring it back (the testicle). Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with stitching.
Then take care of yourself as with the rest of the wounds, until it is healed.
If you find a wound corrupted from blackness by something else, then it is necessary to use tying instruments, which are the suspensors, in order to prevent blood flow.
Then cut off the testicle with its suspensory ligament and extract the wound; afterward, care for it as we said.
If indeed water is collected in two parts, then know that there are two branches; so dry the other part equally as you did with the other.
And if it agrees with you, so that it becomes one operation, then do this: afterward, wipe away the blood. And insert into the sections a thread soaked in oil or rosy oil; and place outside another thread than you soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over both testicles, and stretch the entrails: and place on top two doubled cloths, which are small; and tie them above with a ligament that has six turns in this form.
Then take two cloths, and moisten them, and fill them with red dye according to this likeness: and make the ends by which it is pressed from cloth or wet wool; and join them with a tight belt around the loins; and one end should be taken over the buttocks up to the back, and the second should take hold of the part of the chest; and two ends below over both thighs, and two other ends above over both inguinal regions, and join the whole tight belt around the loins.
And sometimes, this ram is treated artificially with a cautery at the site of the section with iron; and it is as if you take the cautery with a delicate knife and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it is inflamed, as we have described. Until, when it reveals itself as a white, healing mass containing water, then take the cautery in this form.
It assimilates Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that healing mass, and it is inflamed until all humidity is expelled.
Then extend the healing mass with hooks, and scrape it with a fine, ignited cautery, and cut into it as much as possible for you until you eradicate all of it.
And cauterize from the egg, so that it does not touch the same fire.
And know that this operation is more salutary, and less prone to blood flow, and better than an operation with section.
If, however, it causes you opposition in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, a hot apostema or blood flow or something else: then you must care for what causes you opposition from that with the cure that is fitting to it, as has been mentioned above.
However, if the patient is timid and does not expect this operation because of his fear, then administer the perforation as I describe that it is.
When you have certified to yourself through what we said about the meaning of what is liquid (the limb), then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the fistula at the lower part of the limb with a wide spatula-like tool, and make the incision according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place a bandage over the wound and bind it tightly, allowing it to drain the remaining water, then care for it until the wound heals.
However, if there is a problem with the drainage of water at the time you pierce it, and this is not due to the white skin making a counteraction in the wound opening and preventing the exit of water, then you should insert a needle into the wound or an instrument with which the water of hydrops is extracted, whose form has already been described, or add to the operation of the wound slightly.
And know that water returns and is aggregated after six months, or about those times. When it therefore aggregates, it will be healed in the same manner, and the patient will pass his days.
**Head XIII.**
On the care of muscular wounds.
You should know that in this section on this ramice, there is a risk leading to harm in many dispositions. Therefore, I consider its abandonment as a salutary step from it.
And I am reminding you of the operation on it, and the type of scar.
I say, therefore, that many scars occur in bodies, from which the testicles are formed: and this happens for many reasons, namely.
Or from an excess of acute fluid, which flows towards the testicles. Or from striking.
And the colour of the scar is according to the colour of the body, and it does not cause pain; and the scar is grey.
And perhaps the scar is bony, which has a dark colour, and does not cause sensation.
And sometimes it occurs from the knotting and swelling of arteries, as has been mentioned before: or from the swelling of veins.
What is therefore derived from their (arteries') expansion can be known through the position of the pulse when you press it with your fingers. And it is not necessary to touch it directly at all.
That which is derived from the expansion of veins does not disappear from it when pressed with the fingers.
And now it is possible that an incision can be made over this type and over the other flesh: and it is as if you were to cut the skin of the testicles. Then extend the foreskin upwards and extract it with a clean blade, free the suspensory ligaments from the cavity, and tie the vas (spheres) with a ligature, and cut the suspensory after you have freed it from every part of its attachments.
If therefore the foreskin is consolidated with those born tissues, then you must grasp the foreskin and cut it.
And if there is an adhesion between something from the foreskin or in that which is between the vas (spheres), then you must free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
However, if there is a born tissue at the place of adhesion which is behind, then you must cut it all and extract the foreskin as we said.
After your operation is complete, fill the wound with gauze soaked in rose oil and wine. Then tend to it, along with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 49.
On the care of ramics (or stitches) which is done with wine.
It is a condition known as apoplexy, when there is some kind of inflammation within the brain, similar to a botch, accompanied by a softening of the testicles; and this makes it difficult for the patient to move or exercise, or even walk.
In the treatment of this illness, fear plays a part, because of the remembrance of what came before.
Indeed, we must say that the treatment of this (illness) is according to what the first ones did.
I say, therefore, that it is necessary for the patient to sit on an elevated seat. Then, push the suspenders of the testicles downwards. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, when you feel what is near the scrotum; and have another assistant hold them, and stretch them out gradually.
Then he incises with a broad and sharp spatula, crossing the section directly over the vessels, until the vessels are detected.
Then he removes the skin from all parts, as we told you in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temporal regions.
Then he fixes them with a sharp knife where the double filament is located, and ligates each one at the first places where they occur; and ligates them again at the last of them. Then he cuts them in the middle of the straight section according to the length of the body, and extracts what is aggregated from foul humors that are corrupted.
Then he treats the wound with the treatment of the remaining wounds, where blood is generated, so that the vessels which nourish one testicle fall off. It is not a bad thing through that.
If, however, the vessels are blocked in all of them, then they should be extracted for this reason, so that the testicles are not deprived of nourishment due to the cut, and it does not become weak or withers, and there is no pain with them.
Chapter LXV.
**On the care of intestinal ramified vessels.**
The event of this ramicus is from the section that occurs in the case of an incision made on the perineum over a vein in the inguinal region extending into the abdominal cavity.
Why the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from an incision or from its extension.
And these two types occur from many causes. Or from impact. Or from sudden movement. Or from noise. Or from the elevation of a serious condition, and similar things.
And the sign, when it is from the extension of an incision. It is what happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly: it is an equal distance towards the deep [cavity], because the incision compresses the intestine.
And the sign of its presence when it is from a cut with a knife, because it causes a sudden severe pain from the beginning: and it is an apostema that is diverse, visible under the skin nearby: and that is due to the exit of the intestine, and its course towards the outer part of the cut.
And it sometimes emerges with the intestine twisted: and this is called the "twisted intestine" or "twist," and it can occur with vigor.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine and gets stuck there, bringing about great danger, especially when pressed upon. For it causes severe pain and, in particular, when pressure is applied.
And in the treatment of conditions of this kind, there is fear of iron, so one must be cautious about cases involving it.
And the method of treatment is to urge the patient, so that he reduces his intestine with his own hand back into its proper place if he obeys and it returns. Then it is lifted up over its collarbone between your hands, and its legs are raised.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin upwards towards the higher parts, and dry the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then fix in two jaws of the cutting hook, as needed to open the cut with them; and the cut should be according to the quantity that it is possible for the intestine to emerge from.
Next, scrape the skin from the sinus and the areas beneath the testicles, until a white, hard membrane is exposed from all sides. Then insert your index finger into the space following the testicle, in the area between the white sinus membrane that is beneath the skin, and the second sinus membrane, and firmly adhere to the posterior part.
Then, with your right hand, pull the inner skin of the testicles; and as this extends the white sinus membrane upwards with your left hand, gently press the sinus with your right hand to expose the part to be cut. And instruct your assistant to extend the membrane upwards, and you will carefully loosen the adhesion that is at the back, completely detaching it.
And ensure with your fingers that nothing remains intact from the intestine within the white, hard sinus. However, if you find anything remaining from it within the sinus, then push it towards the lower venter.
Then take some thread, in which there is a thick filament made from ten threads, and insert it near the last sinus, that is, the tunic covering the testicles, which follows the cut; then cut the ends protruding from the thread, until there are four threads remaining. Then arrange some of them over others in a cross-like pattern and tie them with the silk from which we spoke, since it is a strengthening ligament beneath the skin covering the testicles, until nothing of the substance that nourishes them can escape, so as not to cause any hot abscesses. And again, place the second ligament according to the first, distant from it by less than two fingers. And after these two ligaments, divide from the scalp, which is under the skin of the testicles, in the amount of the size of a finger, and cut through it all according to its roundness, and remove the ovum from it.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, from which the blood flows, and heal it as we have mentioned above.
Then apply a cloth soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the cut; and apply the ligament as we have mentioned. And when the white scar that we mentioned is cauterized, be careful after cutting it to prevent blood flow. Indeed, this often happens. And leave the ligament until it falls off on its own.
But if the case delays, then it is bathed with warm water; and apply over it what we have mentioned until it falls off.
Then tend to the wound with the rest of the wound care until it heals.
Chapter LXVI.
On the Rapid Branch
In this chapter of the text, there is no record of anyone daring to perform surgery on it with a blade.
And they said first that it is done as we have narrated in the chapter which is about the rib (and the blade's impact on it). Which is, as you tie the blades after the section above them with ease below; then cut in the middle and treat it afterward with what opens it up, until the blades fall off; and heal the wound, according to what we have said, until it is cured.
Chapter LXVII.
§ On the disruption that occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the opening protrudes and does not descend to the testicles with any part of the intestines; and if it does descend, it is minimal and returns to normal within a few hours; but if it prolongs with that condition for some time, an additional fissure develops in the scrotum until the intestines descend completely into the scrotum.
And that occurs from the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groins, as we have said. That is because the wound extends: then it softens, and the space is filled, and it protrudes.
And its treatment is with cauterization, as the preceding account has described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron, in this manner: and he lies so that the sick person rests on his back between your hands. Then dry the space of the rupture that has become filled and protruding, by cutting across its width, according to the amount of three fingers.
Then tighten the edges that are under the skin, until when the white wound beneath the skin is exposed, which follows its course.
Then take a knife, and place it over the protruding wound from the skin, and press it deeply into the entrails.
Then make two incisions over the ends of the knife from the wound, and connect them with a stitch, one to the other; then remove the end of the knife.
And do not cut the wound at all, nor stretch it, nor anything else, as I have made you know in the treatment of intestinal branches.
Then the care concerns the treatment of wounds. When therefore you make an incision with a knife, clean it, and restore the wound, until it is consolidated.
The wound contracts, and no additional prominence of the rupture is added.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is closer to healing.
Head LXVIII.
§ On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
In some men, the skin of the testicles softens frequently because the flesh surrounding them softens, and its appearance becomes discolored.
Therefore, he who is asked for his treatment should make the patient lie down on his back and cut away all the softened skin that has become loose from the natural skin.
Then sew together the two edges with stitches: if there is any surplus of the softened skin on its first three stitches, or four, make a firm stitch.
Then incise between the sutures.
Then attend to the healing of the remaining wounds, until they are healed and the stitches fall out.
Head LXIX.
§ On castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated by our law, and for that reason it is permissible for me not to mention it in this book of mine, and its remembrance is not necessary except for two reasons.
One of these is that it should be known to a doctor when asked about it, and that he knows the cure for whoever has suffered from it.
And another reason is that we often need to perform castration on certain animals for our purposes, such as rams, wild boars, cats, and similar animals.
I say therefore that castration is performed according to two methods. Or by traction. Or by making an incision, and sectioning.
In such cases where friction is used, the method of operation is as follows: We make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become soft and relaxed and hang down, then we apply pressure with our hand until they resolve and are no longer visible under the touch.
However, in castration through an incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspenders and dry over each cut one by one until two eggs pass, then incise them after cleaning both, and do not leave anything from the sac on top other than a thin film which is above the testicles.
And this method of castration is better than that which uses friction, because friction may leave some remnant from the testicles, so the animal might still engage in copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Head 70.
§ On the care of hermaphrodites using two methods.
A hermaphrodite is similar to men according to two methods. One of them is because it appears in the space it follows, or on the skin of the testicles, where it is between the two testicles, shaped like a small woman, with hair; and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the testicles.
However, in women there is a single type, and they are like a small man over the chest, with their testicles protruding outward; of whom one is like the penis of a man, and two like his testicles.
And the treatment for three types, two of men and one of women, is as follows: because it is necessary to cut away the added flesh until the impression of them flees. Then, the care of these injuries is with the cure of other wounds.
However, in the second species of men, from which urine emerges, which is on the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure for it.
Chapter 71.
# On the Incision of the Clitoris and the Protruding Flesh in Women's Genitals.
The clitoris may be added on top of the natural state until it becomes corrupted and takes on a disgusting appearance; and sometimes it is so enlarged in certain women that it expands like the penis in men and reaches up to the act of copulation.
Therefore, you must hold the excess of the tentigin (tissue) with your hand or a hook and cut it; not too deep into the incision, especially into the deep root, so as not to cause bleeding.
Then take care of the healing of the wound until it is cured.
However, a problem arises when a part born in the mother's womb does not grow to its full size; it may emerge towards the outside according to the form of a tail, and for this reason some call this condition "tail-like" disease. Therefore, we must cut it as we cut the tentigin (tissue), and take care of it until it heals.
§ On the care of the Alratic (condition), which is a ulcer in an unperforated woman.
Head LXXII.
Alratic is when there is an ulcer in an unperforated woman, or when there is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is when it arises from a previous illness: and it itself becomes formed either by the addition of flesh grown out, or by a thin or thick crust; and it occurs either in the deep part of the womb, or on its sides, or on the upper part of it, or the lower part of it; and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and delivery, and perhaps menstruation.
And knowledge of it is acquired through observation of the obstetrics if the pregnancy is evident and close.
However, if it is not evident, then seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
However, if the pregnancy is from a very subtle sign and it is close to both lips, then approach it and break it off.
And it is, as you place two small pieces of cloth over the lips.
Then place your two hands simultaneously, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread. Then stretch the two lips with strength until the subtle sign breaks off and the pregnancy opens.
Then take a thread, soak it in oil, and place it on the area: and have the woman press it every day so that the wound does not harden again.
However, if the sign is large, thick: then it is necessary to cut it off with a broad, sharp blade like a myrtle leaf.
However, if the pregnancy is from flesh growth, then suspend it with hooks and cut it: and be with medicines that stop the flow of blood without biting, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and pitch mixed with wax.
Then administer a broad pipe of lead, so that the wound does not harden quickly, hold it for several days, and then apply a liniment made from dry flax, after which it should be treated with the remaining care until it is healed.
And sometimes, when a new growth of the flesh is born, it should be cut according to this method; for as long as there is no cancerous ulcer - because the cancerous ulcer that exists within the matrix cannot be opposed entirely with iron.
Head LXXIII.
§ On the care of hemorrhoids, Athaliel, and Bothor the red in women's bodies.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of veins' orifices, as long as they constantly discharge a great deal of blood.
When hemorrhoids therefore become enlarged, they turn into theils (varices). I have already spoken about their kinds, signs, and treatment; here I will say which receive cure from them and which do not.
I say therefore that hemorrhoids which are within the matrix opening, and do not appear to the senses; then there is no cure with iron.
But those that are from them within the matrix, over which sense does not fall, these are the ones that are to be treated.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to introduce a woman into a cold house. Next, extend the edges with shears or a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then, clean them near the flow of blood from one of the cuts without causing a wound: such as Acacia, dragon's blood, pitch, and similar substances.
Then, push her feet against the wall at that very moment. Afterwards, place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood continues: then make her sit in a mixture of sumac, and quince seeds, and gall, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with it to apply it over her back.
If therefore blood comes out with it, it is good; and if not, make the skin on her back sticky and moist, without scarring.
Then take a cloth, and dip it in the juice of tarathit, or argan, or grapevines, that is, pomegranate wine, and make it adhere tightly.
When the abscess has ceased to exist, then care for the wound with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasis truly describes the red rubor as resembling the heads of garlic, and it has a harsh appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what appears from it, according to what I have said in the previous chapters, equally, and care for itself until it is healed.
Head LXXIV.
§ On the perforation of the Exit (or outlet) that occurs in the matrix.
Many kinds of abscesses occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone abscesses, ulcers, suppurations, erosions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and erysipelas.
And I have indeed already spoken about all these ailments and their kinds, and the signs of each, and their treatments in division: it is necessary that I should speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the matrix, when it is from abscesses that collect blood, and how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, it is necessary that you consider. Then if the pain of the apostematis is acute at its onset with its percussion, and with flame and fever: and you see it turn red: if it falls upon it sense, then you will not rise with its perforation: and treat it as it pleases above the maturation, until such time that the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
Then you must make the woman sit on a seat that can support two cushions, and lean back or lie down on her back, gathering her feet towards the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and tie them with the appropriate strap to that.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and use an instrument to open the maternal orifice.
And when you see to administer this instrument, you must insert it deep into the woman's matrix, so that what enters from the instrument is not deeper than the matrix itself and does not harm the patient.
But if the instrument were deeper than that, then you must put threads on the cover of the deep matrix, so as to prevent the entrance of the entire instrument into the deep matrix; and you must pull back the thread that runs in the instrument from its upper side, and hold the instrument, and unfold the thread by turning it, until the deep matrix is opened.
When the exit (orifice) appears and is touched by the hand, and it is soft and supple, then it must be incised near its own head with a wide spatula.
When the pus is therefore drained, then it is necessary to apply to the wound a compress soaked in rose oil or verdigris oil, which has some astringent property, and after applying the compress, remove the section deeply into the matrix.
And place on top of the matrix, and over the comb, a clean wool cloth soaked in water with small stones.
Then it should be treated after two days with an ointment suitable for it until it heals.
And when the matrix and wound are completely cleaned, so that they can be cleansed with water and honey, then afterwards with water containing the root of lilies or long aristolochia, and finally return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it must be prevented from healing with iron, but rather treated as we said in the division.
Head 70
# On Midwifery: How Embryos with Abnormal Birth Positions are Treated.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know, first and foremost, the shape of a natural delivery.
From these signs, it follows that when you see a woman pressing herself down towards the lower parts, desiring to smell the air, and relieved of what is above her due to childbirth, and hastening the exit of the fetus - then know that this birth is according to the natural form, and its exit is over her own head, and the second stage follows with it: either suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her belly so that the fetus descends quickly.
For when it descends over her own head, the second stage follows with it, and they are cleansed of these excesses with a good cleansing.
However, if it deviates from this birth, it is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For when the fetus exits on its own feet, and its body comes out before its head and feet, or one hand or foot at a time - or its head and one hand come out together, or it turns around over its neck, and similar unpraiseworthy forms occur.
Therefore, the obstetrician must be prudent and clever in all of these matters, and beware of errors and deceptions - and I will show every figure from them, and how the skill is in it, and it is signified by that, and stands above itself.
When the fetus comes out from its mother's womb in a natural and violent manner, it becomes difficult for her to give birth, and you will see that its strength is already weak; then have it sit on a seat or have women support it. Moisten its lips with a mixture of fennel seed and boiled fennel, and with moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert her finger slightly into the vagina and find the second stage, then cut it with her nail until it drains from the humidity, and press on the woman's womb until the fetus descends.
If, however, it does not descend, then the woman should be enema'd with a mixture of fennel mucilage and sesame oil.
Then after the enema, order her to press herself, and make her sneeze with the conditions, and hold her jaw and nose at the same time. The fetus will come out immediately.
If both hands of the fetus come out first, then you should bring them back with ease gradually. If, however, it does not obey during the introduction, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet up; then suddenly shake the seat on the ground; and have someone support her so she doesn't fall during the shaking.
If the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the remaining fetus, and tie his hand with cloth, and extract him with care, for he will come out.
The exit of the embryo is on its own feet. When the fetus emerges on its own feet, it is necessary to push them upwards, then turn the fetus slowly, and finally release it.
Then take one of its feet and extend it slowly.
When they emerge up to the thighs, then command them to be pressed and make it sneeze with a condition; for it will come out if God wills.
And if it does not come out as we described, then bring the fetus back slowly until you place it according to its natural form. For it will come out then with easy exit.
If it is prevented from coming out as we described: then take from the mucus of the womb, and oil of myrrh, and dissolved gum, and strike all of it well in a mortar; afterwards, with a thin instrument, cut through the vagina and into its uterus below. Then make her sit in warm water until she achieves relaxation.
When therefore you see that her lower parts have become heated, then prepare for her a seat of myrrh and place her upon it. When therefore she has retained the myrrh for an hour, then make her sit upon the seat. Then make her sneeze; and hold her mouth and nose, and press gently on the lower part of her belly. For the fever will depart immediately.
§ The exit of the fetus is over the knees and hands. When it exits in this manner, then insert your hands gently during delivery. Then the woman should lie down on her side with her head lower than her feet, and she should rest her hands. Then press gently on her belly. Then extract what is under her feet from the tissues, until she is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus does not come out, then take its feet and move them with a steady motion. Then press what is above the hypogastric region gradually until the fetus ascends to the upper parts. Then he should insert his hand and gradually grasp the fetus, and especially instruct the woman to press until the fetus comes out.
The fetus, hanging laterally from the hands. The hand should be maneuvered for reduction. If, however, it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman up and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed and shake her legs with a steady motion.
Then apply the liniment you prepared from mucilages.
If she accepts the delivery, then have her sit on a seat. Then strive to reduce the hand and adjust the fetus according to its natural position; make the woman sneeze and instruct her to press herself until it comes out.
When the fetus emerges over its own neck, with hands spread out, and its face is towards the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the fetus' hand, then gradually and slowly deliver it, ensuring ease in the process.
When it (the fetus) is thus equated, then place over its head what we have mentioned from oil and mucus.
Then command it (the fetus) to move gradually. After you have done that, then make it (the fetus) sit on a seat and command it to lean towards its right side. Then command it to compress (itsself) and make it sneeze when ready.
The delivery of the fetus prepared on its side. When it descends to the opening of the mother according to this manner with the forceps, then cut the forceps with your finger until it is evacuated by moisture.
If it (the fetus) is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then cut it (the umbilical cord) from the navel: so that it does not retain its life and dies.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as required, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times; for thus it will emerge through the vaginal opening.
On the emergence of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or even four. However, this is unusual and rarely happens.
Indeed, it is a matter outside of nature, and they do not live completely; and it contains them, even if they multiply, in such a way that they are separated by a gap, distinguishing between them the ligament attached to each other at their navels.
And sometimes they emerge as one fetus does through a natural and easy birth canal; but they emerge through an unpleasant channel, as we have narrated.
If certain ones of them become difficult during childbirth and come to that which we have mentioned from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: and be it a narrow passage, let it do what it does with ease or tardiness, and be shaped according to every figure as it is prepared for it by the guiding craft towards health.
A reminder that it is formed inside the womb from embryos, and they miscarry.
Sometimes one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, or more than ten are formed in the womb; and now it has come to my knowledge that a woman gave birth to seven, and another to fifteen, all formed.
Which is done according to the measurement of the glorious sage.
Therefore, all this should be so that it is in the knowledge of the obstetrician. Perhaps they will come to know something similar to it; therefore, let them oppose it with what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI.
§ On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus with the method I mentioned in division from medication, and it does not exit, and you need to extract it by hand, then you should consider:
If therefore a woman is of sound constitution and is not affected by any of the accidents from which there is fear of her loss: then it is necessary that she be placed on her back on the bed, with her head inclined downward and her legs raised; and let two attendants hold her or bind her to the bed so that her body does not slip out during the extraction.
Then he moistens the mother's bone with humid oils mixed with alum, fennel, and linseed.
Then she greases her hand with these oils and muds, and then introduces it into the mother (womb) easily. Then he seeks with it the place where the hook (of the placenta) is attached from the fetus, and suitable places for that.
Therefore, consider then if the fetus is prepared to come down over its own head: then fix the hooks into its eyes, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or under its beard, or in its furca (fork of the spine), or in places close to the ribs, and under the ribcage.
If, however, descent is over its feet, then (the hooks) are fixed into its chest and the middle of its ribs.
And he must hold the hook with his right hand, and place the tip of his left hand between its fingers, and then introduce it (the hook) easily, and fix it in one of those places we mentioned, until it reaches a free space.
Then he fixes another hook in its opposite (part), or a third if necessary: so that the contraction is equal and does not lean towards any part.
Then it should be extended equally, and not just in a straight line, but moved to every part so that its outlet is healed, as is done with the tooth during extraction.
And it is necessary that there be relaxation of the extension in what lies between them. If a part is retained from that, then it is necessary for the midwife to moisten certain fingers with oil and insert them from the side, in order to separate what is retained with them.
If therefore a part of the fetus emerges, then the hooks are changed to another place that is higher; do this until the whole fetus has emerged.
If therefore the hand emerges before others and it is not possible to reduce it due to its tightness, then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped over it. Then extract it until the whole of it has emerged, cut it or make an incision in the joint of the foot, or at the elbow; and thus you should do to the other hand and both feet.
However, if the head of the fetus is large, or there is a tightness during its exit, or water has accumulated on it, then it is necessary for a spatule with sharp edges to be inserted between the fingers and find its way with it through the head, and extract the water; or break it itself with an instrument called an Almisdac, whose shape comes in accordance with the shape of the other instruments that follow it.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head due to nature, then it is necessary to cut open the mother's abdomen and extract the child with care, as we have said. Then, with forceps, grasp the bones.
If the head should come out and become stuck at the level of the forceps, it must be carefully extracted until all the moisture within the chest is discharged.
However, if it does not complicate or resist extraction, then cut the head as best you can.
If the lower abdomen is infected or there is hydrops within it, then pierce it until all the moisture drains out.
If indeed the fetus is in a normal position relative to its feet, then attracting and directing it towards the mother's womb is easy.
However, if it becomes stuck near the womb or chest, then extract it with the cloth you have wrapped over your hand, and unblock the womb or chest until all that is within them drains out.
However, if the remaining limbs are removed and the head is returned, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the womb is therefore open, then he should insert his hand into its depths and find the head with it, and draw it out by means of his fingers until it reaches the mouth of the womb; subsequently, he should introduce one hook or two hooks in it and pull it out with them.
If the womb becomes contracted due to the heat that befalls it, then one should not labor over it; instead, one must then administer flows of moist substances, ointments, and have it sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, then it may be corrected; then, what we said regarding a living fetus should be administered.
If it is not possible otherwise, then it should be cut open and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything from the second layer inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we said regarding the hot apostemas that occur in wombs.
If there is a flow of blood, then it should be lowered into strict waters, and the remaining cure should be administered.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb was dead; then she became pregnant over it again by another man, after which the other fetus also died. Therefore, after a long time, a separation occurred in her navel, and it swelled until it opened, and it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called upon to treat her, and I medicated her for a long time; yet the wound did not heal.
I then applied to it certain bandages with strong adhesive, and pus exited from the site. After that, several days passed, and another pus exited from it. I was amazed therefore when I saw that there was no pus left in the wound.
I therefore thought that they were from the bones of a dead fetus.
I then examined the wound and extracted many bones, while the woman was in better conditions; and after having been in such a state for a long time, it now began to discharge only small amounts of pus.
And I did not confirm this foreign object here unless it is known that there is knowledge and assistance to it, which the skilled physician administers with his hand from the treatment.
Chapter LXXVII.
**On the shapes of instruments necessary for extracting a fetus.**
The shape of the hinge (vertigo) when it opens the board.
Here below is the form of the strap (strictor), which equalizes the books, to which are applied two pressure points equally on both ends of two wooden boards. However, this hinge (vertigo) must be made more delicate with a tighter strap: and it should be made either from ebony or hard wood.
And the width of all wood should be like two fingers: and each margin is like one finger, and the length of each is a palm and its middle; and in the middle of the two wooden boards are two additional pieces of the same type of wood, which have already been firmly attached to both, whose length is the middle of the palm and a little more: and the width of each is like two fingers, or a little less.
And these two additional pieces are inserted into the mother board's hole so that it opens with them when you release both hinges.
The other shape is similar to it, more delicate, and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or hard wood, according to the resemblance of the pincers. However, at the extremity of it, there are two additions, as you will see above; and the length of each addition is about a palm, and the breadth of each is equal to two fingers.
If, therefore, you wish to open the womb with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down, and open what is between her legs. Then insert these two additions joined together into the womb, and you hold the extremity of the lower part of the instrument between her hips. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you would with scissors, equally as much as you wish to open the mouth of the womb, until the midwife does what she wishes.
The shape of the other vertigo than what the ancients said, the shape that impels the fetus, which is impelled.
The shape of the forceps, through which the large head is contained: it resembles a fork, with teeth at the extremity, as you can see.
And when it becomes oblique, according to this shape, like the forceps that you see, with teeth like sawteeth, which cut and contain.
The form of dissection for holding a single spine.
The form of dissection for holding two spines.
The form of the scalpel with two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two scalpels, also wide.
These instruments all exercise their functions, and the more diverse they are in type and prepared by the craftsman, the quicker they are for his work, and the superior they are among men due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not despise this instrument, but rather have it prepared for you. The need for them is indeed inexcusable.
Head 78.
§ On the extraction of the secondary (spine).
When the secondary (spine) is held during childbirth, then it is necessary to gently support the weak ones so that they retain their breath. Then make it sneeze when you are ready: and press your hand over its mouth and nose. If it therefore emerges through this, it is good.
If it does not: then take a cup and pierce an opening in its lid, and place in it herbs that open the mother's mouth, such as fennel, rue, anise, chamomile, yarrow, and cassia wood, and centaury; or some of them, and steep them in water, and place them on fire.
Then place a wick of reeds over the opening of the cup, and the other end in the mother's mouth, and hold it until steam reaches the depth of the mother's womb.
Then make it sneeze, as we said. Indeed, it will emerge with ease.
If, however, it remains after this treatment and does not emerge, then instruct the midwife to immerse her hand in sesame oil or a mixture of egg white. Then insert into the womb, and seek with it the second one. When he has found it, then he should take it and gradually stretch it out.
However, if it is attached deeply within the womb, then he should insert his hand as we have described, until he finds the second one, and slowly extract it according to its right position, so that the womb does not fall due to a forceful pull; indeed, it must be turned with ease to the right and left sides: then add to the amount of pull. It then obeys and is held firm, freed from its adhesion.
If, however, the womb is contracted as we have already mentioned, then care should be taken with sneezing and from the use of an ointment made with herbs.
If, however, it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire yourself out in re-attempting the extraction.
Indeed, it is necessary that what comes out from the womb towards the woman's hip be bound to her thigh. Then, apply a cleansing enema with a four-ingredient ointment. It will indeed putrefy her after a few days, dissolve, and come out.
However, when it putrefies, a bad smell is eliminated from it and reaches the stomach and head, and it hurts that invalid. Therefore, it is necessary for them to administer the appropriate fumigations to that.
Some of the ancient experts have already been experienced with the fumigations of nasturtium and dried fig.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman during retention of the secondine (a midwifery tool) and menstruation.
Let there be made of them a similar alcama (fume hood) or from a vase: and let the wide end be placed over the fire: and place the fumigation on top of prunes: hold it until that fumigation is consumed: and repeat another.
Head LXXIX.
§ On the healing of an unperforated ankle.
Many children are born, and some of them have unperforated anuses, which have already been softened by subtle purification. Therefore, the midwife must perforate it carefully with her finger: and if she does not, perforate it yourself with a sharp spatuli (a surgical instrument) and be careful not to touch it.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil over it. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
However, if it becomes swollen, then insert a lead pipe into the wound over several days and remove it when the child wants to eat.
And now it happens that the swelling of John comes from the healing of the wound or the abscess. Therefore, it is necessary that this consolidation be cut away, and then treated with what we said from healing and lead.
Chapter LXXX (80)
**On the healing of fistulas occurring in the lower part.**
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are called a "Nodation" or "Grossitude" and they may occur near the anus, either in one section or multiple sections; there can be one fistula or more.
When that nodation becomes old, it opens up, and moisture from it is either clear water or thin pus.
And sometimes there are these fistulas penetrating through them. Therefore, they are known to penetrate through what is ejected from the wound, and their force, when the patient uses the bowels: and perhaps it emerges from them in a twisted manner.
And they become fistulas when they penetrate into the space up to the vein and even to the heart's pulse. And they penetrate from these up to the hip joint, and even to the knot of the tail.
However, if you recognize the penetrating fistula up to the anus, even from what is not penetrating, it is as if you insert your index finger into the anus: and you try to gently insert a thin instrument into the fistula made of air or iron: when there is no torsion.
If there is torsion in them, then insert into it a thin lead probe or an equine hair until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
If you do not feel it deeply, nor does anything emerge from the wound, or pressure, or pain as I said: then know that it is not penetrating. So, proceed to treatment accordingly.
And when the fistula is penetrating up to the vein or to the urethral opening: then its meaning is that urine exits from it, and its blockage prevents the wound from healing with medicine.
If it really penetrates to the hip joint or to the hip bone: then a sign of this is that the pain reaches there and continues until it reaches the bone, if there is no curvature leading to the bone; and the pain in the area around the part, and the discharge of pus from it always; and that treatment does not heal it nor does it solidify with ointment.
And in all these fistulas that penetrate deeply, there is no cure at all; the treatment of them is a matter of toil and vanity for foolish doctors, upon whom their formation depends.
However, in those that are not penetrating and are not old, there is hope for healing with a scar, according to what I will tell you, and I have already tried it: and it is as if the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lift their legs up to their hips, and their hips are inclined towards their belly. Then they insert a lead or air probe into the fistula if there is curvature inside, until you know where the pain reaches.
If, however, the patient feels pain around their anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel in your finger that the pain has already penetrated by itself, beyond what you feel between your finger and the anus or the flesh; then you will certainly know that it is penetrating. Therefore, do not struggle with it, because its healing is not like we said.
They said, however, that in some men, the flesh is healed and relief is expected from treatment, by cauterizing the wound gently according to its width, as was mentioned before, and inserting the burning instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus. Then they repeat this process twice or three times, until you know that all the added flesh is charred, similar to little tubes made of feathers.
Then they treat it with lard wrapped in cloth until the charred flesh emerges, then they apply ointments that nourish and strengthen the flesh.
If it is healed therefore, it is good.
And if not, then it is never healed with other treatments.
And if it fails to emerge and does not reach your finger inside the anus, and there is a thick flesh or scar between them, then you see a fistula following the skin's surface, so dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you cut the probe that is in the fistula as you cut through it until the cutting reaches the end of the probe, and the probe is freed and falls.
Then clean the flesh that is similar to little tubes made of feathers so as not to leave anything from them.
If, however, blood ties you and releases you from between yourself and your surgery as it cuts those meats, then better and quicker aid is to cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
Since cauterization with fire promotes good habits, adds the combustion of those meats, and stops the flow of blood, as well as dries up humors.
Then care for it with lint soaked in butter or crushed scales, until the place releases pus, and those burned meats emerge into the pus.
Then care for the wound with consolidating ointments that form hard meat: and are medicines in which there is constriction and drying up.
For when it is nourished, then it is already healed: and do not fear repetition.
If, however, a fistula has already reached down to the deep anus and extends from the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
If therefore you feel a strain, and between you and it is a tear from healing or flesh, and it is close to penetrating: then there is no operation in that, unless according to the path of trust and hope.
That is because it is administered in one of three ways: either by cauterization as we have said, or by cutting it out until you achieve its dissection, so that it becomes possible for you to insert a treatment and cure from next to it. And do not proceed too far with the cut, so as not to injure the nerve that contains the anus, and it happens that there is a discharge from the inferior opening without will. Then take care of it as we have said.
Perhaps it will heal: either by extending the wound or cleaning it after drying it close to the anus as we have said, or with a probe or another sharp-ended instrument. Then clean the filtered flesh that is in the cut, until you can with scrutiny.
Then try to restore the wound of the whole cut, and the upper opening where it is reinforced: and a fistula remains open on the inner part of the anus, and it will be less painful for the patient.
And when a fistula is sought after this manner: and it is, when you insert the probe into the fistula: then take the perforated ends, which are like a fine needle, that is, the preparation of the corium, in this form. And insert into it a soaked thread from five threads, and encircle it roughly. Then insert a probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth.
If it is penetrating the inner edge of the anus close to (the opening), then extract the thread from that orifice; so that you can insert your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread, and join both ends together: tighten them both, and release it after one or two days; and the more the thread penetrates into the flesh, the tighter you should hold it, until the tissues between the two ends of the thread are incised and they fall away; then tend to the wound until it heals.
However, if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in any way you can prepare, except if it is too deep. It is not necessary for you to make it penetrate for the sake of the thread, lest you cut into itself.
Then do with it as we said, until it heals.
The shape of the surgical knife with a sharp point where the fistula is found, whose edge is acute and sharp, while the other part is not acute so as not to cut what is unnecessary, as you see.
**Chapter LXXXI**
On the sewing of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows following an incision into them; and on the treatment of fissures.
There are hemorrhoids according to two modes. Either they are within the anus, resembling the seeds of figs or grapes, or they are like new grains. And from them there are small and large ones; and blood flows from them always, it is one and many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremes.
However, those that are outside the anus are in most cases few in number and moist, from which a yellowish water flows, or a little blood flows constantly; and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is within the anus is to urge the sick as if to ease them; and it should be expressed until the anus is freed, and appears clean to you. Therefore, therefore, also hang them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail. Then incise them near their roots.
If, however, they do not retain the hooks due to their humidity and the softening of both, then take them with a rough cloth or with twine made from double linen thread, and extract them with your fingers. Then incise them and sprinkle on them some hot powdery substances to keep them in place at the site of the cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what preceded in the chapter on cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the cure until they heal.
If, however, the anus does not obey to let it pass, then apply a enema to the patient in whom there is a small fissure, so that it may wash away what is in the anus and quickly obey when the patient expels it.
If, however, the threads are external from the anus, then their condition is lighter and easier; and it is as if you take them with your finger or with a hook and cut them off. Then care for them with what we said before until they heal.
And if one shuns the cutting with a knife, then it is necessary that you administer their stitching according to this manner. Take the soaked thread and insert it into the wound. Then extract the thread towards the upper parts and make it penetrate with the point on the other side of its root: and entwine both ends of the thread, in the lower part of the needle, and let them be lateral: and tighten the thread's knot firmly. Then tie a knot on the thread and extract the needle.
Do this with all the threads and leave one: do not let them slip, so as to prevent the excess of blood from flowing out.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in rose or saffron oil and put the wound on top of it: and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it until it falls off.
When therefore the threads have fallen off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the cure until they are healed.
**On the care of fissures.** Many times accidents occur due to the exhaustion of feces and the constriction of nature.
Therefore, since ancient times, when there is no medicine in them, one should use the point of a spatula or your fingernail, until they become moist and the upper layer of skin that prevents their healing is removed. Then take care of them until they heal as necessary.
However, if they do not heal: then repeat the process with a stronger reason than before, until there is much bleeding and then take care of them until they are healed.
§ On the treatment of gangrene, both of open and closed wounds: also of athelia (fester) and sores, and of formicae (fungal infections).
Head 82.
Know that gangrene is not anything but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head of a pin; and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers, and results in pain during walking.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off what is around the head of the pin, and hold it with pincers or a hook, and pull it out from its root.
Then attend to that care: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what preceded in its chapter.
However, if the wound is deep with a small eminence, rough, filtered, and round above the surface of the body, And this often happens in the hands of boys.
And the treatment is to stretch the wound and cut it open; or tie it tightly with a silk thread; or with a hair, until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine; and then the wound will be cured, either turned inside out or not, without using an instrument that I will mention.
A tick, however, is a small, filtered, thick eminence above the surface of the body that penetrates deeply; and when it finds cold, it feels like the bite of a flea, affecting the whole body, especially the hands.
And the treatment is to take a tube from a duck's feather or a strong vulture's feather, and place that tube over the tick, until it contains a circle of the tube's parts. Then turn your hand with the tube until you remove what is around the tick; and place it deep into the flesh, and root out the tick from its base.
And if you wish, make it with a tube of air or iron in this form.
Place the upper part of the tube over the dead and enclosed swelling to draw out the fluid so that it does not interfere with the finger's grasp and its own resolution.
And if you wish to cauterize the fly as described in the cauterization of Ethelil in the chapter on cautery.
Head 83.
§ On the forms of instruments used for clistering in diseases of the anus, and also for the treatment of colic and bloating.
Sometimes the clister is made of silver, or brass, or iron forged or hammered.
And sometimes it is made of these materials in small or large sizes according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, that which is administered for the cure of small children should be in small amounts; and those whose anuses are weak or painful, similarly their clisters should be.
Large clister.
Its [the cyst's] base, that is, the upper part where the uter is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a distinction for it to be tied like the uter as you see, and its inferior end which enters the anus should be blunt, that is, not open, soft, very much pliable towards thinness; and on one side of it there should be two openings, and on the other side one opening.
And the width of the opening should be according to the thickness of the radii, and a little larger, and the uter in which medicines are placed should be from the vesica of an animal, or from paper tubes that are in the form of a small funnel; whose root is one palm.
And it should be pierced with many openings as required, and there should be space between each opening that is the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those openings a strong thread from raw silk, which should be from ten or so threads, and bind together with it the other uter like a funnel. When the uter is thus placed in it, tie it at the head of the cystern with a strong twine between two distinct constrictions. Then sterilize it with that.
And this is the form of a circle and the hole depicted here.
The quality of cleansing with it (the enema) is such that you should fill the colon either with a warm or hot solution from medicine according to the tolerance of the patient, and because it should not be too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should lie down on his back and raise his legs towards the upper body, and place underneath him a sheet or cloth on which the patients lie.
Then moisten the tip of the enema with oil or alum or with a mucus of fennel or similar substances. Then insert the enema into the anus with ease. Then have the assistant hold the enema with both hands and squeeze it out forcefully until all that is inside the enema bag is emptied into the colon.
Then remove the enema and have the patient raise his legs against the wall.
If the medicine makes him want to evacuate, then he should hold it as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is the final step in healing.
If, however, you cleanse him with a cloth in the maladies of the bowels and hasten his excretion, then repeat the enema until he is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful fissures in the anus, then use a delicate enema with a gentle flow, similar to the enemas given to children.
And this should be the form of a delicate enema, over which there is tight skin.
Head 84.
I have spoken in the previous section about the treatment of wounds, and here I will describe their treatment with the hand and with medicines as a supplement.
I say therefore that wounds differ according to the type of wound they are and according to the place on which the wound lies.
The wounds that result from such events are often similar to the impact of a stone: whether it be a cut with a sword or knife, or a blow with a spear, wood, or arrow - and other similar objects.
Wounds, however, which occur according to the parts of the body, are such as a ulcer that falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or any similar part of the limbs.
And I am telling of the treatments for certain wounds, so that I may set down this reasoning and rule over the other wounds.
And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, since the memory of the composers will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When there occurs a simple wound in the head, and there is no fracture of bones: consider then, if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and it has already injured only the skin: and it is a large wound, and you fear that the outcome for the affected limb will be bad because of the heat: then rush, and perform immediate cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay it: and extract blood from him according to the amount of his vitality: if nothing hinders phlebotomy, especially if the amount of blood coming out from the wound is small. And the phlebotomy should be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
And the phlebotomy should be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And the patient should be careful not to overfill himself with wine or heavy food.
If something prevents diminution (of a wound), then it is diminished from food, and it does not approach the flesh or wine.
And if there is a hot ulcer, apply to it a poultice of rose-colored oil alone, or with wine that has a constricting property.
However, if you are free from the hot ulcer, then place on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and has not changed to a different color, the poultice I will describe shortly; and if it has already changed its color, then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
If the wound is large, or it is from a sword cut, or something similar, and its edges do not come together due to poultices, then bring them together with stitching, as I will describe regarding the wounds of the stomach about their stitching.
If the wound has already been detected from the bone and hangs down, and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension, then cut it. Then tend to the wound with medications, and restore hard flesh where the skin is missing, and particularly instruct the patient to take food that has bulk, such as grain heads, and cooked wheat, until it becomes as soft as a pulse; and similar foods.
If you find putrefaction in the skin that does not adhere to the bone, then cut off the entire putrified part and throw it away; afterward, tend to it.
If, however, there is an artery or a vein through which blood flows in these wounds and it cannot be cut off by means of drugs, then investigate the artery. If you find it unextracted, then dry it with a spatulum or bind it. Which, if it is necessary, as it does not produce what we said, then cauterize it until the blood stops flowing.
If, however, these wounds are small, simple, then their treatment is easy, light: so as to apply poultices over them this poultice: because it solidifies them before they change.
§ Mode of the poultice's application. Take one part olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts unburned lime: warm the whole thoroughly, and sieve it; then fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly until it adheres well to it, and coagulate it with blood.
Then tie it tightly from above with bandages, and leave it, neither loosening it nor moving it until it heals, so that it does not fall off. For it is not eradicated from it until it is healed.
And sometimes, when only this calx is available and you do not have frankincense or dragon's blood at hand, it still performs the same operation on many great wounds when it is placed over them and tightened, and they are recent wounds with their own blood that has not been altered by air.
If the wound has already been affected by air in some way, especially during the summer season, then this powder's intention is not effective. Therefore, take care of it as we have said, putting on top of it certain prepared ointments or, until pus is discharged, pastes made from barley flour with water and honey. Then take care of the rest with treatment until they heal.
If indeed it happens with a wound that the bone is fractured and it is small, then extract it with care. And I will now speak of the cure for fractures of the skull, which we shall discuss in the future.
# On Wounds of the Neck.
If, however, a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and a wound of the head when it is simple.
However, if the nerve of the collar or an artery has already been incised, then, if it is a nerve, there is no skill in it, except to ensure that its cure is done with what causes constant tightness, like a belt and bands and similar things. Since nerves cause pain and strain them.
And never put anything cold over the wound at all, because the substance of nerves is cold and its continuation is with the brain, which is higher among the limbs; and that should be treated by medicines gently, such as a hot compress with sweet water infused with oil or rose oil and myrrh, when it is also washed with sweet water, and other mineral stones according to this manner, and wet ointments.
If, however, the wound is large, then apply stitching; or close its edges with small threads. Then take care of it until it heals.
If the wound is indeed deep, or there is a cavity in it that has collected pus, then perforate it at a more depressed point.
If an artery has already been incised in the wound and its blood flow is occurring: then separate, or dry it up, and tie that; or cauterize it if necessity requires it.
If, however, the spine is already incised into the throat or completely through it and the inner parts are safe, then close the edges of the skin with stitches over the cane of the throat, without touching the throat itself, but rather equalize it and bring it back to its natural form. Then tighten the wound gently and leave it for a few days. Then treat the wound with ointments that have a constricting and drying effect until it heals.
If the wound has already made an impression in the bone, then probe it: if there are fragments of bone within, remove them entirely or as many as you can: leave what does not come away until the wound putrefies and separates, allowing its discharge to escape.
If the wound is recent, then apply poultice over it as I have described. If however, bone is visible in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it as you would with whatever remedy is mentioned in its own chapter.
**On the wound in the flaps (spatulas)**
If there is a piercing of the lance or the knife, and you see the depth of the wound, then consider it. If therefore from the wound comes a sudden flow of blood, and when it draws out the patient, you know that the wound is mortal.
If it is not deep and it bleeds freshly with its own blood, then do not put powder on it at first nor tighten it, so that the blood does not get stuck in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, causing harm to the patient; but rather apply a drawing ointment to it twice a day.
If you do not have an ointment at hand, then put a piece of old cloth over the wound to draw out what comes out from it due to moisture; and make the patient lie on top of the wound so that whatever is gathered there can flow away.
If indeed three days or more have passed since the wound and no spasms occur to the patient, nor bad heart tremor, nor tightness in breathing, and you see that his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is healed. So take care of it with bandages and the rest of the cure until it is healed.
If healing occurs and the wound opens up permanently, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore, treat that very part from its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut with a knife or razor, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat that very part from its own chapter if it is large; or with dust, if it is small.
However, if it has already made an impression in the bone and a splinter is protruding from it: then examine the wound, and proceed to extract the splinters if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them be until the wound putrefies, for extraction would only worsen it.
Judgment on the accidents of wounds in the rest of the body is the judgment we have described regarding their cure.
§ On wounds of the abdomen, and the issue of intestines, and their discharge.
The disruption that occurs in the intestine is great, medium, or small.
Therefore, when the great (disruption) allows the intestine(s) to exit or the number of intestines to be exposed.
Why this intrusion and their more difficult and intricate sewing happened.
And the small disruption becomes difficult in another way. Therefore, it follows that the reduction of them becomes more difficult if you do not properly proceed to their place at once; for it is inflated, opened, and enlarged, making the entry difficult.
Therefore, the medium disruption of them is best; for when their reduction is not difficult as it is in these two species, it becomes easier to open them.
Know that the stitching comes about according to four modes.
The two common stitches converge in the stitching of the abdomen and in the stitching of the rest of the body's wounds; and the other two stitches properly communicate with the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper for the stitching of the abdomen; and I will tell you each one with its exposure and declaration.
I say therefore, because when the wound is small and something from the bowels comes out of it, making its reduction difficult; then that is due to one of the two modes. Either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because there is an inflation in the intestine due to a chill in the air.
When therefore that condition obtains, then it is necessary to warm the part itself, so as to immerse a sponge or damp cloth in tepid water. Or boil it in a mixture of squinantum, kyper (cyperus), and spice, and wrap the intestine in it until the inflation is resolved.
It also makes wine, which has a constipating effect, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
When therefore you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with the water in which the herbs have been boiled, or with lukewarm water. For it should also facilitate the entrance of air, with a small amount of movement.
If, however, it returns to its original state after this treatment, then find a small wound in the hemorrhoid with an instrument used for cutting them.
And the initial treatment is better when prepared than cutting; and force should not be used to cut after the need has passed or because of a lack of instruments.
Sit the part of it that is bent, acute, and the other part not acute, and its tip be not as fine as a needle, but rather slightly obtuse; and this resembles chalk, as you can see.
When therefore the wound has healed and entered the intestine, then it is necessary that it be reduced to its natural form in its proper place, as far as possible; for this is better.
When there is a wide disruption in the lower part of the entrails: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the entrails, then place his head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if there is a disruption in one of the two parts of the entrails, then direct your attention and always consider that the part with the wound be higher than the other part.
And so it is necessary that you treat these in great wounds and in medium wounds.
But in small wounds, follow what is prepared for you.
Then make it so that there is a present helper between your hands, who holds the disruption with both of his hands, and closes its lips. Then, using that, he removes from it something here and there, following the suture; and this is the common method of suturing one thing to another.
And it is, as you take a sharp point, or a number of sharp points according to the extent of the wound. Then, from the edge of the wound, measure with your finger an amount equal to that of a ring finger, that is, of the surgeon; and sharpen one point, then insert it into both ends of the skin while pressing the two inner parts beneath the skin until you make it penetrate from the other side, and at this moment you have joined together the two ends of the skin, as well as the two inner parts, and there are now four sides.
Then, with a double thread, tie around the needle several times from both parts at the same time until the two lips of the wound are joined together properly.
Then, let go of the ring finger's thickness and sharpen another one; fix it in place with a thread as you did with the first needle. Do not therefore cease to do that as needed with the needle, until you have completed the constriction of the entire wound.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between fineness and thickness; because fine needles penetrate flesh very quickly, while thick ones are difficult to introduce into the skin; for that reason, they should be of medium thickness between fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be pierced through both extremities of the skin close to each other very much; so as not to quickly pierce the flesh or open the wound before its healing, and not to stretch when stitching, so as not to prevent the wound from healing.
Then cut the end of the needle so as not to injure the patient at his rest, and place small pieces of cloth on both ends of the needle, which hold it together; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And this kind of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. Since it suffices for stitching them with one, or two, or about those needles.
The second kind of stitching is common, as it aggregates four ends when stitching: two ends of the skin and two other ends brought together at once with a needle in which the thread is wrapped equally in thickness and thickness.
Then when you have pierced with the needle these four ends, bring the needle back to the part from which you started, so that the threaded string falls from the upper part of the wound: so that the stitching is like the stitching of cloth with which clothes are sewn, and put between all the stitches a quantity equal to the thickness of a smaller finger.
This kind of stitching is known by people.
And with this stitch, I treated the wound that had occurred to a man in his abdomen, who had been cut with a knife, and there was a large disruption of the wound spanning one palm from the middle intestine; and it had protruded from the intestines approximately two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore reduced it after the intestine had remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound therefore healed within approximately fifteen days; and I cared for it, and it was cured, and after that it lived many years, restored to its former state.
And the doctors had judged that it would not heal.
And it was a miracle that I had not treated it with ointment. Because I was in a place where I could not find ointment, nor anything from medicine. I therefore placed on the wound two times a day the usual poultice, and I persistently washed it with honey-water until it was cured.
I will now describe two types of stitches according to the narrative of this discourse.
And so you begin with a sharp suture: and you insert it from without to within the part.
Thus, having pierced the skin with the needle, and proceeding along the wound according to the length and breadth of the whole body: leave the end at the side into which you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate from within towards the outer end on the other side.
Having thus made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this same end from the outer part towards the inner: and leave the end that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate to the other end from within outward; and with your penetration, as you make it penetrate into the end that is on the inside, which is in that part, until it penetrates into itself completely.
Then begin again from this same side, and with the same end, which is on the other side of the inside, and extract the needle from the skin through which it penetrated.
Then insert it back into that skin, and with the same end which is on this other side, make it match with this extreme; extract it from the flesh where it started, and do so once more, and then again: and continue thus in succession until its whole length has been extracted according to that example.
And the completion of this suture is such that it wraps around the wound as if it were closing the skin; so that you leave the end from one side on one part of the skin's edge, and release the other end from the other side until it is completed.
A second type of proper suture, as Galen described.
This is how he describes their use, as if they were weaving them in a manner similar to that in which some surgeons join all parts to the one appropriate to nature: and they apply one end of the thread to its other end, and the other end of the thread to its other end. And that is how it works, as I have told you.
You must now attach the thread to the end near you from the outside part, and make it pass through to the inside only; and then release both ends of the other thread. Then take the thread again, and make it pass from the outside to the inside in both ends of the other thread.
Then take both threads again, and make each pass from the inside to the outside, to the other two ends of the thread which are on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common easy stitch, and it is the stitch whose recollection has come before.
This, therefore, is the speech of Galen as well.
And certain men said. The wound is corrected with the use of two blades. That is, so as to insert into each one thread by means of a single needle: and begin with the insertion of the needle from where it is in your possession, and cause it to penetrate until it reaches the other side, according to the wound of their skin that is equal.
And know that when there is disruption in the middle of the entrails, then the stitching of it is more difficult than the rest of the places of the entrails.
The true judgment of the treatment of a wound is the judgment of the rest of the wounds.
This is because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before it is altered by air, and reduce the intestines, and their own skin, and make them suitable: then place a covering over the flesh's corruption.
If the air has already altered the wound, then place on it some of the ointments that are present to you, until they form pus: and the threads fall off, and they heal completely, and miraculously. Then care for it as the cure for the rest of the wounds, until it is healed.
If you do not have access to the necessary medications, then place a clean bandage on top immediately, from which the pus will begin to drain, and change it twice daily, as I taught you, until it heals.
You do not need other medications in most cases when the wounds are simple.
However, if the time comes when the wound affects principal members of the body in the injury, then it is necessary to soak a linen cloth in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the affected areas between the groin and under the armpits.
If he feels pain, punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (which often happens), then enema him with astringent wine, black and warm; especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and becomes an exit that penetrates until its core.
And know that what comes from the large intestine is easier to heal, and what comes from the thin ones is more difficult to heal.
However, the intestine called the jejunum does not admit healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and that is because of its multitude, being composed of small parts, and the magnitude of them, and because of the subtlety of the body, and the nearness of its own nature of nerves.
If, however, that which proceeds from a wound is gangrene, and you find it fresh: bring it back according to your method of reducing it, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If, however, a space has indeed been left and it has already formed into a wound, either fresh or black: then you must tie it up with a thread above the place that has become discolored from it, so that no blood flow occurs. In gangrene, there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is beyond that ligature, and leave both ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that its pull will be directed away from you, and the extraction of that piece at the place of the gangrene, and the discharge of pus from the wound.
**Remembrance of the wound that occurs in the intestine.**
When there is a rupture in the intestine, and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people: because I have seen those who were wounded in their abdomen with a lance, and the wound was from the right side of the stomach, and the old wound: and a fistula formed, and it discharged excretion and flatulence.
I therefore applied treatment, until I was not convinced of its healing: nor did I stop gently massaging it, until it was healed and the place was consolidated.
After I had seen the wound healed, I feared for the patient, that something might happen to him within his belly; and nothing happened to him from that incident. And he remained in his best condition, eating and drinking, and having sexual relations, and he entered the bath, and he continued with his routines.
And some of the experienced ones said that when a wound happens inside the intestine and it is small: then one should bind it in this way. And it is as if you take ants of great heads. Then bring together the two edges of the wound, and place an ant on one of them which has an open mouth over the two edges of the wound. When it (the ant) climbs onto it and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it sticks and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first, and keep doing this until all wounds are filled with ants according to their number.
Then reduce the pressure, and heal its wound. For indeed, some parts of the intestine remain attached until the intestine is fed and healed, so that it does not suffer any further damage to its innermost part.
And indeed, it is now possible to tie the intestine even with a fine thread; which is taken from the intestine of an animal and attached to it after being inserted into the wound.
And it is also possible to take the end of this thread from the intestine and let it be exposed for a long time. Then, tie the end of this fine thread with a thin line sewn into it. Then insert that thread into the wound and sew with it the intestine. Then reduce the swelling into the wound.
And this method of stitching with silk and intestine is nothing but according to the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is great, wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines' graceful folds: then there is no skill but diminution, and there is no healing at all.
## On the Care of Ulcers and Fistulas
You should know that every wound or ulcer, when it becomes old and hardened, forms a fistula, which does not heal and always emits pus, and is not severed. Then it is universally called, regardless of the part in which it is located, fistula, and we call it by that very name.
A fistula, indeed, is a true, filtered, hard, white nodule; it is painless but has the appearance of a feather. For this reason, some call it risus, meaning "feather.
In some cases, it is damp and emits pus. And perhaps the moisture may break apart in certain cases. And sometimes there is much of this moisture, and yet there is little; it can be thick or thin.
And I have already mentioned in the division, when I spoke of wounds, that every ulcer which does not heal, nor has flesh born in it, is nothing but due to one of nine causes.
Of these nine causes, one is either due to a lack of blood in the body, or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh between it and the lips, preventing the birth of flesh; or because there are many sores and filth; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or because corruption falls in a region that is a kind of pestilence, or due to the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where the digestion of ailments is difficult, and the healing of ulcers is delayed by nature; or because there is one mouth, or a certain number of bones.
And I now reveal all the causes and signs of these conditions, as well as their treatments with medicines in division; and here it is necessary for me to make you know the treatment of fistulas and incisions, which are made through a path of operation with the hand.
Therefore know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For from them (fistulas) there are some that affect major veins and arteries, or nerves, or openings; or they reach the intestine, or the urinary tract, or any part of the ribs; or they affect the joints of the spine or any structure composed of joints, such as the hand and foot; and from them there are those that extend to the vicinity of the main member and similar ones.
Therefore, from these fistulas in this way, is difficult to heal from illness and does not accept treatment, and dealing with them requires effort and ignorance.
If it is from fistulas that some of their depth do not reach the places I have mentioned; and you hope and trust in its healing, and seek to gain knowledge of it, then accept attempts with iron or steel if the fistula tends towards straightness, and examine it with itself.
If, however, there is curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with attempts using a thin lead probe. Since lead, due to the softness of its body, is alleviated and cured around the deformity.
If there is a fistula with many openings, it is not possible for you to apply treatment over it effectively. Therefore, wash it out from those openings through its own openings.
Since the humidity through which you wash it out, flows towards other openings, and passes out from them.
Then carefully inquire as to what manner it is possible for you to know whether there is a bone or a nerve, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or near; or whether there is one fistula with many openings which overlies the whole of it, with all your strength; when you ask about the patient's condition, and at the site of compression with your hand, and by similar signs and causes of accidents.
When therefore you stand by all those true stations, then proceed to treatment according to your confidence; and consider at that time, if there is a fistula near, visible, or far away in a healthy place from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which I have told you: then dry the fistula as mentioned above from my narration, and remove what is in it from discharge, and corrupt flesh, which arises at its opening from the flesh or matter similar: and treat it until it heals.
If there is a fistula of great depth and straightness, then you must cut it as deeply as possible for you. Then cleanse that part from all corrupted flesh.
Then apply a pure lye in sharp medicines and insert it into the depth of the fistula which you have reached with your knife: do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved all that remains in the depth of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If indeed it does not heal from that, then cauterize it as we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is a bone, and you have verified it, then remove it yourself and dry it as I have told you: if nothing prevents you from cutting any vessel, nerve or main member, as we said.
If you therefore find a bone that has any corruption or blackness, then scrape it until all of the corruption is removed. Then take care of it with what makes it heal until it is healed.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did before, then know that you have not achieved complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore, examine it a second time, make a precise assessment of it, and carry out purification with all your remaining strength.
Then restore it. If it heals, then it is good; but if not, then know that that corruption is deep and you have not reached its root. You do not have any skill in this except to let nature take its course.
If the flesh is rotten and it is possible for you, then pull it out with thin forceps suitable for that part.
However, if there are many bones, then carefully extract them all, using all your strength.
If something contrary happens to you from humours and there is no fear or mistake in the cuts, then cut away those humours and flesh if they are there, and free the bones.
If it is not possible for you to remove the bones at that time, then place over the wound that which will cause it to rot; and leave it until it rots as much as is around those bones in the flesh and humours.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal. And the incision should be narrowed as much as you made it during your operation. In my opinion, place on it, if necessary, a cloth soaked in tritured sulfur with oil; or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or some kind of radiant ointment.
For when these putrefy, that is, the moistures separate from them and the bones detach, the loss of them should be alleviated and their attraction removed.
However, if there is a single large bone, such as the shank bone or the hip bone, and similar ones, and that which has been corrupted from it is a significant part, then it should be cut with the last reason, until that blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If indeed that which is corrupted in it is a significant part and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it needs to be tightened and cut entirely up to the point where the corruption ends; then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you the story of what happened to a man on his leg: so that you can use this as an example and help for your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years old who experienced pain in his leg due to a condition that had developed inside his body, specifically from the internal organs, until it reached the leg, causing a great abscess. And there was no external cause for this.
Therefore, much time has been spent on his treatment due to the error of the doctors, until the abscess opened and many materials converged with it. And the treatment of his leg was postponed until an abscess formed, and multiple openings were made in it, through which pus and bodily humours drained.
So it was treated by numerous doctors for about two years, but there was no skilled surgeon to attend to him until I was called, and I examined his leg, and the materials flowing from those openings, which had taken on a great deal of movement: indeed, the entire body of the man had wasted away, and his skin had turned yellowish.
So I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
Then I carefully examined all the openings, and I found that they connected with each other in every part of the leg.
I then probed and followed one of these openings until I found the bone itself corrupted: it was already decayed, blackened, putrefied, and perforated, until it had reached the marrow.
I have therefore dissected what I have discovered and prepared it from the corrupted bone.
And I determined that there was no corruption of the bone other than what could be cut away and dissected. And I had now eradicated it.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with long spaces filled with medicinal consolidants. And it was not consolidated.
Then I tried again, and I discovered another bone above the first one that I had detected: and I found continuous corruption with the bone; and I dissected what appeared to me from this corruption as well.
Then I attempted the restoration of it. And it was not restored.
I therefore examined it again, and I did not stop striking the bone separately, and I tried to restore it; but it was not restored until I cut off about one palm-length from the bone, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicine, and it was quickly consolidated and healed; and this repetition of the operation and cutting off of itself was not needed any further because of the disposition of the weakness of the illness, and its lack of endurance, and my fear for it concerning death: for it was subject to fainting from excess of vomiting at all hours.
Health is therefore complete healing, and flesh grows hard in the place of the bone; and its arrangement in its body becomes good, and its strength returns to it; and it is changed into its dispositions; and it causes no harm to its walking at all.
However, if a prominent bone in the body is already broken, it must be secured in this way, and so it is: take hold of the ligament and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone; and instruct someone to gently stretch it upwards, and place another ligament above it, using a thicker thread for the first one. Then bind it over the flesh that is next to the bone, and stretch the end of it so as to draw the flesh down; and you will remove the flesh above the place where you want to tighten, in order not to harm the cut.
Place a wood or board under the bone precisely, for when you do this, it will not prevent but rather cut away the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that there be a tightening over the corrupted place for some time, so that there is no decay of the bone; and it does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and incites to another tightening.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then a deep part of it continues with another part; and the corruption is in the middle or in another part of it; then remove the flesh from all parts completely. Then place the wooden splint below.
Next, cut that part from the first side where the corruption is, until the fracture is continuous from the other side, and make the splint according to the length of the fracture as we mentioned before.
If the corruption is at the joint, cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other side.
If indeed the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill involved in it except for scraping.
If the corruption is in the thumb or toe joint: then the case is very difficult indeed. Indeed, it is necessary that you inquire how the corruption appears to you. And scrape it, and clean it as best you can, and adjust it with any skill you have, so long as it does not cause opposition from a vein or nerve.
And know that the cutting and sawing of these bones require many incisions, according to the position of the bone, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and size, and thinness, and rarity, and hardness. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare an instrument suitable for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations signify to you the kind of instrument you need when you are engaged in a lengthy study. And the knowledge of these methods is a testimony to the ways of illness; for then you will indeed find within yourself what is suitable for him from among the instruments for every sickness.
And I am firmly telling you at the end of this chapter's discussion the number of instruments you will be making examples from and testing on others.
The shape of another knife.
The form of surgical incisions is joined. Place the head of this razor according to the form of the star-shaped keyhole, and its points correspond to the shape of the elastic hook's points.
And it does not fit unless the incisions' heads are rubbed with it when they become corrupted or widened, and it is large and great.
The form of the larger razor.
The form of the lateral razor.
The form of the razor where there is curvature.
The form of the other razor's fine point.
The form of the other razor's curved extremity.
The form of the razor's delicate hook.
It resembles the saw, and its end is like a blade; it is exhibited in many places for the reason of bones.
The form of the razor that corresponds to its function, which is perforated for bones.
Its end is triangular, the tips are sharp.
It is suitable from India. And similarly, it is necessary that all we have said about razors, scalpels, and saws be done.
§ On the cutting of tips and the locking of bones.
The tips putrefy, either from an external or intrinsic cause.
When therefore you have treated the putrefaction with medicaments, and it does not yield to treatment, and you see the putrefaction affecting a member, without causing pain; in that case, you should cut off that member as far as the putrefaction extends, so that the patient may be freed from death or from the evil which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign of that which happens to it is that the member turns black until it can be healed; whether it was burned by fire or rotted after turning black: until that rot spreads throughout the entire member and body.
Therefore, when making the next cut, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is due to the impact of certain venoms: such as those of the sea scorpion, wasp, bee, and others.
If therefore the corruption or impact is in the end of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread, so that it progresses to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off at the root of the finger, and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread until it reaches the end of the arm.
And if it suddenly occurs in that place, then cut off the arm at its elbow joint.
But if the corruption spreads, and you see it around the elbow, then there is death of the limb. And beyond that treatment, it is the quantity of strength.
And similarly for the foot, when corruption suddenly occurs in a toe, then cut it off at one of its joints; and if it reaches the arch of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. If it ascends towards the knee, then cut the leg at the knee joint.
If the damage has already reached above the knee, then there is no cure for it, except to release and let the afflicted person die.
And the manner of cutting the limb is either by sawing or cutting through it, in order to tighten the ligament below, which you should cut: and tighten another ligament above the place. And let the assistant stretch one ligament downwards, and let another assistant stretch another ligament upwards. And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, using a broad scalpel, until the whole flesh is detached. Then it is cut or tightened.
And it is necessary that you cover all parts with a linen cloth, and do not allow the saw or cut to touch the healthy place; and add to the afflicted a new wound and a hot poultice.
If, however, bleeding occurs internally while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly, or place some absorbing powders on top to stop the blood. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded member with a suitable ligature and attend to it until it is healed.
And I tell you about what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing that I am telling you about.
Which is because a blackness occurred on his foot, similar to the burning of fire, and that corruption first happened in his toe, until it spread throughout the whole foot.
So the man pulled off a part of himself, after he saw that the corruption was spreading to the member because of its pain and burning, and it affected the joint; and thus he healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same corruption occurred in his index finger.
He came to me, and I tried to recover that superfluity with what I put on his hand from medicines after cleaning his body; but the superfluity did not stop, and it started affecting other fingers until it spread throughout the hand.
He called for me to cut off his hand, but he did not want it, hoping that I could help with the rebound of that superfluity, and I feared even more for his death during cutting his hand. Since the virtue of man was superior to the case.
After he lost hope in me, he returned to his land, and came back to me because of his eagerness, and he cut off his entire hand; yet he was healed.
And I did not record this story except to be an aid regarding what happens in this condition, and as a sign that shows its significance and according to how it is acted upon.
§ On the care of wounds, and the quality of enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, then it ruptures or perforates, and whatever is inside it from the pus comes out, leaving an empty place as if it were a cavity; and the skin above it becomes like a thin cloth that has been worn out: and it does not reach its ultimate stage in corruption, nor does it affect the mouth, or the nerves, or the ligaments. It deserves to be called a "sinus", and is not named a "fistula"; however, if the space of the abscess is prolonged until the corruption affects any of these members, then it is called a "fistula" or an ulceration.
And its treatment is to cut off that skin completely as it is affected; and especially when it has become thin and like cloth, and you trust that because of its corruption, it does not adhere to the place.
If you hope that it will adhere to the skin and does not result in that final corruption from its completion, and if there is thickening of the skin with flesh, then take care of it with a clister, as it were, to consider towards the sinus.
If it is large and pus is discharged from it, having a foul smell, then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine, which consists of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and zinyar, mix them together into a useable preparation, and boil over a fire until the medication turns red, and then it will thicken like honey.
Then take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey, and clisterize the sinus with it, tighten its opening, and leave the medication inside for two hours.
Then extract it with expression, do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul odor is removed.
And when you have clisteryzed it with ash water, if this medicine is not present to you, take ash from burned wood or ash from oak trees, and pour water over it. Then apply it, and clisteryze with it until you trust that the sinus is already cleansed.
If the patient cannot endure either Egyptian medicine or ash water, then clisteryze it with a mixture of water and honey, to which some crushed zinyar has been added. It cleanses itself with a mixture of honey and wine, due to the property of honey to purify and wash away, and wine makes the skin adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
You do this several times, and trust that the corruption of the sinus is now gone: then cleanse yourself with whatever makes the flesh in it grow anew.
And it is, that you take from the ointment of dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rosy oil, and astringent wine: or cleanse yourself with certain medicines, and other unguents, whose properties I have written in the treatise on unguents.
If the orifice of the sinus is tight, through which a catheter for the enema cannot pass: then widen it with a sharp iron, or place in it a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it widens.
And similarly, if the orifice is also wide, then close its lips with a suture: and allow it to hold the amount that goes into the enema without adding more.
And similarly, if its orifice from which pus flows is elevated to the upper parts: then dry it in the lower part where it is located, so that the pus can flow out of it below: for when pus becomes constricted in the depth of the sinus, it prevents flesh from growing in it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you see fit, then try to prepare the member in such a way that the pus can drain from it easily according to what you have prepared. Try to ensure nothing retains the pus inside completely: and take solid medicines that are placed on the wound, suitable for what you see. And extend them over the linen cloth. And the cloth should be of such a size that it allows communication throughout the entire sinus. Then use scissors to cut directly into the sinus' opening, expanding it slightly more than the sinus orifice. Then extend another linen cloth with ointment, according to the size of the opening, and place it over the sinus opening at a distance, allowing the pus to drain out of it: and do not remove the large cloth unless after a few days once.
The one who is over the sinus opening, he is the one you move at every hour to allow what is collected in it from pus to drain out: and so that you know if what flows out of it is a lot or a little: digested or undigested.
And consider once again the place of the sinus itself, whether the lord of that part feels pain therein or not, and whether there is a gap there or not.
Therefore, if your treatment proceeds thus, and you see the material that emerges from the sinus opening, then know that the sinus is already attached or approaching attachment; then resolve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you have resolved the wound, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
However, if a fine, slow-moving virus emerges from the sinus after a long space, then do not despair about its attachment, for healing is approaching, since there are people whose flesh takes time to heal in their wounds, and others who act against it.
However, if after many days a bad, undigested pus emerges from the sinus, then know that the sinus is not attached.
If therefore the attachment of the sinus is delayed, and its condition prolongs: then in the drying process of the remedies, let the physicians make them such that they have humidity in their substance and dryness in their power, as the ointment of dyafinicon when superfluitous addition is added to it from above.
And from the very last part of what is being cured, take the ointment of dyafinicon, and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it again over it with equal old wine in its substance.
Then he should be bound with it and use it himself.
And it does this similar action when you do not have a drying ointment at hand, using honey when you prepare it until it becomes thick enough for use. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: mix them all together and sprinkle that over the honey while it is still on the fire. Then place a cloth over it and bind it on your chest, and wrap the honey that you have prepared, until it thickens; then sprinkle some powder on top of it, and place it back on the cloth, and secure it.
And when it is administered with the long Aristolochia and the roots of the celestial lily, and there is a lily; and flour of herb, and centaury. Use them simple or compounded, mix them, and sprinkle that over the honey I described; use it.
If the condition of the sinuses persists and does not improve with this treatment, then know that there is corruption within it; or it has already made an impression on the bones, or on the hard parts of other members, or on the ligaments; in such a case, treat it with fistular care as mentioned above.
On the care of panaritium and the treatment of a thumb with an attrited nail, and the addition of a cut on the finger, and amputation.
Panaritium is an ulcer that occurs beneath the nail of the thumb or foot, and it may occur in other fingers as well.
When this condition is prolonged and its treatment neglected, and the ulcer becomes infected with heat, or it decays and pus is discharged until the root of the nail is corroded, and perhaps it destroys the whole finger, and sometimes the corruption reaches the bones, until a foul odour emanates from it; and then the tip of the digit widens, and its colour turns black.
When, therefore, you treat it as we have said in amputation, and your treatment does not heal it, then you should cut off with a knife the whole remaining portion that is left of the nail. Then cauterize the ulcer after that. Cauterization is indeed very useful.
If indeed the bone is healthy, and the nail itself is also sound, and the protrusions of the nail already press upon the flesh inwardly and begin to pierce it and hurt it, then you should place a thin radium under the angle of the nail that presses upon the flesh, and push it upwards; and cut off the flesh with ease, and apply over it what remains of the medicine burning, corroding, until it is entirely removed. Then care for that wound with ointments until it heals.
However, if the corruption has already affected the mouth, then it is necessary to cut open that mouth and remove the diseased part: for it never heals as long as the corrupted bone remains within it.
If you see that the corruption and decay are spreading to the finger, then cut it off at a joint, as has been mentioned for its proper treatment. Then care for the diseased part until it heals.
However, if there is an injury to the nail due to friction or impact, and it causes intense pain, then a phlebotomist should drain the blood from the affected part first. Then dry the nail using a sharp scalpel, cutting across from top to bottom.
And be careful not to cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for you may cause additional pain to the already sensitive area, and this could lead to increased healing time for the tissue.
Then care for the area with something that soothes pain.
The true finger that is born into some hands of humans may be entirely fleshy, and sometimes there are bones within them, and perhaps there is a nail, and some are born at the joint or have their origin in some node of the finger. Therefore, he who is born with certain finger knots does not move, and he who is born near the joint of the finger may perhaps move.
Therefore, he who is among them (the parts of the body) is fleshy, his section (incision) is easy. Which is, as you cut into itself near its root with a wide scalpel.
However, the treatment of him whose birth is at the joint's root is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting into it.
In him who is born in a finger near the last knot, then you must cut into the flesh first with a round incision up to the bone. Then, saw the bone with one of their saws suitable for that. Then take care of it until it heals.
The consolidation that occurs in the fingers is often due to either birth (i.e., it is born with him) or from healing of a wound, or from fire burning, and similar causes.
Therefore it is necessary to cut away that consolidation until the digits return to their natural form. Then place between them a lining of cloth soaked in pink oil, so that they do not adhere too quickly, and separate them; or place between them a thin layer of lead, until the place is consolidated as necessary.
And similarly, if there is consolidation of certain digits with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
§ On the Incision of Deformities.
These are the veins that are inflated, thick, filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in many parts of the body; and most notably their outflow is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk or work hard, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer purgation of the body from black cholera several times with strong purgative.
Then the phlebotomist should draw blood from those veins of the patient.
The treatment of these [veins] with iron is indeed according to two methods. One of them is that they bleed, and the black blood is extracted. And another way is that the vein is lifted up, and all of it is extracted.
The section of it is indeed according to this manner. It crushes the limb first with hot water extensively, until the thick, foul blood is resolved. Then it ties the limb of the patient from the upper part of the thigh to the lower part of the knee with bandages. Then it cuts the vein in one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then it lifts up, that is, extracts the blood in your hand from the lower part of the leg upwards, and from above, it should be left to the phlebotomist to cut the limb at the first sign of bleeding. Then cut the wound down below: until an amount of blood sufficient to stop the bleeding and endure the patient's strength is drained.
Then bind it: and instruct him to refrain from foods that produce black cholera: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when veins are filled and it hurts the patient.
The elevation of a wound is carried out in this manner. If there are many crusts on the wound, it should be carefully cleaned. Next, insert the tip of the knife into the bath: either use a small incision in its leg with hot water, until it turns red and the veins bulge, or apply intense pressure if a hot bath is not available, until the limb is heated.
Then dry the skin with a clean cloth along the length of the vein, either at its last segment near the knee or at its lower part near the ankle.
Then, using scissors, open the skin and scrape away the vein from all sides until it appears healthy; at this point, you will see it turn from red to dark purple. When the vein is thus drained from the skin, you will see it turn white, resembling a string.
Then insert the forceps under it and lift it until it is completely removed from the skin; hang it gently with a hook.
Then dry another section near that one with three fingers. Then, scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then, lift it up with the radii as you did before, and suspend it with another hook, as you did at first.
Then, dry another cut or several cuts, if necessary. Then, lift it up and make an incision on that last cut near the heel.
Then, extract it towards the cut that is above it.
And do this until you have extracted it from the cut that is above, or from all the higher cuts, until, when it has come out entirely, then make an incision on it.
If, however, it does not obey you in being extracted and lifted, then insert a sharp two-edged blade and tie it, and extract that very one; or insert under it a radium, and turn your hand to every part until it comes out. And beware, so as not to be cut. For if it should cut you, then it will be difficult to extract it at all, and it inflicts further harm on the weak part from which it comes.
After you have completely removed it, place over the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil, or simply oil, and tend to it until it is healed.
If the vein is twisted and has a kink which needs to be released towards certain parts, and it is not as we said, according to rectitude, then you need to find above it, towards every part of its twist, and the places where it needs to be released.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have completely loosened it, and be careful near the cut not to injure or puncture the vein, for it will be difficult for you to raise or extract it. Therefore, be careful.
The shape of the incident which heals the vein.
The form of the vein's blindness.
It is not as hard as the other veins, nor does it have sharp ends that would puncture the vein; rather, it has great flexibility, being soft. If it were thin, it could puncture the vein with its thinness; on the contrary, its excessive thickness, as we said, should be avoided.
On the extraction of the thigh vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions on Earth, such as Alizegis and Arab lands, and in dry, hot lands with little tenderness, that is, where grass or trees do not grow.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed, its generation is from the decay that occurs beneath the skin, as happens within bodies of snakes and internal worms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of the course of this vein is what happens in a leg with severe inflammation. Then the site is used. Then the vein begins to exit from that site of use, as if it were a root of a plant or an animal.
When it appears from that end, then you must cover the whole fragment with lead, whose weight is a kilo (drachma keil), up to two kilo-drachmas, and make the knot on itself: and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Therefore, whenever something comes out from that (wound), lead it back externally and clean that impurity. If it extends too much, then cut off that part and clean the remaining part. And do not cut it completely until it has come out entirely. For if you cut it, it contracts and goes back into the flesh, causing an ulcer, putrefaction at the site, and a bad wound.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and removed gradually until the last part comes out from that (wound) and nothing remains within the body; from this vein, indeed, comes out a certain amount in some men, equal to five palms and ten fingers in length. And now it has reached me, because a man has been released from two-and-twenty palms.
However, if it happens to you during your treatment time: then insert a knife into its wound and pierce it deeply with the body, until all that is within it of the matter comes out entirely; and administer to the site a treatment against putrefaction for several days. Then take care with the cure of the ulcers.
And this vein, indeed, when it has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot itself, it has numerous openings, and a branch emerges from each opening.
Therefore, treat it as we said in the division, and with what has been mentioned above.
§ On the section concerning worms generated beneath the skin, and it is said to be a "boil.
This boil is called a "boil" in some lands among us, because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh.
And it moves throughout the body, ascending and descending, and is visible to the sense when it moves from one part of the body to another until it ruptures wherever it ruptures on the skin, and emerges.
And its generation is from the decay of certain humors. As worms and snakes, that is, roundworms (lumbrici) and tapeworms (ascarides), occur in the intestines.
And it is feared from his evil intent. For when he (the foreign body) enters the body and is carried to the head, and reaches the place, then perhaps it opens within him and comes out, and destroys the eye, and this happens often.
When therefore one wants to cure it and extract it, then that is not done except during its movement, and the appearance of itself to the sense.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above it and what is beneath it with a strong ligature. Then dry it above it, and extract it.
If it is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a hot cauterization on the place until it dies.
And moreover, what is feared, is its corruption, how it corrupts the eye, as we said.
If, however, you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tighten a good ligature beneath it. Then dry it above it, and extract it.
And it is necessary that the patient use purification of his body with medicines that dissolve bad, putrid humors.
And he should beware of foods that cause putrefaction.
§ On the division of disease, Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land; it is a pain that occurs in certain members, then it changes from one member to another.
And I have indeed seen it myself, according to what I tell you. I have been called to see a sick woman in certain parts. And she withdrew her arm, and I saw a little swelling in the vein at the wrist of the arm.
And after having waited for an hour, I saw one swelling move with a thin thread, as the flesh does, rising towards her shoulder more quickly than it can be said; so that it looks like living silver, when it runs from one place to another.
Therefore, the pain retreated from that place and became fixed in the shoulder.
Then, at the passing of an hour, it (the pain) grew weaker and moved into the rest of the body, until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that it was spreading throughout his entire body, as I could see.
I was amazed, therefore, at the speed with which it (the pain) shifted from one part of the body to another. And I had indeed never before seen this pain with my own eyes in such a way. However, I have seen many who experience the pain shifting from one part of the body to another; and they do not see it with their eyes as I saw it in a woman.
And I do not think that it (the pain) would be as it is, unless it were because she was a woman of those who have veins detected in this way; from here, therefore, appears to the senses that mobility has changed.
And it is necessary that it does not appear in this way to those who are delicate and have moist bodies, secret veins.
If therefore you wish to cure it and the patient feels that pain, then if it appears clearly to your eye, as we said, then tighten over it, and under it quickly; and dry it above it until that flux is stopped up; and cauterize the place.
However, if you do not see it with your eyes, then care for it with the discharge of the body, and with what it expels vapors, and purges them with foul pills, and pills of myrrh, and similar things.
**On the Extraction of Arrows**
Arrows differ according to their kinds and according to the places where they fall from the body.
The diversity of these is indeed great, for some have large barbs and others none; some are sharp, and others dull. And among them there are some that have three angles. And from those that have tongues (arrows). And from those that have stars (arrowheads).
The injuries that occur in the members themselves are of two kinds. For these members are derived from the main parts, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar organs. When one of these members fails and shows signs of death, as I will tell you later, then it is necessary that you swiftly extract the arrow from them, for death follows where it is located, in many ways. And when these signs of evil do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deeply within the member, then extract it and tend to the wound.
The signs of the brain, when a arrow falls into it and penetrates through the bone, and enters from above the brain, are: for there occur sudden fainting, darkness, giddiness, red eyes, swelling, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of the mind, and cholera-like vomiting. And perhaps blood may exit through the nose or ears. And perhaps speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed. And from the wound's location, white fluid similar to pus issues. And so it exits from that similar moisture of the flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not emerge.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left mammary gland; and it feels as if it were itself fixed in a hard substance, not in something vacuous. And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse; and blood flows from the wound black. And it follows that extreme coldness, cold sweat, and fainting. Know therefore that death descends without a doubt.
And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the lung is the flow of foamy blood from the wound; and the symptoms that follow are a stiff neck, fever, and a change in color to pale. And the great, deep breath departs; and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into a part of the chest, that is near the ribs, then it is as if it touches the little bones; and it causes great anxiety with a sharp pain, with a breathless sigh, and all the arms tremble.
And if an arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will issue forth from the wound due to the food.
And if an arrow enters the abdomen and becomes lodged there: something of feces will issue forth from the wound, or a bruise, or the intestines which have already been ruptured. Therefore, there is no hope for its cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine issues forth from it: something proceeds from it to the outside, and a stronger pain occurs in the patient; then know that it is mortal.
The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, throat, palms, elbow, back bones, furca (hip bone), thigh, leg and similar parts from the limbs are salutary according to many dispositions; when the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve, and is not a venomous arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen these arrows to be such, so that you may know through this regarding your cure.
Which is, because an arrow struck a man in the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. Therefore, I extracted it from his other side, beneath the fat of his ear, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the Jew, which had penetrated his eye fat under his lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I could not extract it from there except for a small part of its shaft, with which it was attached to its wood; and it was a large arrow among the arrows of the Turkish bow, with soft iron, without points.
The Jew was thus healed, and no harm occurred to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it had points. I then followed it up between the two ribs, and it was already submerged in his throat. I was thus puzzled with it, until I extracted it; and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the man, which had penetrated his belly; and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, nothing changed over him from his dispositions regarding the arrow; nor was there any further complication, and he recovered, and no ill accident befell him.
And he saw a man to whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the wound over it had healed. After which, after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And he saw a woman to whom an arrow had pierced her belly; the wound over it healed, and the arrow remained inside; and nothing changed from his dispositions regarding her, and the woman did not experience any harm from any of her natural operations.
And he saw another man to whom an arrow had pierced his face; the wound healed and remained, causing him little pain; and similar cases were many.
And I extracted the arrow from a man who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it was already declining to the right side a little; and the arrow was entirely hidden.
I was therefore called to his care after the arrow's wound for three days. I therefore find the wound of the arrow very tight.
Therefore I examined it with a delicate probe, and found no sensation; he, however, perceived the puncture and pain beneath his gold ring on the right side. I therefore hoped that it was the puncture from the tip of the arrow.
I therefore applied a poultice to the place, which had an attractive and softening power, confident that it would heal and reveal to me the sign of the arrow, so that I could cut it off; but no such accident occurred at the site, indicating that the arrow had not struck deep.
I therefore applied the poultice to it for many days; and no accident occurred, and the wound became consolidated in time; but it remained weak from extraction for a space of days, until he felt the arrow enter his nose on a certain day. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I then applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to it for many days, until it opened; and when I probed it with a probe, I felt the fine tip of the arrow that was adhering to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound that corrosive medicine until we could see the tip of the arrow; and it passed by me with that space of time approximately four months.
Then, after the wound had been enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it and move it, it did not yield to extraction, so I did not cease to work delicately over it and ingeniously with methods of ingenuity until I began on it one day with well-made forceps, in accordance with which their shape would come to an end at the conclusion of this chapter, until I extracted it. Then I healed the wound.
And indeed, the doctors judge that the nose cartilage does not heal. So I healed it, and the wound became consolidated, and it was cured completely healthy; nothing at all harmed it.
And I will tell you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you may apply that rule and meaning to what I have not mentioned.
Since the parts of this art and the distinctions between them are not comprehended within the narration; nor does the book understand it, and a prudent artisan compares with little to much, and finds the operation new, and a new instrument among the descents of external matters of this art when they occur.
I say, therefore, that arrows do not come out of the members in which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. It entered through attraction from the place it came from inside. Or on the contrary, of the other part.
And that which comes out where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding into the flesh: it is attracted and comes out.
If it does not obey to come out from the time when it fell, then you need to let go of it for several days until the flesh around it putrefies: and its attraction will be released, and its coming out.
And similarly, if it is lodged in a bone and does not obey you to come out, then let go of it for several days, and repeat the process of attraction and motion every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you to come out after several days, then you need to drill around the arrow in the bone from every side with a thin knife, until the arrows are enlarged. Then attract it and extract it.
If, however, the arrow is already absorbed in the body's place, and it is hidden and concealed from the senses: then seek it with attempts. If, however, you feel it, then attract it with certain instruments that are suited to its attraction.
If, however, you cannot overcome it because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in deep places; and there is no bone, or nerve, or vein there: then find a place above it, until the wound becomes enlarged, and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
Which if there are others to hold, then free the flesh fixed in them from every part, with all the means and devices you can, until it becomes loose or twisted.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is located, then use a twisting of your hand, with shears to all parts, until you make it gush out; and the subtlest last, with subtlety, so that the arrow is not broken, and it becomes difficult for you to attract it and extract it.
If you cannot remove it at once, then leave it for a few days until what is around it putrefies. Then repeat the process: it will indeed be cured then if contrary to you the flow of blood persists; then administer what we said from treatment in its chapter: and guard your virtue from vein, nerve, or chord cutting.
And administer wit in every way possible to evacuate the arrow: and let that be with ease, or calmness, or slowness, or firmness, as I have told you.
And it is necessary that when you draw out the arrow, make it weak according to its figure, as it was near the case of the arrow itself. Because it is more convenient. If, however, it is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you from the figures.
However, the arrow which emerges from the opposite part or has already proceeded from it to the outside: it causes a bulge at the tip of the arrow through sensation from the upper part of the adjacent skin, and you will see it protruding. So dry it above and let the section be according to the amount that the forceps grasp in it.
Then pull it, for it becomes easy to come out.
If it is indeed held in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness until the arrow presses against the bone and increases its own size: then pull it.
And if not: let it go for several days, then repeat the process until it emerges.
If there is wood in the arrow, then push it with that.
If, however, the wood falls off and you wish to apply a push: then insert a sharp instrument into it so that its pointedness goes into the tail of the arrow: then push it with that.
If, however, the arrow is pointed, then push it with the instrument entering into it. The arrow should be freed through that.
If an arrow has lodged in the flesh, it is necessary to remove all the flesh around it if you can do so. Then take care of it as it relates to that arrow.
If the arrow falls into the chest, or stomach, or limb, and is close to where you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut and cauterize the wound from the vein or nerve, and extract it.
Then dress the wound, if you see one, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the form of pincers, by which arrows are extracted.
The ends of these pincers should resemble the shape of an ear, made as if from iron; when they grasp the arrow, they do not let go of it.
And there are many types of them, large and small, and medium and fine, according to the size of the arrow, and the depth of the wound, and its breadth, and the tightness of it.
The shape of the driver is concave.
And the form of the impelling drum.
This is the extreme of the drum, such as the radius, to allow its entrance into the concave arrow, and it is impelled with it.
**On phlebotomy of veins.**
The veins that are subject to phlebotomy, of which the custom runs through the body, are thirty.
Of which there are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the Hermes; and two arteries, which are visible in both temporal regions; and two veins which are in the lacrimal bones of both eyes, called the Aspiring; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the tip of the nose. And two guides, which are in the neck. And two veins which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins that are called Algieric. And two veins that are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is cephalic, and it is from the lateral side of the skull; and the common people call it the vein of the head. And fusca. And it is the median vein, and it is composed of the branch of the basilic and the branch of the cephalic; and the common people call it the body's vein. And basilic, and it is situated on the inner side of the arm; and it is also called titillar. And the common people call it the stomach's vein. And the vein of the arm (funis), and it is situated above the elbow; and it is through this that bleeding is done, and it is the one that is visible above the thumb with a manifest appearance.
And the little vein: it is the vein that lies between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is located beneath the bend of the thumb on the lateral side of the wrist. And the second is the Saphenous vein, and it is located near the heel on the outer side of the body. And the vein of the foot: its location is near the heel on the outer side of the wrist.
And there are three other veins in the leg similar to these.
§ On phlebotomy after drawing blood from two veins near the ear.
The true phlebotomy of the two veins near the ear is indicated for chronic catarrh, hemigranae (half-headache), old skin ulcers, and other ancient head conditions.
And the quality of the phlebotomy depends on what I have described. And it is done by purging the head from below: and the nape of the neck is rubbed at the location of the two veins with a rough cloth using proper friction. Then he strains his weakened neck with a twist, until two veins become visible. And the locations of these are behind the ears in two depressed areas of the head. Therefore, seek them out with your finger, and where you feel the pulsation of these veins beneath your finger, mark them with cautery.
Then take the phlebotomist's knife, which is called the "Incidens. Then insert the tip beneath the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomist reaches the vein near the mouth. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin towards the upper parts, and cut the vein with a precise incision made by the knife. And the length of the incision should be about the size of two joined fingers, or somewhat more; and let as much blood flow out as you wish.
Then tie it off with small threads, and leave it until it heals.
And this is the beginning of the book, describing the incision and cauterization of these veins.
The true aid for the bleeding of two arteries at different times, which is for an old migraine: and a sudden and continuous constriction; and the flow of sharp excess fluids to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according as I tell thee. He strains his weak neck until two veins appear to the senses with a manifest appearance, and you can feel their pulse under your finger. Then indeed, mark the signs with wax.
Then take the skin above the vein with your index finger, insert the phlebotomy instrument from below, and draw the vein upwards. And cut it, as you did with the other two veins: and let the blood flow according to the amount necessary for thee.
Then loosen the constriction of the weak neck, and place your finger over the vein at once. Afterwards, place a bandage and poultices over it, and tighten the constriction firmly above; and release it until it is healed.
And now let us recall those things, and their incision, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
The true instrument for venesection of the forehead is indeed after the cephalic venesection, for ancient facial ailments: and for hemicranias, and redness; and foul ulcers.
And the quality of that venesection is, according to what I am telling you. The weak neck is compressed with the blade until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the "Fossor".
Place the sharp point that is on top of the "Fossor" (instrument) against the vein itself, and strike it with a sawing motion, or with another tool in its manner: and let the blood flow according to your will. Then open the lower incision, and bind it until it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a scalpel on the side. However, it is not necessary for the scalpel to have a sharp point as in other scalpels; on the contrary, it should have a broad edge. And the scalpel should be placed on it according to its thickness, since the wound is close, and perhaps the scalpel might break when it is too thin.
The treatment of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal bones of both eyes is for the eye's inflammation and redness, as well as for conditions in the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that it tightens the weak neck with bloodletting. Then the scalpel should be used on them, and you should stand over their head.
And the phlebotomy should be made according to the thickness, with a small scalpel, slightly broad, since there is no need for it to be deep at that place. If the scalpel is too thin, it might break.
Then make it flow from blood as much as is necessary for you. And place a bandage over them, and bind them tightly at night, and loosen them in the morning.
The phlebotomy of nasal veins refers to the treatment for acute fever, a violent headache, and facial pains, such as hemicranias, and the redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it tightens the patient's neck. Then hold the nose with your left hand, and take a thin, long phlebotomy instrument; fix it in the middle of the nose, between what distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. Since the vein does not appear there to the eye, and since the blood begins to flow immediately.
And you must, while holding the phlebotomy instrument with your last hand, let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you. Then bind it tightly at night. It is indeed quickly restored.
In Guide's manual, the true principle of venesection is to constrict the flow of blood, prevent the onset of leprosy, alleviate melancholy, treat impetigo and bad ulcers, and counteract corrosive (i.e., worm) infections.
And the quality of this venesection is that it constricts the patient under both sides of his neck with a ligature; and the surgeon should stand over the patient's head, while the patient sits on a seat.
Then the surgeon should make the venesection vein longer for a broader cut. Then extract a moderately tempered amount of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that. Then do the same for the other vein.
Then release the ligature and tie the two veins with a medium tightness so as not to cause further harm to the patient. And leave it until morning. The wound is healed.
On the bleeding of veins, Albucasis. According to Albucasis, the indication for phlebotomy of veins is when there is a buildup of blood in the mouth, leading to gum corruption, bad ulcers, and cracks in the lips and mouth, as well as those found in the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that you make the patient sit before you and tighten their neck with a strap. Then you open the patient's lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left, and their demonstration is through the darkening of the colors. And the truth is that around them there are small, black veins. Therefore, make an incision on each with a cutting instrument.
If, however, there is doubt about which one it is and you do not know, then turn your attention to the larger incision and those that are more apparent.
And similarly, do the same with the two veins that are in the upper lip, and indeed custom usually follows this, and make incisions on the two veins that are in the lower lip.
On phlebotomy of the vein beneath the tongue after cephalic phlebotomy. The true method of phlebotomy concerning the two veins beneath the tongue: It is that phlebotomy of the cephalic vein should be performed for conditions in the throat, and for ailments of the uvula and disorders of the mouth.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy is such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun; and raise his tongue, and look beneath his tongue at one vein from the side, and another vein from the other side; and the color of each should turn to blackness.
Perform phlebotomy on both veins; and be careful not to use your last hand on the phlebotomy. For beneath them are arteries, and perhaps there may be a flow of blood from these arteries.
The three veins that are phlebotomized in the forearm—of these, phlebotomy of one is customary for all people.
Phlebotomy of these should be performed according to two methods. By piercing with a myrtle-handled phlebotom; or by pressing with an olive-shaped instrument to achieve greater fluency; or by cutting with a surgical knife, it is called alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these there arise various broad and narrow kinds according to the width and tightness of the veins. The form of the myrtle phlebotom is wide as you can see. And it is used to open veins that are concave, full, swollen, visible, thick, and those that contain thick, cloudy blood.
And this phlebotom is of smaller width and more delicate extremities.
And it is suitable for the delicate phlebotomy of veins containing thin, yellowish blood.
However, the basil (vein), which is one of these three veins, provides the greatest facility for phlebotomy. Because he extracts blood from ailments that are under the throat and neck, following the chest and vein; and it is befitting for the phlebotomist to use a phlebotomy tool on it, as a precaution, and be above the fear of it, since there is an artery beneath it. If, therefore, he errs and adds to the puncture of phlebotomy, he will hit that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary not to use a phlebotomy tool on it with a cutting phlebotomist; instead, it should be cut with an aluminium (or similar) instrument.
If it does not appear with a clear sign, then it is necessary to find others for it, and exchange it for another, or seek some branch of it; or apply a phlebotomy tool at the place of its position in the arm. Indeed, it is clear, and cut it with an aluminium phlebotomist, as we said.
However, if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same site, then it is necessary before tightening the arm, to touch the place, until you know the location of the pulse. Then mark the place with wax, afterwards tighten the arm, and cut the vein with a concave phlebotomist (as we said). And so that the blow does not fall through the space from the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligament, an inflation at the place you indicated with wax, then that inflation is the inflation of the artery; therefore, release it gently.
If you see blood rising during phlebotomy like urine from a boy, and it is thin, red blood, then know that it is from the artery's blood. Then proceed, and place your finger on the long space above, then remove your finger. If therefore blood is severed (it is often severed many times), then tighten the limb and release it; and let the patient be careful from its motion; and it should be over his fear.
And do not move it for several days until it heals.
However, if the blood does not sever and it constricts you, and you do not have a remedy at hand, then cut the artery if it appears to you. Because its extremities are constricted, and the blood is severed.
Take and accept the leather of the fistula, and find its middle part; take one half and tighten it over the vein with a ligature and small stitches until another day.
Then if the blood separates, it is good. And if not: then take care of itself with that whose remembrance preceded the flow of blood from the place of the stitches; and the separation of the blood from it is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the small wound's location and the possibility of binding it from the arm.
The dark veins, however, require a certain force for phlebotomy, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this is because it is composed of branches of the Basilic and Cephalic veins, as we have said.
And it happens that the phlebotomist should be careful because there is a nerve under it. If therefore he adds to the puncture of phlebotomy and finds a nerve, there is a loss of sensation, and its healing becomes difficult, and perhaps it does not heal completely.
And this nerve appears to the sense many times. If it is hidden in certain men and is subtle, and not shown, then you should put your phlebotomy where it passes through them, the incision with the alnessil, and the detachment of the nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
**On the Cephalic Vein** The phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and conveys it to the eye diseases.
And for this vein, if you wish, you should puncture it with a phlebotomizer made of olive or myrrh, because it is the healthiest of all veins, as it is neither beneath an artery nor a nerve.
However, when you perform phlebotomy, it is necessary to remove the head of the vein only with a phlebotomizer, and look for a softer place, and it does not harm him if it is not found with the first strike, but it should be passed over it several times with phlebotomy.
However, perhaps it will be displaced in some men when not phlebotomized in the first strike, but it does not harm him that displacement in some way.
¶ On the usefulness of phlebotomy and precautions to be observed in it. However, the quality of phlebotomy and its potential complications depend on careful consideration of the procedure's correct execution.
Firstly, it is essential to understand that phlebotomy should only be administered for the purpose of preserving health, and to continue doing so with caution to prevent illness from arising or worsening.
And phlebotomy should be performed on one of the three veins found in the arm, namely the cephalic, the femoral, or the basilic vein. And to perform phlebotomy at the beginning of spring after fasting, on the veins located above the wrists, and in summer and winter after meals when there is a sign of overfullness.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the first or third day after three hours have passed since the previous day.
However, phlebotomy performed to treat illness does not have a specific time; but when circumstances and necessity dictate, it can be done at night or during the day, and at any hour or time.
And it is not necessary for children under the age of fourteen to undergo phlebotomy until their veins become stronger. A pregnant woman should not have blood let from the fourth to the seventh month. Nor should the elderly, who have already passed sixty years, be bled.
So if anyone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels before bloodletting with a gentle enema, if much feces is retained in them; so that the veins do not draw from the intestines an excess of putrid fluid harmful to the main members.
A patient should not be bled when they are exhausted from nausea, nor constipated or too drunk until that condition is removed from them. Nor should an invalid with edema be bled.
And let bloodletting be avoided again after a stomachache, vomiting, flow of the bowels, multiplication of coitus, labor, exercise, vigils, fasting, and anything else that weakens strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick due to food, drink, and medicine; then it is possible for him to do that.
Then he should take a bath, if nothing prohibits it; or exercise some kind of exercise to thin the blood.
And moreover, perform his phlebotomy about the third hour of the day, as we have said, and try to cause his chest to be drained on that day from all animal misfortunes, such as distress, anger, fear; and from all bodily misfortunes, such as labor, pain, excess, and similar ones.
And let him make his condition present with those things of which usage is a custom among men, from aromatics and perfumery, and rejoicing, and similar ones, according to the possibility.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a bench higher than that of the patient; then he should draw his arm and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand twice or three times. Then he should tighten the ligature with the thong and wrap it twice.
And the ligature should be firm, but not excessive, for when a ligature is uneven or there is too much tension in the ligature, it hinders the flow of blood; and similarly, when it is too loose, it also hinders the flow of blood.
After the ligature, he should then have the patient rub his hands gently back and forth until the veins swell and become visible to the touch.
Then the phlebotomist should cleanse the wound with a little oil, traditionally used for this purpose.
Then he should place his index finger of the left hand over the vein itself at the site where he intends to perform phlebotomy, lightly: so that the vein does not escape and is crushed. Since veins are like a cord that escapes during phlebotomy and some are full of swift blood flow; and when you place the phlebotomist over them, they contract beneath the phlebotomist and the phlebotomist is deceived, not opening the vein; and if he does open it, it is too tight. For this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then he should remove the phlebotomist. If the vein opens on its own from the first attempt, then it is good. And if not, then repeat it another time at the same place lightly, or above it with haste; if the place does not heal.
If the place heals or becomes weak, then release it on the day or after two days; and do not tie the ligature tightly. Perhaps indeed the healing place attracts heat. Nor should a bath be taken.
He then practices phlebotomy if he loves it.
If the opening is small or the blood flows gently, and you fear that too much blood might be lost, then repeat the phlebotomy in the same wound according to the right direction, and add only a little to the procedure.
And do it quickly before the place is healed; for once the place is healed, it is a problem in many cases.
If therefore you see that the place is already healed, then do not repeat over it at all; for it does not allow you to achieve anything. And place nothing on it from the fat of oil, for it eases the flow of blood. And it is better at this place than pure oil, and than all the rest of the oils.
And similarly, apply the fat of oil to every vein that you phlebotomize where there is a need to stop the flow of blood; and make it into a paste with flour and honey when applied to the place.
Blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.
If a great abscess occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which happens frequently, especially to those who have not been bled properly, or if there is only a small opening in the vein, then apply and place over the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, heated slightly, and squeeze it firmly immediately, as it will be relieved.
And it is necessary that you do that after the blood has exited from the vein itself with its completion, or from another vein.
If after a few days there remains in the site some blackness or redness, it does not harm it; and if you wish, place over it something of aloe or myrrh dissolved, or something from the juice of mint, that is, warmth or something similar to it.
And indeed, abscesses and swellings often occur during phlebotomy in the Basilica.
Therefore, place your hand over it, and if you feel softness at the time of your compression over it, then that swelling is bad. Therefore, put something over it from what we have said. For perhaps blood may flow from that artery.
But make an embolism for it with what has constriction, so that the place hardens. Then care for the wound itself with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary that you extract blood from every man according to the amount of his strength. And that appears from the color rising above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it turns red; and likewise, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it thins; and similarly, if it is acute, then remove its sharpness until it becomes smooth.
And he who is full, strong, and needs the extraction of blood at once, must have the vein amplified and be bled on the side, and conversely, for him who is weak.
And it is necessary to extract the wound in vessels and make a tight opening; and better yet is that which is administered in vein phlebotomy, so that there is a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this mode of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting a nerve; and it is more commendable and healthier than phlebotomy through width and length.
And he who is accustomed to reach the point of phlebotomy with syncope, must give him a little bread soaked in pomegranate juice before phlebotomy, or warm water if he is heated; and extract blood from him in three or four places.
If there is a chill in the complexion, then he should take bread soaked in thin syrup, or in syrup of honey perfumed with spices, or in perfumed aromatic syrup before phlebotomy.
If, during phlebotomy, a fainting spell occurs due to excessive blood loss, then one should take a drink of meat broth and thin aromatic syrup; they should use spices with the patient's chest and rest it; and employ the remedies mentioned in the chapter on syncope from evacuation.
Whoever wishes to restore their arm and resolve their blood issues, if phlebotomy is required due to excessive evacuation and the patient's strength is weak, they should gradually dissolve their blood over several days.
Indeed, whoever wishes to restore their arm and resolve their blood issues, but their body is strong, should do the following after seven or nine hours—or when it has been longer since their first phlebotomy.
Whoever wishes to draw blood from their body towards the opposite part from where it is declining, should do so on the second or third day.
In cases where a person's body has too much already heated and aggravated blood, causing fever, it is necessary to draw out a significant amount of blood at once; and widen the opening until syncope occurs; after having preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand over the pulse near the flow of blood, so as not to cause death in that spot. Many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and it falls due to negligence.
And it is not necessary when you intend to open the arm and second to let blood, while the opening of the vein is already closed, and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow out, as it is hurriedly superimposed on itself with impetuosity, and the wound quickly extends. For that is a great evil, leave it alone for now, until it is bled a second time.
Or remove with care the coagulated blood from the opening of the vein, and place over it some dissolved salt in water. And place over it some of the alum or sage, and apply gentle compression until the blood flows out.
If indeed the vein has already burst, then leave it, and do not press it, until the hematoma is seated.
If it is necessary to open the vein a second time and there is no excuse, then either bleed it again over that place, or on another arm in another vein.
The phlebotomy arm, however, at the place of the vein Fusca and Basilica, if they are not found and are hidden, since they are composed of them.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the patient introduces his hand into warm water until the blade becomes red and the vein is clearly visible.
Then it is tied over it with a thin ligature with moderate tightness. Then the phlebotomy is made according to the transverse direction gradually, not longitudinally or laterally, and your opening should be wide enough for the phlebotomy to be performed over the joint of the hand slightly.
If the flow of blood is obstructed, then repeat immersing your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you achieve your need.
However, if it is the summer season, then excuse yourself from immersing your hand in warm water. And certainly the most blood flow occurs in warm water during winter time.
And this vein's phlebotomy is the healthiest for all veins, because it is not pulsating under it nor is there a nerve.
The phlebotomy of the left hand's Vein Saluatella is beneficial for liver ailments.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that you tighten the vein with your hand and ligature, or with your own hand, after you have inserted it into warm water, until the vein is bent and its sensation becomes very pronounced. Then perform the phlebotomy by passing it through. And if you cut it completely through, it will not harm it in any way.
And be careful not to use the phlebotomy tool too roughly. For under it are the naked nerves of the fingers, exposed from the flesh.
Then return your hand to the warm water and allow the blood to flow into it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's opening and be stopped from flowing.
So when you have withdrawn the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on top of the vein, so that it does not clot quickly.
And likewise, it is necessary that you do this with every branch tightly bound.
The true method of phlebotomy with the left hand is as follows: since it is directed towards the spleen's afflictions, do likewise in this phlebotomy as you did in the second equal manner.
The method for saphenous phlebotomy, however, is for ailments located in the lower part of the body, such as maladies of the matrix (uterine issues), retention of menses, kidney problems, old ulcers of the coxa and crura, and similar conditions from these ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that the patient immerses his afflicted foot in warm water, and makes friction over it until the veins burst, and ties above the joint of the foot with bindings. And indeed, the veins are located near the calcaneum (heel bone), visible towards the thumb, and they branch out from it on the face of the foot with many branches.
Therefore, perform phlebotomy on it at the broader branch or near the calcaneum where it joins together, since this is better and healthier.
Which if performing phlebotomy on it on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it on the surface of the foot.
And do not perform your phlebotomy through it as if you want to cut it, and let the phlebotomy be neat (precise).
If, however, the escape of blood is forbidden, then repeat the procedure by immersing the foot in hot water and allow the blood to flow into it until it is cleared.
If, however, the phlebotomist mistakes the vein in the first attempt, they should repeat the procedure higher up slightly, for that place is safe and there will be no harm from it when you seek relief from nerves, as we said before.
And likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot.
The sciatic vein, as we said, is located at the side of the calf near the ankle.
And the manner of phlebotomy for it is, to ease the pain of the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should enter a warm bath and hurry: and grasp the foot with four fingers on the side of the ankle up to above the calcaneum, using a thin, long blade, for it is not visible otherwise.
When it appears, then perform the phlebotomy as best you can, either directly or according to the turn of the vein; and it is better, whether by making a cut with a blade or by slicing it with a section. For indeed it is a healthier place, and it is hidden from many men.
For indeed it is a healthier place, and it is hidden from many men. If you do not find it or it does not appear at all to the senses, then take a branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot and towards the ear, and cauterize from the nerves, causing blood to flow out in quantity as desired.
Then loosen the stricture (bandage) and place over the site of the phlebotomy (bloodletting) a piece of skin, and tighten the area. Indeed, it heals quickly.
**On Drainage (Ventilation) and the Nature of its Use**
Tents (wounds) are formed from horns, air, and other (foreign) bodies.
And Drainage (Ventilation) is performed according to two methods. When performing scraping and extraction of blood; and another is ventilation without scraping.
And this ventilation which is without scraping (or incision) is according to two methods. For indeed it is with fire. For indeed it is without fire.
And the places where vapors are applied with cutting and extraction of blood are fourteen locations of the body. Of which one is the venting of the alnocratis, which is last on the head; and alkhel, which is in the middle of the neck; and the venting of the Alhagdahim, which are two layers on the neck from both sides; and the venting of the mind, which is under the jaw in the lower mouth; and the venting of the two spatulas; and the venting of the Alachosos, which is at the very end of the tail; and the venting of the two forks, which are in the middle of both arms; and the venting of the two tendons; and the venting of the two caves.
And indeed, venting does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and because of that, the strength does not leave them, as is the case with phlebotomy. Nor is it necessary to apply venting or with fire, or without fire, in any illness that results from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
If need arises from illness to apply venting, or because of custom, we administer it at every hour at the beginning, end, and middle of the month, and at any time it may be.
Which is because there are people who, when much blood accumulates in them, until it needs to be extracted through incision, find swelling and hardness in their head.
And from them, some find swelling and redness on their face, head, and neck. And from them, some experience itching on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness in their eyes.
And from them, some scratch the area of their incision. And from them, some experience their laughter increasing. And from them, some find the taste of blood in their mouth; or they might retch and spit out blood. And from them, some experience prolonged sleep. And from them, some see blood and redness in their sleep, wounds, and things similar to these.
When we therefore see something from these signs, and particularly if it occurs in the third medium of the month: we then order the incision to be made, after two or three hours have passed since sunset.
The treatment of venting the nape (of the neck) is as follows: since it conveys weight to the head and what drains towards the eyes. It is necessary at this point, so that it (the treatment) may be effective after the evacuation of the entire body.
And this, indeed, is the place for phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not permissible to use it (the treatment) on one with a cold complexion or congestion. For it causes great harm.
And because of this, it is not permissible to use (the treatment) on the elderly or those with cold-related ailments in their heads.
However, if one insists on doing it (the treatment), oblivion will befall him.
And because of this, you should urge the ventosator to rest his hand with a gentle flow towards the lower parts, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Ventilation or alkehel is the place for the phlebotomy of the dusky (type of blood) and basic (phlebotomy), and because of this, it brings about asthma, constriction of the breath, cracking of the instrument, coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary that the ventosa (suction cup) be applied to Alkehel's wound momentarily, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
The use of the ventosa indeed provides relief from localized pain in the head, eyes, half-headache (hemigranae), perforation, and tooth root pain, and it takes the place of bloodletting with a leech.
And it is necessary that you warn the ventosa user not to use his hand for scraping too forcefully, so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
However, the use of the ventosa under the chin provides relief from alcohol in the mouth, decay of the gums, and similar conditions that affect the mouth, and it replaces other bloodletting methods on the lips.
However, the use of ventosas in the form of spoons provides relief from arthritis, which is caused by stiffness and heat.
The use of ventosas on the internal parts of two bell-shaped cups provides assistance to bloodletting from three veins: the basilic, the fusca (dark vein), and the cephalic, because these ventosas draw blood from all those small veins in the flesh, and the smaller veins draw blood from the others until it reaches the three main veins.
And it is necessary that you warn the surgeon not to go too deep into the scarification, for the site is denuded of flesh, and beneath it are nerves and arteries.
However, the ventosa that is sucked over the anus helps with hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon that the ventosa should be strong and made of air, for the site needs a strong suction, and the delicate vents might break, so a deep scarification is required.
However, the vents of the veins diminish their size visibly, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and bring relief to old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and gonads; they induce menstruation, relieve pain, and take the place of phlebotomy on two saphenous veins and varicose veins.
However, they weaken the body greatly, and cause fainting in many people.
And the aid of varicose veins is near to the aid of the two crusts' vents.
The quality of the position of the vents is that you place the ventosa first in a hollow place and apply a moderate suction; do not prolong the position of the vents, but remove them quickly, and move them quickly so that the humors reach the site with an equal flow; do not keep repeating this process and continuing until you see the site turning red and swollen, and appears to be blood-red: then scarify and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider the disposition of bodies.
For those who have tender flesh, rare hair, it is necessary to perform the incision only once, not repeatedly, so as not to ulcerate the site.
And especially the windbagger, to amplify the incision, and make it deeper slightly; and regulate the suction for ease, speed, and his own motion.
If there is great thickness of blood, then it is necessary to perform the incision twice. In the first instance, the path to thinning the blood and improving its flow is opened; and in the second, the precise examination for the meticulous extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is indeed very foul, then a third incision should be made; to achieve the ultimate result.
And finally, when we wish to extract blood gradually or in small amounts, a single incision is sufficient for us. Which if we wish to extract much blood, we perform many incisions.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary to make a deep incision; and the depth of the skin should be equal to the depth of the incision.
What is that which needs to be administered from oils at the site of the windpipes, and what should be avoided when using them?
In the case of skin that is thick, hard, and dark, with tight pores, it is necessary to apply the windpipe areas with open oils, such as lard, vegetable oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is during the winter season, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or snowball (satina) oil, and similar oils.
If indeed there is excessive thick, cold moisture, then amber oil, or balsam oil, or white oil, or anise oil, and similar oils should be used.
If indeed it is necessary to open wide the pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and after ventilation, these windpipe areas should be washed with rosewater, or cold water, or warm water, or pumpkin seed water, or water from portulaca, and similar substances.
He whose blood is excessively moist should wash the windpipes with vinegar or myrtle water and sumac, and similar substances.
He should wash away their excess with old wine, or with pure water, or with anise or chamomile decoction, and similar substances.
And it is necessary that ventilation be taken care of in the bath or in the bathing area; indeed, it is necessary to administer [a treatment] after leaving the bath, for an hour or two.
And it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after ventilation.
§ What is it that is necessary to regulate ventilation or phlebotomy before ventilation?
And after that, you should consider primarily: if the one who is ventilated or bled is choleric, and acuteness and inflammation are present in his blood: then he should take cooling substances, such as the juice of a grenadine; and also throughout the day with vinegar and lettuce, and dry herbs, and fennel: and similar ones.
And remove his food cravings for fat, and meat that is easily digested, and prepared foods with herbs: and similar ones.
And for those whose condition is cold, it is necessary to take syrup in a drink of honey, or from almonds, or from fennel seeds made; and to consume medium perfumed wine, which is between old and new: and he should be instructed to limit his food intake. And remove his food and drink, and any vomit; and birds, that is, small birds; and the chicks of pigeons should be left.
And it is necessary that the drink on the day of cleansing and bloodletting be more than the food; and it is necessary to give in the drink for certain men in the hours of the tyro's ale, or a remedy from moss, that is, mace, or assafoetida before cleansing, or after: so that the principal members be strengthened, and the blood be thinned. And it is not necessary for them to take it in a hot drink.
**On Wind (Pneumonia) without Scarification:** However, the wind (pneumonia) that is without scarification affects the upper part of the epigastrium, and the spleen, and the podagra, and over the abdominal wall, and the navel, and the kidney locations, and the anchial pixels: for these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought through them unless there is an attraction from a member of blood to another member; as we place pneumonia over the nipples in the illness of nasal bleeding. And we use them to resolve the cold wind that has entered from one member to another; as we place a wind over the abdominal wall and navel. Indeed, it rarefies the member and warms it up, and thus drives away pain because it resolves that fluidity.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is a congestion or stone in them. By its powerful attraction, it may perhaps open up the congestion or even dislodge the stone from its position.
And similarly, when placed over the spleen, it does the same, draining the blood from both of them.
These wind passages are managed solely with incision. And sometimes they are managed with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with warm water in cases of pleurisy: and that is to fill the wind passage, making it large, with only hot water, or water in which herbs that are suitable are boiled.
**Form of administering the wind passage with fire.**
It is the size of an opening between two fingers, shaped as we form it; its depth is halfway through the palm; and there is a small hole on its side, approximately in the middle, large enough for an awl to pass through: it should be made of iron or brass, smooth and flat, not damaging the member when placed above it; and in the center, there is a crossbar passing through it, made of iron or steel, where a candle with fire is placed.
And now this becomes a great and swift flux, greater than we have described, and somewhat less according to the sickness and age of him who uses it.
For the winds of boys and those who are emaciated are different from the winds of men and of fat bodies.
The quality of applying this swift wind to a member over fire is such as kindling a nice flame with fire from linen or a small candle: and place it over the middle of the transverse staff that is in the center of the wind. So that the fire is ignited around the lower part of the wind, so as not to burn the weak body.
Then it is placed over the member: and the finger is on the hole that I mentioned, until we hold the wind; when we no longer need it, we remove the finger, and vapor will exit through that hole, and the wind will be immediately dissolved.
Then apply fire according to its mode, and repeat it if you need it.
In the case of the wind given for the disease of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse staff or hole: and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed only over the member.
And this is its form.
And this suction cup is better the larger it is, as it can absorb more water.
**On the Suspension of Blood Sugar**
Blood sugars should not be applied to many parts of the body unless there is no possibility of placing vents there due to their weakness, such as on the lips, gums, and similar areas. Or on a bare member without flesh, such as a finger, nose, or similar parts.
And the quality of their use is as follows: as you come from blood sugars that are in sweet waters, clean from putrefaction.
They should then be left in sweet water during the day and night until they are hungry and nothing remains in their stomachs. Then the body is drained first with phlebotomy and then with vents. Then the infected member is washed until it turns red. Then they should be placed on top of it.
When they are thus inserted and fall, and it is possible to suck out the place with a powerful flow, then it is more extreme in the cure; and if not, then withdraw the place with vinegar. Then with much water, it is rubbed and pressed out.
If the flow of blood continues after the operation and there is oozing, then immerse a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the oozing stops.
If the amount of blood is excessive, then sprinkle over it a powder of crushed skin or gallstones and similar things from hemostatic agents until the blood stops.
Or they can place on the area half-crushed bark, and leave it until the beans adhere to the site, as the blood stops.
And it is necessary if a repetition of the operation is required, when possible, to change them.
But if the hemostats cannot be suspended, then the place with fresh blood should be cleansed. Or fix the bandage on the sites until something from the blood oozes out. They are then placed, for they adhere immediately when they sense something from the blood.
When therefore the roots begin to fall off, apply something from an aloes plant that has been crushed, or salt, or ash; and they immediately fall off.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, as it deals with the restoration of broken bones and the treatment of dislocations caused by accidents.
Know, O Sons, for many fools throw themselves from this Chapter, as well as those who are troubled and have not ever looked at the ancient book nor read any letter from it.
And for this reason, this method is exclusive to the sciences on our earth. And I have never found it at all beneficial in that regard, and I have not acquired from it what I have acquired only because of the length of studying ancient books, and my study above and beyond understanding them, until I extracted his science from them.
Then I adhered to experience and study through the length of my life.
And I have now described to you from that in this chapter all that contains my knowledge: and beyond my experiment, after I shortened it for you, and freed it from the occupation of length, and abbreviated it to the end of abbreviation, and showed it to the end of declination: and I formed many forms in it from the forms of instruments used in it, with addition and declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
In the prologue to this chapter, we must say the main points of the discussion and chapters, to which the thoughtful practitioner is required to attend in order to reach the truth about them: that you and those eager may know, or learn, this noble art, and others through you.
I say, therefore, that when someone suffers a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or any of these conditions, then it is necessary to address the immediate needs first, whether that involves bleeding him (phlebotomy) and treating the wound itself, or both at once; if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of strength, or if it is a young child, or an elderly person who is weak, or during a sudden heat wave, or a severe cold snap.
Then he should be satisfied with his food, cold odors, and lean meats, and avoid wine, fat meats, and overindulgence in any foods or meals that fill the veins with blood. Until he is safe from the heat and no longer suffers from the discharge of matter to the limb; then the patient should return to his usual routine, as it was before.
When the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient should be fed a nutritious diet with abundant, rich foods that are easy to digest, such as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, vegetables, and fruits, and fresh fish and wine. With this regimen, the healing of the fracture will occur faster and better.
And know that broken bones, when they occur in young people or the elderly who are weak, cannot always continue to heal and consolidate according to their natural tendency due to the debilitation of their limbs; rather, those that do heal will be like the bones of young children.
However, nature attaches something similar to glue over the broken bone from every part, in which there is thickness, by which it adheres and tightens itself, until they are glued together again and bound together, until it reaches the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the first place, unless something prevents it from its operations. And for this reason, it is necessary to provide nourishment to the patient with food that contains weight, moisture, and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the members: for a fracture of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the chest is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the remaining members exist in diversity. And I come with the remembrance of exposing every type of fracture in its chapter, distinguished from others. And the types of fractures of bones differ from each other as well.
Because it becomes an arched fracture, besides the occurrence of stars in it. And sometimes it becomes a fracture according to the length of the bone; and its fractures are oblique, that is, stars, and additions proceeding, as they are in a reed when it is bent with a knife for writing. And they do not proceed: and it is a fracture with a knob and disruption at the head: and it is a fracture of a small fissure.
And of every kind there is a skill, or proper instrument for its restoration, according to the remembrance of it, distinguished in its places.
And from that by which the fracture of a bone is known, there results its torsion and prominence; and its appearance to the sense, and the sound it makes when compressed with your hand.
When therefore there is no visible torsion, nor any sound when the bone is touched with your hand, and it does not produce great pain, then there is no fracture there, but rather it may be a torsion or a small crack; so it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compression at all, but instead place something over it from among the medicines, whose remembrance comes after that event which happened in its place: then a tight binding should be applied gently.
And know that when the place bends and splits into two, apart from what happens there through stiffness, nonetheless every part moves away from its comparison; then you should begin from your own time to straighten it, equalizing it before it suffers a hot delay.
If however it suffers a hot delay, then leave it for a few days until the delay from rest has passed. Then equalize it according to any way possible through gentleness and skill.
And you should know that the restoration of it and the equalization of it are easier than the bones, where fractures occur.
Then tighten it yourself, according to what will bring back your memory of it.
If indeed there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this fractured member from both parts, if it is a hand or foot; or with your hand, if it is a smaller limb; or with two cords, or with a cord and a hand.
And you should position yourself where you place the member in a level position according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the fractured member extend; then try, as much as you can with all your skill, to return those additions to their places, and according to whatever method you can do in their positions; and beware, according to your strength, that it does not cause pain or injury to a weaker part through your operation.
And at that time, you should try and touch it with your own hand. If therefore you see something different there, correct it and equalize it according to your strength.
And beware of sudden stretching and strong compression, as many unskilful people do. Indeed, it often happens that through their own operation, they cause a feverish ulcer or contraction in the member, as we have seen many times from their operations.
Then attach after equalization, and the appropriate operation, and tightening of that member, and rest, and tranquility: and warn the patient over it. And make it seek to avoid moving itself during their personal moments, sleep at their rotation, agitation, and during their tasks, and all their movements with their utmost power. And to beware that the position of the member is not such that it follows pain. This is because when it feels pain or injury in the disposition of the member's position, then it is necessary to change it to another disposition from that one where it does not feel pain.
And be wary with it so that its position is equal and straight, so that there is no curvature in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of tightening the fractured member is according to what I narrate.
Know that fractured members differ in their fragility, magnitude, and form.
Therefore, for those that are smaller among them, such as the arm, finger, sickle, and similar ones, it is necessary that there be an incision of a soft, thin cloth. But for those that are larger among them, such as the thigh and leg, it is necessary that there be a wide, hard incision made within them.
Since the broad ligament connects the great member and draws it tight from all sides by an equal constriction, so that it does not admit of any spot entering within.
Then, after you have freed yourself from equality, apply a liniment that is suitable for it, in a soft pad over the place of the fracture itself. Then, begin to cover the ligament over the place of the fracture with three or four layers of the bandage, according as the member requires; and hold your hand lightly with the ligament for a little while.
Then, take it to the upper part from the place of the fracture, and hold it less tightly than your previous constriction of the fractured place. Then stretch yourself with the bandage at the place of the fracture slightly, and gradually soften the constriction, until you receive from the healthy place a great relief.
Then take another cloth and apply it again over the fractured site with new incisions. Next, with the incision, go down to the lower part of the fracture. And thus your work consists in contracting and softening the incision, according to what we said about the first higher incision.
Then place between the incisions a soft cloth or bandage that conforms to the curvature of the fracture, if there is any; and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then make another incision over that same cloth. Next, equalize the incisions that have been made properly; if there is no swelling or hot discharge at the site, do not alter them.
If there is swelling or hot discharge at the site, then place over it something that will stop the discharge and reduce the swelling; leave it for a few days. Then tie over those incisions at that time.
And the incisions should be made from the middle of a broad blade, carefully shaped; or they may be made from wood where sieves are made, from pine branches, or palm fronds, or calamus: and the width of every incision, according to this form and figure.
However, it is necessary that the stars placed above the same course be somewhat thicker and wider than the rest of the stars, and the length of the star should be according to what is permitted by the member's size and thickness.
Then tie the stars together with a string, loosening or tightening them according to the first course. Then bind them together with threads properly, as we mentioned about the course; and it should be so that your binding is above the fracture place more than necessary, and the more it extends from the fracture, the less the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be of medium size and thickness, and made from soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as those who do foolish operations often use their threads made from twisted linen, it is a great mistake; for the binding does not hold with them outside their proper strength.
And fine threads do not work either; for with them you cannot achieve what you want through the binding.
And it is not necessary that there be less than a finger's width between the star and another star.
If the weak part is damaged at the ends of the stars after binding in healthy places, then place under them a piece of soft wood or stained wool until nothing is harmed by it.
When there is a fracture with an ulcer and there is disruption in the skin, I approach it with recollection of its discussion in Chapter Two according to its particularity.
And you should know that not every fractured member needs to be bound with splints from the first day. This is because when a member is large, you should not place splints on it from the first day, unless after five or seven days, or more, according to your safety from the event of the heat leaving.
And this is the manner of plasters by which the ancients used to restore what was fractured and dislocated.
§ The common method of plastering, restoring a fracture, consisting of several layers, especially for women and children, since it does not overcome heat or cold.
And take some flour from the mill, and the core of the flour that hangs on the walls of the mill near the moving wheel: and make it as it is, except that you sift it with alum: and do not make its composition too thick or too thin. Then use it.
§ Another method of plastering, restoring a fracture, dislocation, and torsion. Prepare alum, and laudanum, and acacia, and henna, and mugath: and juice of all these in amounts of one part each of myrrh and aloe, and twenty parts of aloes; all these are to be crushed, sieved, and mixed with alethil water, or with white albus (albut) if the condition of the patient requires a heated complexion. Then use this plaster. It is indeed of good composition, it quickly restores broken bones, and it benefits many people.
§ Another method of the plaster that also benefits fractures and twists. Prepare mugath, alum, and white althae, in amounts of ten parts myrrh and five parts aloe, and twenty parts acacia; all these are crushed finely, sieved, and prepared with water, or white albus (albut), by repeated grinding, and then administered.
§ A method of the plaster for joints, and separated bones from their places; it soothes the pain caused by accidents to them, and cuts in the bones, and fractures. Take succid (lanolin), immerse it in vinegar, and boil it with oil; then apply it to the place.
And in this plaster, there is no virtue of restoring health, but it is a good remedy for relieving the pain of a burning blister, and it expels pain itself.
The method of the plaster which restores a broken bone. Take the leaves of the fig tree and the dry leaves of the paper birch, crush them all, and make a plaster from both.
The method of the abbreviated plaster, used for the restoration of a broken bone: and when you see the residue of the blister starting to heal. Take the root of the tall almond tree, and chamomile, and violets, and herb flour, all in equal parts; crush them all, and prepare them with wine, if the member is not heated.
If it is indeed heated, then prepare it with moist coriander water, or with water alone, and use it.
Another method of the plaster is stronger in resolving a severe blister that occurs during the restoration of the member. Take the root of the tall almond tree, and linseed, and pomegranate, and melilot, and samas (an herb), and violets, and chamomile, all in equal parts; crush them all, and prepare them with willow water, or sweet water, or wine. All of that according to the warmth of the member and the calmness of its heat.
Hippocrates indeed did not say in his book that one should place something on a broken member during its restoration, except for bandaging done with lint and oil; nothing else. And he said it should be a medium between thickness and thinness.
Galen, however, was observed to place things on a broken member during its restoration, where there is loss of heat, such as myrrh, aloe, and frankincense, and similar substances from what we have mentioned.
The method of applying an emplastrum that relieves the injury and pain. Take equal parts of myrrh, chickpea flour, and human hair cut finely, or bird feathers and goose down, and salt; mix them together, sift them, and prepare an emplastrum from them.
However, the amount should be such that it remains firm, and then is dissolved as you consider at that time, if no pain, itching, or movement of the broken bone from its place occurs; then do not dissolve it for many days. If it happens to her at the place a burning itching, or restless pain, or swelling: then remove it immediately and dissolve the emplastrum from it; and take a soft cloth or a moist marine sponge, wet with warm water, wash it with this and apply it to the place until the itching stops and the pain is calmed.
If it happens to her at the place a burning itching, or restless pain, or swelling: then remove it immediately and dissolve the emplastrum from it; and take a soft cloth or a moist marine sponge, wet with warm water, wash it with this and apply it to the place until the itching stops and the pain is calmed. Then allow the member to rest for one hour. Next, place a strip of linen over it, soaked in vinegar and oil, or rose oil, and bind it there for one night, until you are free from the heat's discomfort, and the swelling of the member subsides, and its pain is relieved.
Then repeat the process with a thinner and lighter bandage, and do not tighten it excessively or apply too much pressure until it is healed.
If you observe that the ulcer, redness, pain, swelling, and all other symptoms have completely disappeared, and you only need a bandage and compression, then repeat the process as you did at first.
If none of the aforementioned symptoms occur in the member, then do not remove the bandage unless it has been three, four, five, or seven days after application. And when it is removed after 20 days, according as you observe from the cure of the member, as we have said, until the fracture heals and the coagulation of the flesh above it draws close, then add to the bandage even more than your first tight binding; and also add, in food, more fat than before.
But if you see that the place of the fracture is already dried up and weakened more than it should be, then know that nourishment is hindered from reaching it. Therefore, one should immerse it in warm water with every person who has a sore, and it should be done for all three days, and then the bandage can be changed.
By this very procedure, it is nourished to the member, and it heals quickly.
However, what the foolish healers do with another drop of water from a fractured member, when it does not recover as it should and is restored according to its deformity, is an error from their operation and a great fear; and if it had been right, they would have said so in their books, and acted upon it.
And I have not seen their mark there at all, and it is better that it not be done.
§ On the handling of an accident in the head.
The kinds of fractures are diverse, and their forms numerous; and the causes thereof are distinguished.
For there is a fracture that occurs from the blow of an axe; the blow removes the bone entirely until it reaches the sinew beneath the bone, just as an axe does to wood; and because of this, this type of fracture is called axial.
The blade itself cuts into something bone, and it strikes its face, and the cut does not penetrate to its very end; and this type of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, complete destruction.
And there is a difference between two types of fractures, either major or minor.
And from a fracture comes either crushing or chipping, and its cause is the striking of a bone against a stone, or falling onto a stone, or something similar.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which approaches the skin under the bone, or it is on the face of the bone, and it is a minor or major wound among these two fractures.
And there is a fracture that is hidden within the bone, delicate as a hair, and it is a minor crack, hence this type of fracture is called Capillary.
And from these, there is a fracture that occurs due to a blow or impact of a stone or something similar, which causes the bone layer to enter the inside and leaves an indentation, as happens to metal when struck and part of it enters the interior.
Indeed, this most often happens in the heads of humid bones, such as those of young children.
And thus, for all these types of fractures of the leg bone, I return it to its proper place with the remembrance of that whole in its original state.
And we recognize all these types of fractures through their detection, and inquiry about them with the hands, and removal of the corrupted flesh that is on them.
The true kind of capillary is recognized by its detection on the bone, its cleansing, and its application of wax above it; for indeed, the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, however, consider first the condition of the patient; for if you see from their symptoms something that indicates a clear danger, such as terror, vomiting, extending or losing consciousness, impairment of intellect, loss of speech, syncope, acute fever, redness of the eyes, and similar conditions in numerous arrangements, then surely they will not recover; and if you see symptoms that do not terrify you, and you hope for healing, then begin to treat them.
This is the case when a patient comes to you injured initially upon their injury; and it is that during cold days, then you should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day according to any arrangement.
And if it is during hot days, then you should strive to remove the bone before the seventh day, before it corrupts what is under the bone from swelling, and causes those conditions we have described.
If a fracture of the bone has reached the point where it touches the skin that covers the brain, and it is with cracks and pulls, then you must cut the broken and strained part, as I have told you.
And you should also clean the wounded head and remove the debris from the bone as best you can; and according to the shape of the wound and what is loose over the injured part.
If this happens to you while examining the bone, and there is bleeding or a hot swelling, then oppose it with what is necessary. And you should fill the space with cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and make the wound rest until the swelling subsides, and be secure from bleeding. Then begin the treatment of the bone, and its removal.
And that is done according to one of two methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a sharp blade; and this is its form.
Then apply another blade, slightly narrower than the first; and this is its form.
Then he also administers a broader scalpel than the second one.
And the second method is that you should have with you various kinds of scalpels: some broader and some narrower; all of them sharp at their extremities, either made from iron or tempered; and use them with ease when striking against the scalpel, so as not to hit the head or damage it.
If, however, the bone is hard and firm, then you must make holes around it before applying the scalpels, using what are called non-penetrating chisels; they are not so named unless they do not reach the flesh that lies beyond the bone's edge. This is because the chisel has a rounded tip above the sharp edge of the bone, and its slightly curved shape prevents it from sinking in too deeply or penetrating through the bone's thickness.
And you should acquire many of these chisels, each suited to the thickness of the bone, until you have a set for every skull; their sharp ends should be of appropriate length and width according to the thickness of the particular skull.
And this is the form of three types of chisels, or trepans.
The quality of drilling around a broken bone is as follows: you place the chisel over the bone and use your fingers to rotate it until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then exchange the drill for another location and place what is between each hole the quantity of the radius's thickness, or roughly that amount.
Then cut with scalpels what is between each hole from the bone, and make it thinner than you can with the finest leatherman's tool, as we have said, until the bone is stripped, either by hand or with another instrument that you have prepared for this purpose, such as pliers or fine saws.
And it is necessary to be careful not to touch the drill or scalpel with anything from the syringe.
When you have surrounded the bone with perforations and it has been separated from the syringe, if it is still connected to it, and you have extracted the main part, you should smooth and level its end that remains in the bone with another similar instrument like a scalpel. However, it should be thin and delicate more than other scalpels.
If there remains any small bone or tissue, then take it easily with whatever is at your hand from among the instruments. Then take care of the wound after that with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And there is another method of operation that is easy and entirely free from fear; this was said by Galen, and he praised it highly, and this is the essence of his words. In the first instance, it is necessary for you to begin by detaching the portion of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and evident; until you have detected that part, and placed under it the extremity of this lenticular incision, whose form is as follows.
And the lenticular part does not cut anything softly; and its acute edge, when it turns in two directions along its length, as you can see, is directed towards the siphon, with its face cutting sharply into the bone.
Then strike the incision on one side with a small mallet until you have cut through the entire bone easily, as it requires; and be careful from the fear that nothing untoward should happen to you.
And if the physician were not more foolish or ignorant among men, and were not sleeping, then if there remained something attached to the bone from the cloth in certain places, he would cut it off with the extremity of the same lenticular incision, and free it from it easily. It is indeed freed from it without damage or fear.
If the fracture of a bone does not penetrate to the panniculus, and what is detached from the bone is its face, and roughnesses and subtle scars remain in it, then it is necessary that you smooth out that roughness, and uproot those scars with very fine rasories from which you prepared a variety of quantities, so that it is possible for you to use them appropriately in every place, and more rectly according to what the operation leads you to, and the shape of the fractured bone. And it is necessary that you administer those rasories in proportion to how far you first reach the bone, using them more widely. Then use the finer ones after that.
And it is necessary that you administer those rasories in proportion to how far you first reach the bone, using them more widely. Then use the finer ones after that. And do not stop doing that continuously until you reach the point of administering the thinnest and most subtle ones of all.
In each of the remaining small cracks and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you apply care according to what leads to its correction.
And it is a matter that should not be hidden over all, for whoever has any study in this art, and persists over what we have written, and demonstrates it in great fractures.
If the panniculus is detected and retained when you uproot the bone, then you should take a piece of linen cloth according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the wound opening. Then take another cloth doubled or tripled, and immerse it in rose wine and oil, and place it on top of the first cloth, and make it as easy as possible to avoid straining the throat.
Then apply a wide bandage over it, but do not tighten it unless necessary to hold the wound in place, and remove it after one or two days of this treatment until you are free from fever's grasp. Then untie it and apply medicines to it as needed to alleviate excessive dryness, such as lily roots, herb flour, thistle dust, aristolochiac, and similar substances, and make a powder from these medicines to be applied to the wound until it dries up.
And universally apply to it all medicines whose properties are designed to clean and not cause pain. And be careful according to your ability so that the wound is clear during your treatment, free from impurity of ointment or crusting.
And be careful according to your ability so that the wound is clear during your treatment, free from impurity of ointment or crusting. Do not let any pus form on it at all, for when pus forms on the skin of the brain, it corrupts and putrefies it, and causes great harm afterwards, and this has already happened to the throat when its surface is cleaned by pus, especially when the care of it is neglected, turning black.
Therefore, consider then if an accident happens to a patient with the condition we described, know that it is undoubtedly harmful.
And if blackening does not occur, except due to the medicine placed on it, and it is in the power of that medicine to cause such blackening, then you should take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and a cloth with them. Then place it on the wound; afterward, care for the wound with suitable remedies until it is healed.
§ On the restoration of our body when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken except at both its upper parts simultaneously or one of them; for they are two bones, and the lower part is cartilaginous, so it does not break, but only experiences friction, torsion, and compression.
If one of the two parts of the nose breaks, then you should insert a slender finger into the nasal hole and equalize the fracture with your index finger and thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and this should be done skillfully, easily. And furthermore, so as not to cause pain to that part above the patient during your operation.
If there is a fracture in the upper part of the nose and it cannot be reached with the fingers, then it should be adjusted so that the end of the radius, where there is a small thickness, can be used.
If indeed there is a fracture in both parts, then do it like this: and when repairing it on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at the time when the wound has healed with warmth.
Then insert into the end of the nose a thin piece of linen, if the fracture is in one part; or insert two thin pieces if the fracture is in two parts, and let the thickness of the linen fill the nasal hole.
And some ancient healers said that the linen should be soaked in butter and changed every day. That does not seem right to me, rather the linen should be soaked in a paste made from almonds and ground flour. Then remove the linen until the bone hardens and the cartilage solidifies.
And sometimes a quill from a goose's nail is inserted into the nose where a thin cloth has been placed over it; and thus it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, so that the patient is not hindered from breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing. If you wish, do that; and if you wish, do the opposite.
If, while operating on the nose again, a second aperture occurs, apply a hot compress with lint or cotton soaked in rose oil or some other mild ointment.
However, if there is no second aperture with a hot compress, then one should apply a poultice of sesame flour and ground turd mixed with albuginac. Then place a soft pad over it and do not tie the nose at all.
If the bones of the nose are indeed broken or crushed, then you must cut through them and remove the pieces with the appropriate instruments. Then use the appropriate scalpel and take care of it so that it does not fall out, and strengthen it with suitable dressings or ointments.
If a wound occurs between the nose and lip, then it is necessary to treat it with liniment and administer a lead catheter until it heals.
On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is fractured.
When the lower jaw is fractured, and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound: observe then if there is a fracture only on the outer side, and it is not broken into two parts, and it heals towards the inside; then its recognition is easy.
Therefore, if there is a fracture in the right side of it, you should insert your left index finger into the lower jaw's hole; conversely, if the fracture is on the left side, then insert the right hand's index finger; and with it push the swelling of the fracture towards the inside from the outer side with your other hand, correctly aligned with the center of the bone.
If the lower jaw's fracture has already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension on both parts according to their proper alignment; until equalization becomes possible.
However, if it has already happened that the teeth are dislocated or broken: then tie them from which you hope to keep remaining with a gold, silver, or silk thread. Then place the severed mandible on top. Then place over it a doubled cloth, and on top of that a large, well-made frame; or a piece of sole leather cut to an equal length with the mandible.
Then bind it tightly according to the preparation of its binding, and its application should be continued until it is not destroyed; and especially instruct the patient to use tranquility and calmness, and give him light food.
However, if you think that the shape is already changing in some way, then remove it and loosen it on the third day. Then straighten out what was altered from it and apply a plaster made of ground flour, with albus or sesame flour, after you have removed the flesh; and place a soft woolen cloth over the plaster.
So long as that plaster remains attached and the arrangement of the bones is not altered, do not disturb it until it heals; or tighten the fracture. This fracture is often tightened for three weeks.
If, however, an abscess forms during that time, then administer what we have said many times for its relief until the abscess is removed.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, consider it. If a fragment is separated from the bone, either a small piece or a shard, then be careful here to remove those fragments of the shard with whatever instruments you have at hand.
If the wound opening is tight, then widen it with a phlebotom according to the amount needed by you.
Then, when you have removed those shards, and nothing remains of them, clean the wound opening if it is wide, and if not, place over it whatever plasters are suitable for that, and keep it covered until it heals.
§ On the restoration of the furca (fork) when it is broken.
Indeed, the furca is most often broken from its anterior part near the shoulder, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Or it may break and separate into two, other than when shards occur within it, and this is easier to restore.
Or, alternatively, as occurs in the bone with shards: and this is more difficult to restore.
Thus, when there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the operation in such a case when there is a fracture without an open wound, is that you should have two assistants; one should hold the broken bone steady, while the other extends the neck towards the affected part.
Then equalize the fracture with your fingers, until its shape is correct, according to what is necessary; and there should be neither a bump nor a hollow on it.
If you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a sphere under the bone, made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the amount needed; extend and raise the bone with your hand, until the fracture is equalized, as required.
If you cannot draw the end of the bone towards the outside, because it has reached a depth, then the patient should lie on his side, and place a medium-sized pebble under his shoulder, and have an assistant press down on his shoulder until the opening of the fracture moves up towards the top; and then straighten the fracture and equalize it with your fingers.
If, however, you feel a grating from the bone and it moves, then you should find the source of that grating and extract the offending part with ease.
If it is retained in the bone, then use a saw or other instrument that you have prepared for that purpose, after placing under the fork an instrument that preserves safety, and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is the form of it.
It is shaped like a snail shell, without any indentation.
And its width should be according to the need for it from the magnitude of the bones and the size of its structure. However, its length should also be according to what is possible for you during the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you can see: one end is wide, and the other is narrow.
However, if the fracture of the bone that you have cut when extracting the foreign body is wide, and safe from further damage by heat, then join the two edges of the wound with a suture.
And if the fracture is small or there is no further damage by heat, then fill the wound with linen and wool according to the amount of the cut wound.
If there is an infection with heat, then apply a cloth dipped in rose oil, vinegar, and wine on top.
The true rigidity of bones when they are without fracture or incision is like placing over the bone a plaster made from flour and chalk. And place a soft pad over it. Then place a sphere under its joint if necessary. Then take a bandage, that is, the long wheel used by the Saracens, which should be about as wide as a palm or slightly more. Then place a small, doubled strip over the pad and plaster. Then take a star-shaped piece of thin wood, whose width and length are each the size of three fingers. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the star-shaped piece in the correct position over the fracture and its place. Then place the bandages over the fracture as desired, and wrap them around his neck both above and below the healthy joint, and under the affected joint, and bring them back over all parts, and as you see that the rigidity holds the fracture firmly, so it should not be removed from above the fractured bone. And for this reason, you must look at the patient every day. Whenever the ligament softens, and you see the bone begin to move, then straighten it and tighten the ligament.
Then place the patient's sleep on his back and put a pillow under his armpit near his sleep so that when he turns, assistance is brought to him from his own side. Thus the fracture of the forearm bone is healed through the elevation of the arm.
Or tie the arm to his collarbone, and do not loosen the ligament unless an accident occurs from itching or from a distance, until after twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you see that its face is facing it. And add to the bandage, and leave it until it is restored and congealed.
And indeed, the fracture of the forearm is bound and comforted for almost twenty-eight days, and it happens in some men in a shorter time.
**On the restoration of the fracture of the spatula.**
The spatula rarely breaks, except at its wide end, and not even then are its edges broken off.
When, however, this place breaks and it breaks in the middle of it, and it is not recognized except by touch; then, according to the form of the fracture, one should attempt its preparation. And reduce it according to the natural shape of all possible skill.
Then place a layer of mill dust and alum on the wound, and a soft pad, and put a small piece of doubled cloth on top. Then place on top of it a wide lattice made of thin wood according to the size of the spatula or slightly larger.
If there is indeed a dip in any part of the spatula, then equalize that depression with a soft pad until the lattice descends according to its equality.
Then gently pull from above with an elongated piece of cloth, applying sufficient tension and ensuring the stability of the lattice, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligature every day. Whenever the ligature becomes softened, tighten it and restore it to its place; and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in forty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the ligature; and you will be secure. For it is made of bones whose connection is not to be feared, nor their separation.
But if it extends from a bone fragment and irritates under the skin, then cut above it and remove it. And do as we said regarding the fracture of the fork from the heat of a fever, if something happens from it.
**On the restoration of the fractured chest.**
The chest sometimes breaks in two at its middle, and that rarely happens. The extremities are indeed broken and shattered by its accidents.
When the middle of its bone breaks, which bends downwards, and a severe pain occurs, along with difficulty in breathing and coughing, and perhaps it bleeds, and the fracture is evident to the senses, restoration is achieved so that the patient can regain their strength on their back, and they should be placed between the palms of their hands for support.
Then press the shoulders and bring the ribs together from both parts or sides with the hands, and gradually equalize it, as much as possible, until the bone shape returns to normal.
Then place a plaster and dressing on top of it, and put a thin board from willow or chestnut wood, or similar light materials, over it after you have wrapped it in cloth. Then securely bind it with a bandage over the fractured bone, so that it does not move, and wrap it around towards the back several times, tightening the bandage gently.
Then regularly check the bandage and tighten it whenever it loosens, and if its dissolution causes itching or irritation at the site, or pain, or swelling, then loosen it, remove the plaster, and correct any misalignment in the course of its healing.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see that it is facing towards it: and attach a strap to it, until it heals.
On the restoration of bones when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of bones does not occur except in thick places which follow the back, and from their ends towards the front part. And they do not suffer friction unless because they are cartilage-like. And the knowledge of itself is not hidden from sense at the inquiry with fingers.
And its restoration is done so that the fracture is equal to the fingers according to the possible way, until the shape is attained, according to what is necessary. Then apply plasters, and tie the broken bone with strings, if it needs it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is towards the interior, then there occurs in the patient a severe pain, and a piercing, as that which occurs in him who has pleurisy; for the bone pierces the membrane, and to it also comes difficulty of breathing, coughing, and spitting of much blood: and this is a difficult healing.
And now ancient craftsmen have devised many clever devices in it, and among them are those who say that you should place foods for the sick which cause inflammation and congestion, so that the stomach is inflamed, extended, and the fracture is driven outward.
Indeed, we should avoid causing rapid heat in the abscess if it is not necessary. However, if it has already occurred, then he adds to it.
And some of them said: A swift flow should be placed over the place, then it should be sucked out with force, and it is more similar to reasoning. However, they fear that the swift flow might attract excess moisture to the site due to the weakness of the condition.
And some of them said: The site should be cooperated with wool that is already submerged in hot oil: and small pieces of cloth are placed between the ribs until it is filled: so that a uniform binding can be made when the swelling recedes according to its roundness.
Then the patient undergoes treatment for pleurisy with food and medicine.
Which, if it restricts the patient's breathing, more than they can tolerate, and the bone pierces the membrane with painful punctures, and we fear for the patient, then we must break through the site and release the fractured rib. Then let us place over it an instrument that preserves the cure, of which the memory has gone before: and we shall cut the bone with ease, and also cut into it.
Then we shall gather together the two edges of the wound if it is large with a suture: and we shall care for it with dressings until it heals.
If, meanwhile, a hot abscess should occur, then apply it with appropriate care, and insert little pieces of rose oil into the place, and put over it what is suitable for the abscess. And so shall the sick be cured with it.
Meanwhile, the patient should also lie on their side over which they were sleeping until they are healed.
§ On the restoration of the fracture of the spine and collarbone.
In the bones of the collarbone, indeed, comes sometimes a fracture, and rarely does friction occur to them: likewise in the bones of the spine (dorsal vertebrae). When therefore such a thing happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider (and ponder). For if you see that his hand is already softened, and numb, and dead; and he cannot move it, nor stretch it out, nor contract it; and when you press it with your fingers or prick it with a point, he feels nothing, neither does he experience pain in them: then know that he will not be healed, and in many cases it is mortal.
If, when moved, they feel a tightness with the fingers and a puncture, then know that the concave part of the bone is sound, and that the patient will be cured with treatment.
If it affects the spine in a similar way, and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider its feet: if you see that they are softened, and it occurs to them as it does to the hands, then when it lies on its back, breath and straining leave it without will, and when it turns over on its belly, straining leaves it without will, and when it turns over on its back again, and wants to move, but cannot: then know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not despair in its treatment.
If indeed nothing of that happens to it, then the case is lighter.
And the treatment for what happens from that is as follows: to apply a compress with cold oil on the affected spine, or when the swelling subsides, use vinegar.
Apply this several times a day until the swelling subsides. Then place over it a bandage that is comforting and drying, and tightly wrap it with a strap, and particularly instruct the patient to use rest and tranquility. He should not sleep over the part where pain is felt until it is healed.
If this happens near the friction of the satyated bone, or anything that has already separated from it: then it is necessary to cut through the skin and remove that part. Then join the two edges of the wound together with stitches if it is large. Then care for the wound with some suitable ointment until it heals.
If indeed the last part of the bone breaks and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert your left thumb into the anus, and with your other hand, equalize the broken bone as best as possible.
Then place something over it and remove the protrusion, and care for the wound with the preceding treatment until it heals.
**On the restoration of the anca:**
**Chapter XI.**
The bones of the anca rarely break. If they are broken, then their fracture is not, unless there is a comminution at the extremities; and they split along their length and bend towards the inner parts. This causes pain to the affected area and a puncture, and the limb that breaks becomes stunned.
And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you rest on the fracture as it is shown in its figure.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equalize that fracture according to what is prepared for you from equalization, until it becomes similar to its natural figure.
However, if the fracture is along its length, or it already bends towards the inner parts, then make the affected person lie on their side until a restoration for that fracture is prepared. When you have equalized it, place a plaster over it; then, place a frame made of wood or leather on top and tighten the bandage so that you do not fear any change in the fracture or shifting of the frame.
And it should be equal to the amount that fills it, until the bandage takes hold according to its equalization; and especially instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
However, if a feverish chafing occurs, then stop extending it and its restoration until the chafing sits down; then place on it what is appropriate according to what came before, and return to its restoration, tightening it as necessary.
If there is a fracture or dislocation of the bone, extract it.
**On the restoration of fractures (with the aid of) God.**
That aid is between the elbow and the head of the spatula.
If it is broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.
One of these methods is: take a flat wood of medium thickness, according to this form that follows.
And two ligaments are bound at both ends.
Then it is suspended from the elevated position, and the weak person sits on it. Then he throws his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches its joint, where a curve is attached to the middle of the wood.
Then something heavy is suspended from above, so that the assistant below extends his hand towards the lower parts. Then the surgeon should manipulate the fracture with his hands until it heals as it should.
There is another method to help the patient regain strength on his own head: and suspend his hand from his neck with a ligature. Then command two assistants to hold one of them above the fracture with his hands, and let the other hold it below, extending each towards their respective sides.
And if you wish for a stronger extension, then tighten the ligature below the fracture and above it with another ligature; and each of the two assistants should extend their respective parts.
If the fracture is near the end of the humerus, then it is necessary to place one ligature below the acromion and another below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow: then it is necessary to place a ligature over that area and also over the elbow itself.
Then equalize the fracture with ease without strain until it aligns as it should and is given proper attention; then tighten it if there is no risk of fever.
If indeed there is a fever, then release the tension until the seventh day. And place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil, until the wound rests; then tie it, and the manner of tying it is such that you place a plaster over the fracture.
Then apply a new cloth over the plaster. Then gather the arm over the same aid, and place his hand open over his humerus.
And place a cloth, and tie over the aid of the arm, so that the arm stays in place like the stars: if nothing prevents you from it, nor anything alters above you from the fractured bone.
If, however, something alters above you from the fractured bone, then use stars: and it is such that you place over the fracture itself a star which is wider and stronger than the others. And place between each star the width of a finger, and the length of the stars according to the fracture, with the addition of three fingers from every side.
Then tie over the stars the bandage as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is such that your bandage be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more a fracture is elongated, the less is the contraction.
If therefore you see the position of the stars and the contraction, as we have said, at the hour when you restore the member, then do this: and if you fear an abscessed heat, then leave the contraction and the stars until the seventh day, as we have said.
Consider then the ligament for all three days, so that there is no itching, swelling, or hindrance to food reaching the member due to the tension of the contraction. Therefore correct it all according to what we have said.
If indeed you are confident that nothing will happen from it: then do not loosen the ligament, unless after three days or more.
And let the nurse lie on her back and place her hand on her belly; and put under her a pillow filled with equal wool.
And consider at every hour of night or day, so that the shape of the fractured member is not loosened, or the ligament softened. Therefore correct it all with your strength.
And likewise, for the patient's food, arrange it according to the order we have prescribed, so that it be a light food at first, until the mouth begins to close; then it is necessary that the food be made more substantial.
For the usual course of recovery and to reduce the swelling, it is necessary for the limb to be immobilized for forty days. Therefore, at that time, it should be loosened, and a bath administered, and treated with balms and ointments that correct the condition.
If the fracture is severe and dislocated, then do not remove the ligature and do not reduce it until after fifty days, that is, until two months have passed.
## On the Restoration of a Fractured Arm
The arm is composed of two bones, called the humerus and radius.
Of these, one is smaller (the radius), and it follows the thumb. And the other is larger (the humerus), and it is placed under the smaller one at the inferior part.
Therefore, perhaps only the larger bone (humerus) is broken, or perhaps both (the humerus and radius) are broken simultaneously.
When therefore the upper part of the bowel is ruptured, its restoration is easy and its healing is more so.
And when the lower part of the bowel is ruptured, it is a severe fracture, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are ruptured at the same time.
If therefore the bone that is ruptured is the upper part of the bowels, then it is fitting for a doctor to assist at its restoration by placing an extension on the bowel with ease until it heals properly.
If indeed the large bowel is what is ruptured: then it is necessary to place a stronger constriction with great care.
And it is necessary to place the hand in the form of a palm during its restoration and also extend the stretched extension over the pulse. And the thumb of the hand should be placed higher than all the other fingers; and the joint should be at the base of all the fingers, or with any remaining joints; and the weaker one should sit square on itself, and the pulse should be in front of it, or directly in line with it, at a height where it does not experience any weakness.
Then the assistant should extend the arm from its lower part, or with his hand, or using a ligature. And another assistant should extend it similarly from above.
Then the surgeon should adjust the opening, until it reduces to a form as good or better than possible.
If there are jagged edges in a bone fracture, then try to reduce all the splintered parts to their proper place with your strength.
If indeed it appears separated with jagged edges piercing the skin, and you have no hope of restoring it, then find above it, and remove it according to the method we have mentioned regarding those described previously.
However, if the fracture is with a wound, I have already dealt with that particular chapter, so take care of that wound accordingly.
If, however, a hot apotheosis occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line a cloth with a mixture of red ochre and white wax, in the middle between thickness and thinness, and tightly wrap it over the affected area until the apotheosis is soothed; then remove the ochre and apply a prepared plaster from ground flour and albumen. Then place stars (stitches), and let the star placed over the fracture be slightly wider and stronger.
And know that the number of stitches (stars) is six in most arrangements; either the fracture is in one hollow, or in two hollows at once.
Next, place your bandage over the site of the fracture stronger and more firm, and a little more tightly towards the higher or lower part of the fracture, or place a looser bandage over a tighter one as mentioned earlier in the introduction to this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough. And the thread used to bind it should be of linen, of medium thickness between fine and coarse, as we have mentioned.
And consider the member and ligamen after days. If something should happen that requires correction, such as itching occurring in a member: then it is necessary to immerse the member in warm water until the itching ceases, and release the tight bandage until it is relieved, then continue with the binding.
If the bandage has already become looser, and the bone has already come away, and similar things: then straighten it all with your strength, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive binding, then it is necessary to soften the bandage slightly and release it for a few days until it can receive its proper nourishment, then tighten it again.
If, however, nothing of what we have said affects the patient, then it is not necessary to resolve it unless after twenty days or so.
Then the hand of the patient should be suspended at his neck. And his neck should be equal [in position], and be guarded by its own strength from agitated movements. And make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days, or perhaps in thirty-two days, and possibly in eighteen days. All of this is according to the arrangements of the humors and the dispositions of strength.
## On the Healing of Fractures of the Hand
Know that it rarely happens that the fractures of the hand occur at the joints of the fingers or at the tendons. And it does not happen to him unless there has been friction many times.
When, therefore, there occurs a fracture or bruising of a limb, it is necessary that the patient be seated with his leg in a position of rest and that a seat be placed before him at an equal level. Then place his hand on it, extended.
Then the assistant should extend the broken bones and adjust them as the physician directs, until they are united with a good connection.
Then it is necessary for him to apply a plaster and poultice, unless there is danger of a hot apothema (fever). Then place a bandage on top of it according to the amount of space, and you have already covered it with linen cloth.
However, if the fracture is near the bottom of the foot, then make a sphere-like shape from cloth and tell the patient to wrap it tightly around his broken limb with his foot; then tie it with a long piece of cloth.
And the bandage should be made of skin, which is soft so that it adheres to the skin of the foot; and tie it as necessary.
However, if the fracture is on the outside, then it is necessary to place a bandage above and another below the foot; and the hand should be kept straight and open. Then he applies a strap as required by the hand and extends it between the fingers with a ligament.
If there is a fracture of any of the joints of the fingers, and it is the thumb, it should be set as necessary. Then it is tied with the sole: and if necessary, a splint should be placed straight and firm so that the fracture is lifted and not moved.
However, if the fracture is in the remaining fingers, such as the middle, index, ring, or little finger, then it should be set and tied with the healthy finger that follows it, or all of them according to their sequence, and this is better. Or place a firm splint on top of it, as we said regarding the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after that arrangement of the heated splint, oppose it as necessary when something happens from it according to its course.
## Restoring Fractures of the Hip Joint.
The hip joint often breaks, and this is felt because it turns inward and toward the rear.
And its restoration is such that one ligament is tightened above the fracture, and another ligament below the fracture. And the patient lies stretched out on his face.
Then, every accessory ligament should be extended to its side according to equality; and this is when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
If, however, the fracture is close to the root of the hip, then one ligament should be positioned towards the pelvis so that its extension goes upwards; and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if there is a fracture close to the knee, then one ligament near the knee should be positioned so that its extension goes downwards.
Then the surgeon should align the bone with both of his hands until it is reduced according to the similarity of the natural figure; and the bone is joined with a good connection.
Then it is necessary that you apply an ointment and a bandage, if the member does not become contaminated. If this happens in a contaminated ulcer: then leave it for some days until the inflammation of the ulcer subsides, then resume your treatment.
The structure of this condition must be such. It is necessary to cover the fracture with a firm bandage; that is, bind it twice or three times and leave an excess from it. Then bandage the foot until it reaches the heel near the root of the toes.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come out from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll up the excess from over the foot and thigh from the other side.
Then place the stars over the thigh at the location of the fracture itself and place one star from them over the bone of the leg.
Then fill the space between the foot and thigh with soft cloth to provide tightness.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle towards the location of the fracture, either three or four times. And the more it is elongated with the ligament from the location of the fracture, the less tight and softer your bandage will be, and gentler.
Then turn your attention to the two ends of the thread, which you have inserted between the hip and the leg. Now tie it with both of the three stars that are above. Then insert the two ends of the thread below, until you reach the foot's root. And tie both strings on the other side of the stars' ends, so that the ligament does not move from its place.
Then leave the string over that, as long as it remains, so that no damage, ulceration, swelling, or similar occurs to the member. If anything of that occurs. Therefore, with the removal of the thread and correction of what has happened from that, as we have said many times.
If indeed there is a fragment of bone that pierces the bone, then you should do the same to it, if possible. And if not, find a way over it and move it aside, and take care of the one whose memory preceded it, until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is confined to adding stars to it, as we said in the aid and arm.
However, in the restoration of such a fracture, it does not happen that the patient becomes lame. And if it is restored alone, except for applying another crutch to it, then it is necessary that the one whose leg is injured always walks with a limp.
And know that the hip is either confined or added slightly, or reduced slightly, within fifty days; all of it depends on the diversity of compositions and the remaining dispositions.
**On the restoration of the fracture of the knee-joint.**
Know that the fracture of the knee-joint rarely occurs, but it suffers friction many times.
If indeed it suffers a fracture, then not only is there a crack or split, but also an opening in its parts. And it is that, with or without a wound. And it stands over that with all its sense.
And its restoration is such that it equals what has been disrupted from its parts with the fingers, until it is aggregated and connected according to what is possible from equality and ease, and fabrication.
Then apply a plaster of sesame flour, or mill, with egg white: and place over it a round pad, if needed: and tighten above it a suitable constriction to that.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in the other fractures, such as a hot apposition and similar ones: so that you oppose to every occurrence what is suitable for it, until it is healed.
## On the Restoration of a Fractured Hip (Crurus)
Know that the hips are two bones, of which one is thick, and is called the hip bone: and the other is delicate, and is called the femur.
And both kinds of fractures happen to the two bones of the arm: and because of that, its restoration is done like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If two bones are broken at once, the crumple (or fragment) turns towards all parts.
And if a more delicate bone is broken, the fragment turns towards the anterior part.
And if a thick bone is broken, you will find it pointing downwards, and they are among the ones that won't be hidden from you.
Then apply the extension, equalization, and binding of the stars according to that equally.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many pieces: then the extension should be smaller and your relief gentler.
And indeed, in the leg, there is something like a bow from the operation on the arm; and it is as when you equalize the stars and complete all your work, then take two strips of pine wood, which are used in making the sun's screens that are placed under the boards: and they become like spatulas of the palm: and choose among them those with a moderate thickness, not too thin: and their length should be according to the length of the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap over each cloth with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the leg on one side, and the other part on the other side; they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then he ligates two fasciae at three places from both ends and the middle. When the tightness is forbidden, the crus (tendon or ligament) bends to the right and left, and remains in a good state of rest.
And indeed, a splint should be made of wood according to the length of the crus (leg), and placed within it so as to preserve it from motion.
And above all, it is necessary that you do this in the fracture when there is an open wound with it.
Then consider the crus (leg) every day, and strive with that last effort against detachment, or swelling, or any other conditions. If therefore something of these (conditions) happens, then oppose it with what is necessary until it heals, if God wills.
On fractures of the bones of the foot and toes.
A fracture of the calcaneus does not happen completely.
The bones of the foot indeed sometimes fracture, and the toes also rarely fracture; and they do not occur to them unless there is friction in many positions.
If there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see those bones rising up above each other over time, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground as if walking.
Then stand there and place your foot on what raises those bones; then press or step on it; and keep it level until it returns to its place.
Then apply a plaster and remove the splint; and place under the foot a small board with two flat ends.
Then bind it tightly with the foot using bandages, after you have wrapped it with cloth and other things it needs.
When they have passed three or four days, then loosen the binding. For when you find the bones equalized, or fractured, or dislocated. The operation on them is as you see.
If, however, some fingers are broken, then restore them, and equalize them as I have told you regarding the restoration of the fingers on the hand. Then place your finger's end (astel) along the length of the finger, and make it a little wider; then place this board under the foot as I have told you, and bind it tightly.
If indeed what is fractured extends from two, or three, or more bones, then place over every finger a pad of its quantity, wrapped in linen cloth; and tighten the splint on the lower part of the foot; and let it stand over one head of the splint outside the vein of the foot, so that it may hold good retention.
And it is fitting for you not to forget, but to consider all that I have told you about the rest of fractures from accidents that we mentioned, and oppose every accident with what is necessary.
§ On the fracture of the woman's vulva, and the ribs, and the man's scrotum.
When the woman's vulva is fractured, then make her sit squatting. Then lean her slightly towards the back part of her own body, and hold her from behind.
Then the midwife should fill her vulva with as much as she can hold, until she is full, and let it be like a sphere in the woman's body.
Then the woman should be moved, and her back raised little by little. That bone emerges from its socket until it forms a sphere-like shape in front of the vulva, and the fractured bone returns to its original position.
Then place a small cloth over it. When he wants to urinate, remove the bandage easily, then let him urinate, and bring it back according to the manner in which you originally inserted it; then return it to its original position.
He should do this for seven days or so, for the bone itself will be restored.
And if you wish, take a warm cloth and tie it over the opening with a reed tube, and insert the whole cloth into his vulva. Then blow into the tube with strength until the cloth inside the vulva swells, for the fracture will be healed.
Then it should be bandaged and left for several days, as we have described, until it heals.
And when the chest bone of a man or woman is fractured, then administer for its restoration, and use the same method we have described for the healing of the anchial (or sternum) bone.
And the rectum is not hidden in these close fractures, which barely touch it, especially for those who are students or practitioners of medicine.
Understand my book well, for the very fracture itself indicates to you, in many configurations, the right path for its restoration and tightening; therefore, understand.
When the bone of man breaks, take the quill of the goose and insert it into the fracture. Then place a poultice on it made of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and released after three days or so, and it will be healed, if God wills.
§ On the restoration of bone fractures, when they are with a wound.
It is fitting for whoever experiences a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or any other bone that needs immediate attention, like the leg bones, and leeching is applied straightaway: If you are certain about the conditions of the leeching, as we have mentioned.
If the wound bleeds, then you must cut off the part that is bleeding, so as to clean and dress it three times a day: If you do not have anything else at hand.
Then begin to repair the fracture on that same day; and do not postpone it unless an abscess develops.
If indeed an abscess forms, then allow the restoration to continue until the ninth day, provided the abscess is drained. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause it to develop into a bad complication.
However, if the broken bone is prominent above the skin: then you must, in order to reduce it, apply pressure with your hands easily and gently.
If, however, the extension is not prepared and its alignment cannot be adjusted with your hands: then reduce it using this instrument. And there is an instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight fingers in length, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take from them three or four, according to the amount required for that treatment, in every kind of fracture.
And it should be round; and have a small thickness so that it is not doubled up under the pressure placed on top of it during the operation: and its ends should be sharp, with a margin at their tips. And on top of it, for its thickness, from its middle to its lower parts.
And this is its form.
In this operation, it is necessary to place the sharp end of the instrument over the prominent end of the bone, and push it with a single stroke until the bone returns to its original position and is aligned correctly.
Therefore, strive to align the ends of the fractured bone again.
If the ends of the bone are too small to accept the instrument properly, then it is necessary to cut into the end of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
If you cannot reduce them at all with what we have mentioned, then cut it with what is appropriate for the scissors, as we have said, or saw it with a saw of any kind that is possible for you.
Then, smooth the remaining part of the bone from its roughness and fine splinters.
When the bone is reduced and experiences a sudden intense pain after reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its original position.
Therefore, do that. For when you confer great strength upon the weak, as your restoration completes the work you do to the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in black, astringent wine. And use it properly if it is suitable for summer. And do not place anything over the sore that is black, nor any substance with oil in it; so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption within it.
Then administer herbs at the hour of completion of your bone restoration. And leave the detected sore; so as to cut with scissors a hole into the infections according to the amount of the wound.
And be careful not to strain the wound with a fracture. Many times these foolish doctors have done this, and they have caused their patients to suffer either death or corruption or putrefaction, that is, loss of blood. And let your bandage be soft, flexible, different from the tightness of the other fractures.
If the wound is bad or a large wound, and some bad accident has occurred over it, as we have described, and you feel pain at the suspended place, then it is not necessary to put stars over it. And make incisions over the hard parts at the location of the stars, and tighten it with them.
However, if after one or two days you see the wound beginning to form pus, then remove the hard cloth that you placed over it with wine. Then apply poultices and ointments with which we are accustomed to treat wounds, such as the four-ingredient ointment and others like it.
And it is appropriate for you to loosen the ligature. And consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared so that pus can flow out of it easily downward.
If many days have passed since the wound and it does not consolidate nor is pus drained from it, then know that there are seriously damaged small bones there. Why it is necessary that you should inquire about a wound with care. Indeed, from among those that are separated, remove them and extract the foreign body itself. And as for those that are not separated from it and they pierce the member and cause pain, try to cut them off, and remove them in every way possible for you.
If a wound becomes infected or gangrenous, or any other form of corruption and putrefaction occurs, then it is necessary to confront each of these with what is appropriate for their treatment, which has been described in its chapter.
And regarding what is necessary for my speech to continue, and when you should make your present mind known, if it breaks off and protrudes beyond the member, such as the hip bone or other large members, do not attempt any attraction, for often death comes from that, indeed, let it be, until it putrefies.
Perhaps it would disappear on its own after twenty days, or thirty.
Therefore, care for the wound if it appears to you, and otherwise, let it be.
**On the treatment of a nodule at the site of a fracture.**
Many times this condition occurs during the course of healing a fracture. Especially those near the joints, and it becomes infected because of that shape of the member. And perhaps it prevents the member from performing its natural function.
Therefore, if the inflammation is recent, administer medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloe, frankincense, myrrh, sage, and acacia, among others.
So that you may obtain some of these, or all of them: and mix them with astringent wine, or with egg albumen, or with vinegar: and apply them to the inflammation in a poultice, and bind them tightly over the affected area.
And do not remove the bandage for many days. Then remove it, and apply another one, until the inflammation is removed.
Or bind a sheet of lead tightly over it. Lead is indeed a property that removes all that is feared from the body.
However, if a contraction has already turned into a stone, and it is tight, and urgency demands its removal, then find it from the upper part of that place and cut off the protruding excess; or scrape it with some rasors until it is removed, and take care of it until it heals.
On healing, when a part remains after that which was affected, it does not recover according to its own nature.
When a bone fracture heals and the limb remains weak after that which was affected, it does not become strong unless many causes are at play. One of these is that the solution of the ligament and its binding does not occur as it should; either because of the excess of tightness of the ligaments, preventing nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to an excessive number of applications at the wrong time; or because of a lack of blood in a weak body and its debilitation.
And the treatment for it is to feed the weak one and make their body tender until blood increases in them. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and happiness over him.
Then place a bandage over the member: so that it attracts the skin to itself for much nourishment. And he should continue to moisten it with warm water until nourishment flows, and then return to its natural form.
§ On the healing of broken bones when they are restored slowly.
When a member, having been restored after its healing, exhibits tortuosity or protrusion of the fractured bone, or some other deformity; and because of this, it is disfigured, yet does not prevent the member from performing its natural function; then it is unnecessary to accept his statement that considers the member to be broken again.
And indeed there have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land.
And this operation is indeed reprehensible, leading to death or great fear, so that it becomes mortal.
Indeed, if the weakness and deformity are recent, then it should be moistened with warm water in which softening herbs are cooked, such as almond leaves, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones. And let a plaster be made for her with a softened plaster, as is properly done in making a dressing.
Or take the mucilage of the root of the high plant, and mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and apply it as a plaster.
Or take the fat figs, and mix them with Columbine clay and other similar medicinal substances that reduce hardening.
And when the swelling is relieved with constant friction, old and gentle, which is done with damp hands. And the movement of the member should be applied to every part at all hours.
But if the curvature has already progressed and become strong, and it has hardened like stone, and treatment is needed for it with a knife; then it must be cut from above, and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and what exceeds from the swelling or bone with delicate scissors; and relief should be given to that part with care and attention.
**On the Discussion of Dislocation**
Dislocation is the exit of some joint from its place. For it is prevented from its motion, and the form of the member is disfigured. And it causes pains to occur in the weak, and severe injuries.
When therefore someone experiences a dislocation, then it is necessary to hasten towards its restoration; nor should it ever be delayed.
For if it is delayed, the place will be lost, and perhaps along with it, the reduction of the dislocation.
Because of that, therefore, it should not be moved, nor extended in the hour of its loss. Because it often causes spasms to occur, and painful injuries.
Indeed, when that occurs, then it is necessary to prepare for the bloodletting of the infirm. Then it is released until the dislocation becomes quiet.
Then the member is wrapped with warm water and oil. It should then be reduced with ease.
And it shall cure every member as memory of its place returns to it.
Indeed, I have already organized the chapters on dislocation, even according to what came before in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower parts.
§ On the care of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
The two jaws are seldom dislocated unless rarely.
And the dislocation of the jaws occurs according to one of two methods. Or they may be removed from their places by slight tug, and become soft for a little while. Or they may be dislocated entirely and completely until they become soft towards the chest part, until the discharge of saliva ceases, and it cannot hold itself, nor can it close its jaw, and its tongue is covered with saliva while speaking.
When, however, the dislocation is slight, then it returns to many positions of itself with difficulty.
If it is a complete dislocation, treat it immediately; do not delay until the end. The attendant should hold the head of the patient, and the surgeon should insert his thumb into the root of the mandible dislocation between the jaw and the skull, if the dislocation is on one side. If the dislocation is on both sides, let him insert two thumbs at once. And the rest of his fingers should be outside, as he holds it firmly.
And instruct the patient to clean his jaws and move them freely for chewing on both sides. And the surgeon should adjust the jaw and gently push it back to its place until it returns to its normal position.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then apply a hot water and oil poultice until it becomes easier to reduce them; do not delay the reduction of the jaws at all, as we said before.
When they return and align, and the patient's jaw is closed, and they do not open, then place a poultice of cloth with wax, made of rose oil, on them.
It is then bound with ease using soft ligaments.
Then let the patient sleep with their head raised between two pillows, so that it does not move to the right or left, nor tries to chew or swallow anything; instead, let them be given soft food until the pains subside and the jaw relaxes. Then they may eat what they wish and take it easily.
Let them not strain their mouth during eating and drinking, or yawning, until the jaw relaxes and heals.
If the reduction of the two jaws is difficult when they have been dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, then often fever and continuous vomiting occur; and perhaps the patient's belly swells up and perhaps they vomit pure bile.
So if you see that [the condition] persists, then know that it is a loss, and often such a person dies within ten days.
## On the Reduction of Shoulder Dislocation and the End of the Humerus
The furca (sternum) does not usually dislocate inwardly from its attachment to the chest due to its own continuity with the breastbone. And it becomes dislocated sometimes towards the outer parts, and that is made known to the sense.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. Then it constricts the space with the strong contraction of your palm, for it will return.
Then place a plaster over it, and bandages, and tighten it.
Indeed, its extremities that follow the cubit, and continue with it, do not dislocate unless rarely. Which, if it becomes dislocated on some day: then it is necessary to bring it back and adjust it according to what we said, and what you have prepared.
Then place a plaster over it, and bandages, and tighten it. And especially instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the shoulder is brought back, even when it has been separated from its place.
On the Reduction of a Dislocation of the Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder (humerus) does not dislocate except according to three modes.
Of these three modes, one is when it (the humerus) dislocates towards the lower part of the arm (tittlicus). The second mode is when it (the humerus) dislocates towards the chest (pectoris). And perhaps it (the humerus) dislocates towards the upper part of the shoulder: and that is rare.
And it (the humerus) does not dislocate towards the back due to the scapula (spatula). And it (the humerus) does not dislocate towards the front due to nerves (neruos).
And indeed, it (the humerus) most often dislocates and emerges towards the lower part of the arm (tittlicus), especially in those whose muscles are few. Because it (the humerus) emerges rapidly in those cases, and enters rapidly.
However, in those whose flesh is abundant, the opposite is found, namely that it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or an accident, and the humerus is displaced by heat and pressure, and this is thought to be due to that fact that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you experience this, until you are certain of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And dislocation is recognized when it is directed towards the inferior aspect of the joint: and distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a healthy humerus. For you will notice a clear difference, and in the head of the humerus you find concavity, and at the touch, the head of the humerus feels as if it is hollow: and the infirm person cannot bring their hand back to their ear, nor move it with all its motions.
And similarly, if it is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, then you will notice a clear sensation, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is recent or if the patient is a young child.
And its reduction is such that it lifts the surgeon's hand towards the higher parts. Then place your thumbs under the skin, and raise the joint with strength upwards to its place; and the surgeon lifts his hand and extends it upward. Then he places it inferiorly, for it returns quickly by itself.
If, however, it does not return as I have said, and there have been many days since the dislocation occurred, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water, and an application made which softens and soothes, as if roots of hemlock, fennel, and melilot were steeped in water and applied.
Then the patient should be turned over on his back, and under the skin a ball and wool should be placed which is equal between relaxation and tension.
Then the physician should place his heel on the ball and raise the head of the humerus with strength, and pull the patient's hand towards the lower parts.
And if you see this, reduce it according to this method: and it is such that you make the present man who is longer than the patient, and stands on the side, and inserts his arm under the skin of the patient; and he lifts the skin of the patient upwards until the patient is hanging in the air. And another assistant should pull the hand of the patient towards the lower parts of his abdomen. However, if the patient is weak: then something else should be suspended with him so as to weigh himself; for the dislocation returns immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another mode; and there is a long piece of wood placed on the ground, whose head is round like a mortar's handle, not too thick nor too thin. Then soft cloths should be placed under the patient after they are put on top of the wood, and the patient should stand according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand should be extended towards the lower part on the other side, and his body should be stretched from the other side with strength; for the joint returns to its place quickly.
If his reduction is difficult through all that we have said, then use this care: and take a piece of wood whose length is the amount of two arms, and its breadth the amount of four fingers, and its thickness the amount of two fingers; and it should have a round head to facilitate entry into the deep wound according to this form.
Then soft cloths should be placed over the round head to prevent them from hurting the weak wood.
Next, it should be placed under the lower bandage so that the hand or arm can be extended over the wood until the lower parts: and the wood is bound above the aid and the arm and the end of the hand.
Next, the arm should be placed on the step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand should be extended towards the lower parts, and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side. The incision is entered immediately.
When, therefore, the entrance is completed in any way possible: then it is necessary to place under the bandage a sphere of equal quantity made of wool. Next, apply the prepared plaster from ground flour with frankincense and egg white over the whole arm as required above.
Next, tighten the bandage properly; and the ligature should be placed over the plaster above: and the hand is attached to the neck and released, so that the hand does not move for seven days.
And it is necessary to give light food to the sick person until the member is strengthened, for it is more expedient for its healing.
Next, after seven or five days, a larger one should be placed and withdrawn with movement. If it is strengthened and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
If the suture is dislocated several times due to the moisture that has occurred or for another reason, then it should be treated with cautery using three incisions, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
If all these things are done, and the ligament is released after seven days, but the joint is not strengthened, and the bandage and compression are not applied repeatedly, but it does not firm up, and falls, and cannot be raised to its original position, then you should know that the nerves leading to the shoulder head have been incised, or extended, or softened, and know that the joint will never be restored to its place.
In the case of dislocation towards the chest and breast, or towards the rear, it is done with a push and extension using the hands until it returns and the remaining compression and care are administered until healing occurs.
If this happens after healing, a serious condition in the limb, and there is delay in its motion, then the patient should use the bath repeatedly until that gravity is relaxed and it returns to its natural state.
**On the treatment of elbow dislocation.**
Know that the joint of the cubitus (elbow) dislocates with difficulty, and likewise returns with difficulty; and it itself dislocates to all parts, and especially to the front or back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you, for it falls under strain and under touch, according to whatever shape it takes. And when you join the dislocated cubitus with the healthy one, that becomes clearly apparent to you. The joint is then restored, and the arm cannot be doubled or touched with its own humerus.
And it is necessary, as soon as you notice the dislocation, to act properly and reduce it before a hot swelling occurs.
For if a hot swelling occurs, it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation, and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially when it is in the back parts. It is the worst of all types of dislocations, and brings with it more intense pain, and often ends in death.
And its restoration, when it is possible to reduce it, is as if you extend your hand with both hands: and the arm is spread out, and the doctor's hand is above the cubitus and beneath it, and he pushes the joint back with his thumb or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Now, true dislocation is to the front: then it returns so that it doubles the hand with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of its palm the cubit that is dislocated.
If the dislocation does not obey and refuses to reduce, then apply a firm, steady extension: it should be as if two assistants extend the arm, with two other assistants holding it in place so that it does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is reduced to its original position after a double cloth or a broad ligament has been applied over it and secured on top of the hand.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil so that it becomes one of the substances aiding in the ease and smoothness of the joint's movement. Then he should push the joint firmly until it returns to its original position.
And after its reduction, a compress should be placed on it containing a substance with a constricting and drying effect, and then the wound should be bound tightly with a suitable bandage. And the arm should be suspended from the neck by a sling, and it should be left for several days.
Then it should be removed. If, therefore, the union is firm in its place, then loosen the ligament from it and release the same.
And if you see that the union does not hold well, then repeat the application of the plaster and the bandage, and release it after a few days until it holds firmly. Then release it.
However, if there is a serious condition after the reduction of the union and the arrangement is in motion: then apply humidification in the bath, and gentle friction, and compression until it heals, or place a pad over the joint, that is, a thick woolen napkin. Then bind it, and release it over it for day and night. Then remove it and immerse it in the bath. When, therefore, it has sweated, then gently friction the union with moderate friction. Then repeat over the joint the application of the compress once, twice, and thrice with each bath entry, until it softens.
And if you see, place over it a warm, moist, butter-soaked compress and tighten over it.
Do that several times. It also relaxes and returns to its original position.
§ On the treatment of dislocation by Almahassem.
Albucasis states that the hand can be dislocated several times, that is, the joint which connects the arm to the hand.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. Unlike other joints. However, it is necessary that there be speed in the reduction of this dislocation at the time when it occurs, before the place shifts; otherwise, heat occurs in it.
And the reduction of this dislocation is as follows: place the patient's weakened hand on a table and have them extend their arm; the physician should then place their palm on top of the joint and push it until it returns to its original position.
However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm has already receded into the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on the table at the time of extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding towards the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be such that the inner part of their hand lies on the table, so that the physician's hand can be placed over the entire joint.
If it returns immediately, it is good; if not, then tighten it with a drying plaster to stop the gap, and release it, without repeating that process.
For if it does not tolerate, nor can you reduce it further after several days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its crookedness, and it does not harm the patient except that the hand becomes soft, and it cannot tighten anything, then know that the nerves are severed or chafed.
Therefore, there is no skill in it other than to tighten it with a plaster near the affected area. And perhaps it does not bring about any change.
When, therefore, it does not return as Almahassem described, then apply to it the plaster that we have mentioned. Then it should be tightened and released for five days; after that, it should be loosened and released, and the hand exercised.
If, however, its movement is restricted and something grave happens to it, then loosen it with warm water and several friction movements until it becomes relaxed.
**On the treatment of finger dislocation.**
When a finger is dislocated from its joint, whether towards the side or back of the palm, or in between its joints: then stretch out your finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns to its place.
Then support the head of the finger and hang it towards the side on which it is dislocated, and leave it in that position for two days.
Then hang it up and stretch it out until it becomes straight in that day.
When evening comes, bind it according to the aforementioned description; and do not cease to loosen it during the day; and exercise it with motion; and bind it at night.
Do that for several days until it heals.
And likewise, if it is dislocated towards the joint of the hand, bind it to that side, and perform your first treatment on it until it heals.
And likewise, do the same when it is dislocated towards other parts.
**On the cure for spine joint dislocation.**
When someone suffers from a complete dislocation of the spine or neck, or when many vertebrae are removed from their positions, then there is no cure for it, as death is approaching the sick person.
And the sign of this is that the sick person's strength departs without their will, and they cannot hold it; and often some of his members become weak from it, or both his legs, or both his arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For often it is removed, which often leads to its separation into four parts.
Therefore, what is removed towards the rear is called Gibbosity.
The treatment for it is that you consider when Gibbosity occurs from childhood; then there is no cure for it, nor is there any recovery at all from it.
However, in cases that occur from an accident, or a blow, or similar ones, the ancient ways of treatment have been extensively discussed. Most of which do not return with a successful outcome.
I have indeed now abbreviated from that one, of which I excused but little from its proximity to me for the sake of intent, and through my exposition I revealed it, and formed its instrument in a different manner from what was shown, and they exhibited themselves.
Therefore, I say that the gibbousness that occurs from the previous part is not a skill, nor is there healing from it.
And similarly, that which is done regarding the two sides.
And it is not healed from them, unless what happens in their own back, as I am telling: and it is, as the infirm extends himself over his face on an equal platform near the wall; and a moist cloth is spread under him, so that his chest is not hurt.
Then a straight wood should be placed fixed into the fire on the ground, at the foot's end, around his head; and another wood around his feet at the other foot's end; and the assistant should hold the wood, and it should not be secured in the fire. And another assistant should hold the other.
Then cover the patient's head and under his limbs gently tighten the ligature, making it firm; and extend the limb of the ligature to the wood that is near his head, and bind him to it.
Then tighten another ligament above its branches, and above the knee of the same limb, and near its roots. Then join all the ligaments, and tie those threads to another stick that is near its feet.
Then stretch every instrument to the part of the stick that it belongs to, and do not move the two sticks from their places where they are fixed; however, they are not yet secure, as we have said.
And the physician should place his palms firmly on the spine until it returns, or place a board on top of it. Then he attaches his feet above the board until it returns.
If, however, it does not return after this treatment, then take a board whose length is approximately three arm-lengths. And cause the wall, as we said, which is near the weak part where the end of the board will enter. Then place the middle of the board on the spine. And the physician should place his feet on the other end of the board. And it should be drawn tight until the spine is bent, and then return to its place.
Then, if necessary, operate with a knife that is inserted by your hand: and it is as if you fix two wooden pieces to the ground near the head of the patient at the final joint of the foot, whose length is the arm's breadth; and near its head, two wooden pieces.
And its length is one palm between each wood; and now a hole has been made at every place where the knife runs: and all the wood is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move at all.
And a round wood should be inserted; and the knife is where the ligament revolves in two holes of two woods.
And at its end is a hole where the wood is fixed, whose length is one palm with what it revolves; and in the other two woods, likewise, it is the same.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have tightened in the chest with a knife that is near its head; and the ligaments that you have tightened in its legs with a knife that is near its feet.
Then stand near every knife that is moving, and help it with a strap with which the hand turns; and the doctor adjusts the spine, as we said.
This is the form of the knife, which follows.
Then, after it has returned to its original state and the area is equalized, you should then place a dry plaster with albumen on it. Then, remove the plaster. After that, place a frame made of wood above the plaster, whose width is three fingers, or approximately that size. And its length should be such that it covers the area of the hunch and extends beyond the healthy part of the spine.
Then it is bound with the ligature that we have mentioned. And the patient should be given delicate food until they are healed.
If there remains anything of prominence in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that medicines which soften and soothe be administered, along with the application of a board as we described in time past. And now the lead sheet is administered in that place.
And when there occurs a prominence in the final spine of the back: and it is thought to be due to dislocation, and that bone has already emerged. Why should this medicine be used with such presumption? For it may very well lead to death.
**On the treatment of a displaced anchor.**
You should know that the dislocation of an anchor and the dislocation of the shoulder only occurs if there is a dislocation, not because of minor removal or slight indentation.
And indeed, the anchor joint dislocates according to four parts. This is because it dislocates towards the front and back.
And indeed, it dislocates most towards the inside, and only slightly towards the front and back.
And the treatment for its dislocation towards the inside is as follows: because when you connect a healthy leg to an injured one, it takes longer; and the knee of the injured party sticks out more than that of the healthy one, and he cannot bend his foot at the hip; and there is a place that follows the hip joint's extension, warm due to the head of the thigh bone having already reached that point.
And the sign of one who has suffered a dislocation towards the exterior is that it is contrary to these accidents.
And the sign of one who has suffered a dislocation towards the front is that it extends the healthy leg to its full extent; however, it does not double up without pain in the knee. If it tries to walk, it cannot move beyond this dislocation towards the front, and urine retention occurs, the groin becomes inflamed, and during walking there is pressure on the heel bone.
And the sign of one who has suffered a dislocation towards the back is that it does not extend the leg and cannot double up until the groin becomes stiff; and his leg is also shorter on the affected side, and the groin is relaxed, and the acetabulum (hip joint) becomes painful in the region of the ilium (a bone in the pelvis).
The reduction of this type of dislocation is to consider at that time, if the dislocation is old, which has already become ancient with its having been present for a long time. Then if you perform the reduction and it remains according to its position, then there is no cure for it at all. Therefore one should not make a complete assumption about it.
However, in the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, then act promptly to restore the joint, extending it towards the interior and exterior, moving it to the right and left; perhaps it will reduce on its own, and no other treatment will be needed.
If, however, this does not happen in the aforementioned manner, then one must prepare a strong assistant, and stretch his leg from its lower part, either by hand or with a bandage that is tied above his knee; and another assistant should extend his hand over it, so as to insert his hands beneath the folds of his skin. Then he should tie a soft bandage over the root of the thigh, and hold the end of the other bandage.
And the extension should be either from the front part of the groin to the part of the fork (femoral triangle), or from the back part to the back.
And all these extensions should be done once until the patient is lifted from the ground with his body and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is the common type for all four types.
If, therefore, the dislocation returns with what we said, it is good; but if not, then every kind of that which I say concerning its own cure is necessary.
In the reduction of it, when the dislocation is towards the inner parts, the patient must be turned over on his healthy side. Then he should place the bandage over the root of the thigh, where it is between the head of the thigh and the space under the groin. Then he extends the ligament upwards from the groin region to the higher part of the body, towards the fork (of the femur).
Then he should take another strong helper at his side, and reduce the large space of the weak hip joint, and extend it with a firm outward push. I am returning to my place.
And this is the easier kind of treatment for reducing this member.
If, however, it pulls away from you and does not obey this treatment with this kind of cure at all, then you should bind both weak feet together with a strong and flexible ligament, above the two calves and above the two knees; and each should be of a length equal to the distance between four fingers, and the weak leg should be extended more than the other by the measure of two fingers.
Then the weak one should be suspended over the top of the wooden beam, which is in the house; and its length should be from the ground equal to the distance between two arms.
Then you should strongly instruct the young and strong one to reinforce the hip joint; and suspend another weak one with the strong one; and push the strong one, reinforcing the hip joint with strength, for the connection returns to its place quickly.
In his own version, however, when there is a dislocation towards the outer parts, it is necessary that the patient lies on a bed, as we have described in the case of kyphosis. And the ligaments should be tied above his leg, on his weak side, and also above his chest.
Then two sticks are placed, one near his feet and the other near his head. Then a wooden plank is placed across the middle of the bed, securely fixed; over which wet cloths are spread to prevent discomfort to the patient, and another plank is positioned between his legs to prevent him from sliding downwards when he extends himself.
Then every helper should extend his arm to his own side, and the doctor should adjust the reduction with his hand.
If, therefore, he obeys the reversal, it will be good.
And if he does not obey the reversal, then place another board on top of him and press it equally as we described for kyphosis. However, it is necessary that the patient lies on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front parts, then it is necessary that the weak leg be quickly extended; and this is according to the same account on the bed: and the physician should place his right hand's palm upon the sick side's groin. Then it narrows itself with the other hand, and with that constriction, place it extended downwards towards the lower part of the leg.
And if the dislocation is towards the rear parts: then it is not necessary that the weak leg be extended downwards and raised above the ground; on the contrary, it should be placed upon a hard surface, as is done even when its wide dislocation is towards the exterior, according to what we said about its position upon two surfaces: and it should be on its face, with its ligaments extended: according to what we recently said.
And compression should be applied with a board upon the place towards which the joint is extending, when its reduction is completed according to necessity.
And the sign of its reduction should not escape you: and it is as if you stretch both the weak legs; and when you see them equal, and the sick one squeezes his leg and extends it without help, then you know that the member has already returned according to necessity; then join the two thighs, and put a plaster, and tie with a bandage, that is, a splint: so that it does not move widely towards any parts; and let him remain quiet for three or four days.
Then he loosens the ligament and the plaster, and compares the leg with the other. If you see that both are in the same position, then know that the dislocation is now stable; so absolve the patient to walk.
And if you see any sign of softening: then return to it, and apply that plaster, and tighten it according to your first strain; and release it even after three days.
Then he loosens it and makes the healing process take its course for several days on each leg until it is well strengthened.
§ On the dislocation of the knee.
The knee joint can be dislocated in three ways. It can be dislocated outwardly, inwardly, and downward, that is, to the back.
And it does not dislocate towards the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you should urge the patient to put his leg against his hip. If it does not adhere to the thigh, then know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of dislocation is that you make the infirm sit straight, so that he can extend his leg if possible over it, and your back adheres to its face: and place his foot between your feet.
Then make the knee adhere with your palms, and place them straight between your fingers on top of the knee. Then apply with your palm the two sides of the knee firmly. And another assistant should extend his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg adheres to the thigh gently, not with effort.
Then apply a hot compress, and make the leg adhere to the thigh. Then bind them together at the same time for three or four days. Then untie them.
And the invalid should not be made to walk for several days until they are healed.
If, however, reducing it is refused to you, then apply a strong extension with the ligaments, of which mention has previously been made in the treatment of the ankle, until it returns.
§ On the treatment of calcaneal dislocation.
The calcaneus is sometimes dislocated by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you will see the calcaneus swollen, proceeding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of its reduction is easy, and it is as if it were extended with ease by the hands and adjusted until it returns.
In its treatment, however, when it is dislocated completely, you should make the invalid sit straight and have a strong helper hold him firmly from behind, in the middle of his back.
Then hold his foot with your right hand from its upper part and with your left hand from the lower part of the toe.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand, use two instruments.
Then extend your left hand and push the foot's chest with your right hand towards the leg without effort.
Do that twice as we have described.
Then push the foot's chest towards the leg in the third instance, and pull out the toe.
If therefore, it returns to the first instance or to both according to this manner and you see the foot equalised, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it itself returns.
If, however, you are prevented from its return as we have described, then lay the sick person down on his back on the ground and fix a very firm blanket on the ground between his legs so that he falls there, and you have already covered him with a cloth so as not to hurt the sick person.
Then the attendant should take hold of the patient's coccyx; afterwards, another attendant extends the patient's foot, or with his hands, or with a bandage that he binds around the neck of the foot. Then every attendant should extend against the extension of his counterpart; and a pillow should be placed between the two weak thighs to prevent his body from tilting downwards during the extension.
Then the physician should reduce the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy leg downwards. The dislocation returns with velocity.
When the dislocation returns and its restoration is declared to you, then apply a plaster and poultice, firmly bind it with ligaments, and tie the foot with a bandage to the leg.
And you must be careful not to harm or fear the nerves that are above the heel behind, so as not to put pressure on them and cause injury.
Then let it be left for two or three days. If the ligament becomes softer, tighten it; then loosen it on the third or fourth day and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. If he attempts to walk before that space is closed, there is no security but that a dislocation occurs over it, and it is corrupted, and does not receive healing afterwards.
If a fever occurs in him: then it is necessary that you administer to his sedative that which our previous narrative mentioned elsewhere concerning treatment, and friction, until the fever is removed.
**On the dislocation of toes and its treatment**
It is necessary that what has dislocated from them with a slight extension without effort be adjusted; and this is not difficult, but rather easy.
However, if the dislocation is in any knots of the foot's back: then it is necessary that the weak foot be made to sit on an equal place to the ground, or on a board: and it stands as if walking.
Then stand, and place your foot on whatever sticks out from those joints. Then press it with your foot with strength until it returns, and you perceive that it is now equal, and there appears no eminence at the place.
Then place under his foot a board which will take the whole foot, which has two ends. Then tighten the tight binding for three days. Then loosen it completely, and make him rest from walking for many days, until he is bound and secured by the reduction.
§ On the kinds of dislocation with the elbow or fracture.
When something happens from it, and you attempt its cure and restoration, often death follows, and for that reason, one should not presume over its cure of this kind, unless he is prudent in the art, merciful, pious, slow, not audacious, nor presumptuous, and use only initial medicines which provide only a slight warmth: and let the sick be released by divine judgment. Unless you understand, or hope for salvation from ruin with the gentleness of illness, and where something of hope appears. Therefore, strive for the reduction of it immediately at the beginning of the matter, before a hot apoplectic attack occurs.
If the member returns to its normal state, as we desire, then administer treatment to calm the swelling: and treat the wound with what is appropriate for it from dried ointments.
If there is a dislocation with a fracture, and the segments of the bone are separated, then try to remove them, and do what we said about simple illnesses from what preceded in those places.
And be brave according to your strength, and guard yourself from the entrance of fear: as my previous prediction to you said.
For that is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more beneficial to your body among them in your time.
