Now that I have completed this book for you, which is the latest work on medicine with additions thereto, and reached the end of it through his explanations and statements, it has seemed to me fitting to complete it for you with this tractate, which forms part of the operations, namely, surgery with the hand.
Since surgery with the hand is neglected in our region and entirely private at present, until perhaps the knowledge of it has perished and its trace has vanished; and there remain from it only a few descriptions in ancient books, which have been altered by hand, and it happens to them error and hesitation until the intentions are closed up and its sight extended: I have thought fit to revive it with the order of this tractate according to the way of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation; and that I should come to the forms of cautery instruments and the rest of the tools of work; with the addition of declarations and the elaboration of what is necessary.
Moreover, since a good master of this art with his own hand is not to be found in our time for the reasons mentioned above, it being that the science of medicine is long, and he who intends to practice it needs first to be trained in the knowledge of anatomy as described by Galen, until he knows the limbs' joints, forms, and their connection and separation, and has a knowledge of bones, nerves, tendons, the number of them, their exit, the pulsating and quiet places, and the exits of their vessels.
And because of this, Hippocrates said that "name is much with name, but little with work, especially in the art of the hand.
Indeed, we have already spoken of him at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not aware of what we have said about anatomy, will not succeed but will fall into error, which hurts people; as I have seen many among them, who boast themselves to be learned in this science, yet without knowledge and without experience.
This is because I have seen a stupid physician cut into a scrofulous swelling on a woman's neck and he injured some arteries in her neck; therefore the woman's blood flowed until she died in his hands.
And I have seen another physician who attempted to extract a stone from a man, who had been suffering for many years, and the stone was large.
So he went to him and extracted the stone with a chisel.
Why the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had been called to extract it as well; and I saw from the magnitude of the stone and the weakness of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another physician who received payment from a certain duke of our land for medicine; and there was a black eunuch with him whose leg was fractured near the ankle joint. The doctor acted in ignorance and tightened the fracture over the wound with bandages, and with strong binding pins, and did not allow the wound to heal.
He then released him according to his wishes.
He then released him after a few days and ordered him not to loosen the binding; and he remained in that state until his leg and foot healed, and it ended in disaster.
I was therefore called to him, and I acted to loosen the binding; and peace was achieved, and he was delivered from his pains.
However, the damage was already confirmed in the member; and I could not stop it.
So the corruption ceased its progress in the member until it perished.
And I saw another physician who cut into the cancerous sore; and it festered for days until the evil of his disease was magnified with the lord of the patient.
This is because when cancer is pure from melancholic humor, then it should not be approached with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can endure it, so that it may be cut off entirely.
And because of that Son, it is necessary for you to know that surgery is divided into two parts with the hand: namely, the operation that is associated with safety; and the operation through which there is danger in many positions. And I have now examined in every place of this book where comes the operation that is filled with fear and trembling.
Therefore it is necessary for you to be cautious of that, and examine yourself: so that the ignorant do not find a way to speak and dishonor.
Therefore take measure with caution and protection, and attend to your sick with ease and firmness, and use the better way leading to grace of God for salvation and a commendable succession: and dismiss terrible afflictions that are difficult to heal; and free your minds from what makes you afraid, so that hesitation may enter into your faith and comfort. Indeed, it remains more for your glory, and more sublime in this world, and ultimately for your numbers.
For Galen indeed said in some of his precepts. Do not treat a bad illness; do not call a bad doctor.
**First Chapter**
On incision and perforation, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and extraction of arrows and similar objects: and the entire chapter, arranged in the form of instruments.
**Third Chapter**
On restoration, dislocation, and cure of twists, and similar conditions: chapter arranged from head to foot, and forms of instruments.
To God alone be glory.
**Albucasis' Surgical Textbook**
**Part I**
¶ On healing and damage from cauterization: and what types of preparations are appropriate for it, and at what time; and if with iron or gold.
**Chapter I**
But before we proceed with the description of operations, it is necessary to speak of the quality of healing and damage (from cauterization), and in what type of preparation it should be exhibited.
I say therefore that the discussion of the quality of cauterization and its damage is a lengthy and subtle matter, a secret known only to those with knowledge.
Many learned men have also spoken about this and disagreed; however, I find their brief remarks sufficient, fearing that a longer discussion would lead to an unnecessary extension.
I say therefore that cauterization generally applies to every type of preparation that includes matter or is without matter; except for two types of preparations, which are the hot preparation without matter and the dry preparation without matter.
However, there is disagreement regarding the hot and dry preparation with matter.
Some have said that cauterization is beneficial for these.
And others said the contrary to him, namely that cautery is not suitable for a sickness that arises from heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat, and it is inappropriate to heal with heat and dryness when one is afflicted by hot and dry ailments.
And he who says the contrary to him replied: "Cautery provides a cure for every hot and dry sickness that befalls human bodies, since when you compare a human body and its humors to the fire's complexion, you find the human body cold.
And I say, based on his argument: because from my own experience, I have already extracted that several times.
However, one should not approach it unless they are already experienced and have practiced the last chapter on cautery, and understood the variety of human complexions, and the disposition of their ailments within themselves, and the causes of those ailments, and the events that befall them, and the time frame for those.
From the other complexions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet ailments. Indeed, all doctors have now agreed on these points, and they do not disagree about using cautery for them.
And know, my sons, that through the secret of healing by cautery with fire, and the goodness of cautery with medicine, fire is simple, whose action does not reach any other member except the one to be cauterized, and it does not harm another member joined to it, unless by a slight injury.
The action of surgery indeed reaches that which is elongated from the body part, and perhaps causes a difficult healing condition in the member or perhaps it kills it.
Fire, however, due to its subtlety and the quality of its substance, does not cause it unless it exceeds [the necessary amount].
Indeed, it is through experience that we have realized this, due to the length of service and study with the art, and the focus on the truth of things; and for that reason, I am excusing the length of this speech.
And know, children, that they disagree in the time when it is necessary to perform cauterization, and they set a better time for the true [healing].
And I say that cauterization is necessary at all times; for the damage that has occurred due to time is submerged in the healing that is attracted with cauterization.
And especially if cauterization is due to pains from necessary pains that are strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay; for it is feared from them that a greater evil may occur, than the minor damage that does not pass due to time.
And let not that fall in your minds, O sons, which they do not estimate, unless it be the common and foolish doctors, namely that the disease which is healed by cauterization does not always return: and they assign its consequence, and the matter is not as they think; because cauterization is not, unless in medicine which alters the complexion, and dries up the humors which are causes, wherefore pains happen.
Yet cauterization surpasses medicine in the swiftness of its healing power, and the strength of its operation, and the authority it wields: and it is possible that the disease returns at some point in time according to the complexion of the patient, and the location of the illness, and the strength of the latter: and what is prepared in the body from the accumulation of excesses therein: and what comes to itself through the acquisition of its causes from food, and similar things, unless a disease occurs in which cauterization is administered. A subtle disease in a member from the accumulation of few excesses and humors, such as cauterization on a tooth because of pain, or similar things; for it is possible that that pain does not return in it.
But that happens rarely.
But the common belief that cauterization is the last resort of medicine is incorrect; it does not refer to what they intend, for they believe there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other means after the occasion for cauterization has passed.
But the contrary is true; and the intent (of cautery) is that it is the last resort of medicine, not unless when we apply methods of treatment to certain illnesses, and they do not bring relief: then we apply cautery at the end, and it brings relief; then from that point on, it no longer holds true that cautery is the last resort of medicine, according to the understanding of the common people and many physicians.
However, the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; they did not say this unless because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its material; and they said that it does not cause pus to form at the site of cauterization. That is not entirely true; for I have already proven it and found that it does not always do so in certain bodies without others.
And cautery with gold itself is good and better than with iron, as they said.
However, when you perform cautery with fire using gold in a fire, it is not declared to you when the fire burns according to the quantity that you want, because of the redness of gold; and when it flies towards the cold itself and if you add more heat on top of it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
That is why the artisan falls away from that work; and because of that, cautery with iron has become more convenient and closer to us, from correctness towards practice.
And indeed I have now ordered this Chapter on Wound Care, according to the sections: and I have ordered them from head to foot, so that the seeker may find what he wants from it. **On the method of cauterization for the forehead in the coronal suture.**
**Head II.**
**Herein is described the cauterization which governs the balance of humidity and cold over the brain: these two are causes of sorrow, due to the abundance of flux of humours from the head towards the eyes and ears, and due to excessive sleep, toothache, and sore throat; and generally all diseases arising from cold, such as paralysis, and those from excessive heat, epilepsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments.**
**The method of cauterization is as follows: first, you must persuade the patient: so that he may be purified by three or four washings with a suitable medicine for the head, according to the needs of the patient's condition and age, and his usual custom.**
**Then instruct him to make incisions on his head with a scalpel.**
**Then have him sit between your hands in a cross-legged position, so that he has placed his hands on his chest.**
Then place the root of your palm on the root of your nose between your eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger touches, mark that place with an unhealed wound. Then use the cautery flame with oil: this is its form. Then place the same over the marked place with an unhealed wound, downward, as your hand is gradually tightened, and you turn it around.
Then quickly release your hand, and examine the place.
If you see that it has detached from the bone as much as a head or a hand, then release your hand.
And if not, repeat your hand with the same iron or another one if it gets cold: until you see the bones, which I told you.
Then add some salt, dissolve it in water, soak the cloth in it, and place it over the place, and leave it for three days.
Then place over it the cloth soaked in butter and leave it over the place until the scar from fire is destroyed. Then care for it with a four-ingredient ointment until it is healed.
They have said that the deeper and more open the wound remains, the more pus it emits; therefore, it is better and more curative.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the jaw; and hold the cautery until something of bone thickness is softened.
Then it is recommended after what is softened from the bone; then it is treated.
And others say that it is necessary to approach the cautery to the last, until it makes a deep impression in the jaw, so that the bone falls out, which is done like a horn; or an instrument that women use to enlarge the opening of their letters: and they estimate that vapors from this place leave the head, and the open wound heals over time.
Then it is treated until it is consolidated.
But I do not see these two types of cautery at all for some people except according to the way they fear.
And to let it go, for me, is better with the health of that very person.
The head is weakened by the dissolution of its natural continuity, as we have witnessed in other parts of the body, and especially when the head is naturally weak and infirm, the first species of cautery is more salutary and better for me, and that I use in operation; therefore, when using it, let it be for the sake of health.
Concerning the method of cauterizing the head, it should be done with regard to the pain throughout the head.
Head III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head and persists, becoming severe and using herbs, poultices, hot applications, oils, and other remedies fails to alleviate it.
And especially if it has already been cauterized with one of the cauteries we have mentioned and does not benefit from them, then consider this.
For if the weak head is of strong constitution by nature and is not infirm, and it feels no terrifying cold, then cauterize below with another cautery that is milder.
Then cauterize the entire head with its own cautery, without penetrating the skin, and expose the amount from the bone as we have mentioned.
And cauterize the same head with one cautery at the back of the head, in a place called the vas, which is where the blood flows, and raise your mother's strength in this, and you will not expose the bone.
The patient indeed finds himself because of that persistent pain, and various from the pain of all other parts of the head.
And I will say this for the cautery in its place: and it should be cautery, by which the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head more gently with cautery, by which is cauterized the middle of the head.
And this is its form.
§ Regarding the cauterization of hemicranias, both with hot medicine as well as with iron.
Head IV.
When a painful and persistent sensation occurs in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and is relieved by medicines that cleanse the head, and the remaining treatment is given as I described in the divisions of ailments, without affecting the whole, then cauterization should be performed on it according to two methods: either with hot medicine burning it; or with iron. The cautery with hot medicine burning it is to take a single tooth from another, and remove its own skin, and cut off its extremities from both sides.
Then, cut the place of pain with a phlebotomist's side, until it becomes a place under the skin where the tooth is caught.
Therefore, introduce him into the same under the skin until it is hidden. Then tighten over it with a small constrictive tie and leave it for fifteen hours. Afterward, dissolve it and extract another one, and leave the scar for two or three days. Afterwards, place a poultice soaked in butter on top of it until the wound produces pus. Finally, treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you want to do it with some burning medicines, as I have written in the twelfth chapter of the treatise on "Medicine for Wounds", then do so.
The cauterization of it with iron is indeed done in this manner.
The Fire Cautery, whose form is this one.
And it is called the Claw (Clavilis), because its form resembles a claw, in which there is something of inflammation, and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
Then place it over the spot and hold your hand, and slowly turn the iron with velocity. And the amount that is cauterized should be according to the thickness of the skin, like its midpoint.
And then withdraw your hand so as not to burn the artery below, and avoid a flow of blood.
Then he should soak the cloth in salt water and place it on the wound, leaving it for three days. Then he should remove the cloth with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until it heals. And if it is necessary, cauterize this headache with the tip of a knife according to the rule of cautery.
And be careful from the incision of the artery in this headache, not too deep.
§ On the method of cauterization in old headaches.
Head V.
When treating a headache, as we have said in the previous treatment and in dividing diseases, if the treatment does not help, and you see that the disease is not sufficient for what we said about the first cauterization with medicine or with fire, then it is necessary to use the cautery knife until it becomes white after making signs on the place of pain with a line, whose length is the middle finger, or something like that. And place your hand once and tighten it until you cut the artery and reach the jaw. However, you must be careful not to cauterize the continuity of the jawbone, which moves during chewing, or the side, or the nerve that moves it, otherwise a spasm may occur.
And it should be over the guard and caution of the flow of blood from the artery, which has been cut off.
Indeed, in cutting it, there is fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is neither studious nor expert, and thus he relinquishes the operation to someone else at first.
And I come with the remembrance of the management of the flow of blood from the artery according to its manner and in the place of this book.
Which if you see from the disease, that it does not suffice this cautery, and you see the body enduring the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said, take care of the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we said in the chapter on extracting the artery with a cautery holder having two knives.
Indeed, cautery is better with these tools and more effective. § Regarding the cauterizing of the pain in gold.
Chapter VI. When there is pain in the gold from cold, and it is cured with solutions, and the remaining cure as we said in division, and the pain does not go away, then apply the fire cautery: and that is what is called the Point, whose form is this.
Then, after igniting the point, it should be placed around the entire ear, as it was shown; or around both ears if pain is felt in either or both at the same time.
Then, using the cautery, stretch it from the root of the ear, after marking the spots with wax, and let the cautery be ten points in length on every ear, approximately as much.
Then care for the wounds until they heal.
# On Cauterization in Surgery
Chapter VII
The surgery that is cured by cauterization is not other than a certain kind of condition arising from phlegm, as we mentioned in the classification of ailments. And for the species of cauterization due to desiccation and spasm of the nerve.
When you treat this species of torture with burning, and applying salves, and gargarisms, and your treatment does not bring relief, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected part three times with hot instruments: one at the root of the ear, a second just below its natural position, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery from the opposite part of the infirmity.
For softening does not occur unless it is in the part that appears healthy.
And the shape of cauterization is such that it cauterizes the same cautery in a straight line at the extreme end of the upper ear under the forehead, and at another time; its length should be according to the length of the thumb.
And place your hand with the cautery until the amount of burning reaches half the thickness of the skin.
And this is the form of cautery, and it is a kind from a knife, whose shape has been mentioned: however, it should not be too thin as you see, and there should be a little excess thickness on the knife. Then take care of the place with what has been mentioned until it heals.
# Regarding the method of cauterization in ancient apoplexy.
Chapter VIII.
When apoplexy becomes ancient and your treatment does not help, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries over every horn of his head, and a cautery in the middle of his head, as mentioned, and another cautery at the back of his head, according to what has been said, and the method of cauterization should be according to what has preceded.
It is also cauterized with a cauterizing iron over the stomach's opening: and this is the final method.
Then it is treated with what preceded it.
§ On the method of cauterization in oblivion.
Chapter IX.
It is necessary that in the first instance, great wounds of the bowels receive a quantity sufficient to cleanse the brain, and also small pills which purify the mind.
Then clean the whole head and place over its forehead a plaster of glue described in the treatise on plasters; apply it several times. The very same is the method of cauterization: and perform it according to the same order that I mentioned there. If therefore it is cured by that, then it is good.
If not: then perform three cauterizations on the posterior part of his head, which extend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye; and place between each cauterization the thickness of a finger.
Then comes the care of cauterization, together with what preceded it.
However, if you wish to add it, and the patient can tolerate it: then perform cauterization in the middle.
If you wish to add it: then cauterize the same over the two horns.
Then comes the care of the wound, until it is healed: and cauterization should be repeated according to the form that has been described.
§ Regarding the method of cauterization in paralysis, and its softening.
Head X.
It is necessary that you proceed with the purification of the head with herbs, and as we have said.
Then care for the head of the patient: afterwards, cauterize the wound with hot iron in the middle of the head, and with hot iron over every horn of the head, and with hot iron over its posterior part, and three times over the spinal bones of the neck.
However, if you need to soften the body from other diseases, and the patient can tolerate it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize with four hot irons over the spinal bones of the back, and with the last cautery, until much of its skin is burned, and then remove your hand.
Then care for the wound until it heals, and thus apply oil to the cauterization.
**On the method of cauterization for epilepsy.**
**Chapter XI.**
An epileptic should not be cauterized except for that whose epilepsy arises from phlegm. Therefore it is necessary for the surgeons to first explore his brain with their instruments, and with the rest of the care that we have mentioned in division; when the patient's condition is severe, or he is tolerant of medication.
But if it is a boy who does not tolerate medication, then gargles and brain-cleansing chewing should be administered for many days beforehand with the aid of food that has been prepared in a good way.
Then wash his head, afterwards cauterize it with a single cautery in the middle of the head, according to what has been mentioned before regarding the method; and another cautery on its back, and over every horn of his head with cautery.
If however the patient is strong and tolerant, then he should be cauterized with the cauteries that I have mentioned regarding paralysis, and the softening of the body over the spines of the neck and back; and let the cautery be oiled according to the method that has been mentioned before. If, however, the patient is a young boy, then apply a fine cautery in this manner.
**On the manner of cauterization in melancholia.**
**Head XII.**
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize them with cautery, as we said regarding paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of melancholic humors and the body is weakened by moisture, then give it something that purifies its brain, as we said before in separation; then shave the head of the afflicted person, and make afterwards a properly shaped turban of linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head, and the afflicted person should sit square on all sides.
Now apply the liniment. And it is better from an ancient butter.
And heat it over a tempered fire to the extent that the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it.
Then he should moisten it thoroughly in the center of his head with a circular motion, and leave it until it hardens.
He should do that with the weak patient every week once, following the rest of his regimen well, until he is healed.
Or if not, he should cauterize it by making many small punctures on it, besides holding a hot iron, deep down where it smells bad.
This kind of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then he should place a cloth soaked in butter, or chicken fat, on top of it.
§ In the manner of cauterization with descending water towards the eye.
Head XIII.
When the beginning of water in the eye is declared to you by the signs which I mentioned in division, then begin and wash the weak patient, with that which will cleanse his head.
And keep it from all moistures, and make it sit in a bath, during several days of fasting.
Then command her to shave her head and burn it in the middle of her skull. Next, burn it with two hot iron tools if there is simultaneous capture of the water descent in both eyes; or from one side if the water is captured in only one eye; and cut away with the cautery all veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the burns be long in width on the temporals, and dry up the blood flow.
If you see anything from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible, and I come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, cutting them off, and guarding against the flow of blood.
And when it is burned into the flesh, under two bones, with the last two hot iron tools.
**On the method of burning in ancient tears.**
**Chapter XIV.**
When the tears of the eyes are old, continuous, and when they affect the veins and arteries that are clearly visible on the outside of the head, this is due to excessive cold phlegm; then burn with the same iron tool that I described at the beginning of water descent, with a burn in the middle of the head, and with two hot iron tools over each temporal, and with two hot iron tools under two bones.
And if you need to add to it, then cauterize it carefully on every side with a small cautery, above the end of the eyebrow.
**On the method of cauterization for a nosebleed.**
**Chapter 15.**
When you treat it with what we mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not help: then make the patient drink a remedy containing three parts of weak wine for three nights; afterward, shave his head and cauterize the wound with a middle-sized cautery, using olive oil as the cautery.
Then cauterize the wound with two-pronged cautery above the two eyebrows, just beneath the hairline.
And be careful not to injure the artery.
And this is the form of the two-pronged cautery.
**On the method of cauterization for soothing the eyelid.**
**Chapter 16.**
When the eyelid becomes softened due to inflammation or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery, using this cautery in the shape of a crescent moon.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with a few burns on every part; and they will be elongated from the two timbers, and let the length of every burn be according to the length of the eyebrow, and do not use your last hand with the burn, but rather according to the amount that is dried up by the third eyelid.
And this is the form of the burn according to this method of lunar burn.
§ On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs are pointing inward towards the eye. Head XVII.
The burn on this is according to two methods: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
But in the burn with fire, first of all, the patient should be made to let go of his hairs, if there are any that are removing them, until they lengthen and equalize. If, however, they are burning him near his origin: then close his eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move until they have healed.
When they have healed and equalized, then put the head of the patient in your lap: then mark over the eyelids of his eyes with wax, as a sign that it is according to the shape of the myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs.
Then place a cloth soaked in albumen or in the mucus of psylli over the eye.
Then use a fire-brand whose shape is like this.
Then cauterize over the shape that you have marked gradually on many wounds until the surface of the skin is burned, which appears like the form of a myrtle leaf entirely.
And the sign of health of your work is that if you notice the eyelid already contracting and hairs growing at the site of the eye's puncture.
So free your hand then and leave it alone for three days.
Then place a cloth with butter on it over it until the scar is eradicated.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
If any of the hairs return after an hour and the eyelid softens: then repeat the cauterization over that place as you did at first.
But if the hairs are below: then cauterize it until it is driven to its natural place and it regrows so that the hairs do not pierce the eye.
On the method of cauterization when a medicinal fire is used in the same case.
**Chapter XVIII**
It is necessary to urge the patient to pull out the hairs until they are completely extended and equalized.
Make a shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth.
Then take soap known to be free from lime, and a weight of one ounce or something like that, then apply it with gentle friction, and do so quickly so as not to become cold.
Then spread it out from that [mixture] onto the cloth you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one or both eyes.
And place under the eye a cloth dipped in egg white, and let the patient's head rest in your lap.
And place your index finger on the medicine, and gently press it.
And you move it whenever the patient feels a stinging from the medicine, for its sting is like fire.
While he persists in this thing that he has discovered, then abandon the medicine and move it away with your finger.
When the bite has ceased, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And then consider that if you see the eyelids rising as they do when contracted with heat or a cut, it is good; but if not, then repeat the application of medicine over that place where the medicine has not taken hold or faded until your operation is complete and the eye is contracted.
Then place a poultice of butter over it until the burning of the skin is eradicated.
Then care for it with a diaphanous ointment or any other until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to guard the final guard so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye.
If after a few days the eyelid becomes soft and something from the hair fights into the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place which is softening from the eyelid as you did at first.
Then care for it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And know that the eyes of humans differ in size and shape.
Therefore, according to that, your consideration should be such that the path of righteousness is not hidden from him who studies this art.
§ On the method of cauterization for the tear duct fistula.
Chapter XIX.
When you treat a fistula, because of what we have said concerning the division of illnesses, and your treatment does not help, then you should cauterize it in this manner.
Advise the patient to place his head in your lap and hold his head with both hands, so that it does not move or be agitated when he holds his own head.
Then place the soaked cloth on his forehead or in the thin mucilage over his eye: then apply the cauterizing iron, which has this shape.
It should be concave, just like the shape of a quill from one end to the other when it is cauterizing: and if it is penetrating all the way to the other end or if it is trying upwards, then it is incorrect.
However, this cut is better suited for your purpose.
Then place a hot iron on it, which is made to ignite very much.
And hold it with your hand for a little while near the iron by the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not slip or disturb the patient; and place the hot iron on the eyelid and burn it.
If therefore you reach the end of your hot iron up to the mouth, it will be good.
And if not: then repeat the hot iron once or twice, as you need; and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cloth with butter, and take care of it with a drying ointment until it heals. If after forty days it does not heal: then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed; and shave it according to what has come to its chapter.
And there is another method of cauterization of the fistula, which some have called the first.
Intent on the location of the fistula, find it and then insert a fine needle (a 'cannula') into the fissure itself, which is shaped like this.
And insert into it a quantity of melted lead (a drachma), holding your hand firm with good grip on the needle, so that the patient does not move at all to prevent the liquid lead from entering his eye.
And it is necessary that you place over the patient's eye a cloth soaked in either albumen or water.
Lead will burn the site of the fistula and heal it with a wonderful cure.
Which, if the fistula is healed through cauterization and treatment as we have said, is good.
And if that does not happen, then it is necessary to administer a nasal hole and bring the fistula back to run with the nose, according to where it will reach its own place.
# On the method of cauterization in lip cracks.
Chapter XX.
Many times accidents occur in the split of the lip, which are called pilings, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these fissures, as we have said regarding the division of the illness, and if treatment does not help, then use a small cautery knife in this form.
And the depth of it should be according to the thinness of the knife.
Then take care of the wound with bandages until it heals.
## On Cauterizing Oral Fissures
Chapter XXI.
When an abscess occurs in the root of the gum, or on the palate, or among the roots of teeth; then it forms pus and bursts; afterward it becomes infected, and pus flows, and a fissure is formed; then, if treatment does not help it, one must use hot irons according to the size that enters into the fissure.
Then insert the burning steel into the fistula's opening and hold your hand until the burning iron reaches its depth and its tip: do this once or with two strokes.
Then take care of it afterward, as we said about the treatment until it is cured.
If therefore the gangrened part is cut off and healed, it will be good.
And if that does not help, then it is necessary to remove the place and take away the corrupted bone as it comes to its head.
§ Regarding the cauterization of the gingiva and the softening of the teeth.
Chapter XXII.
When the gingiva softens due to moisture and the teeth become loose, and all care with medicines does not help, then put the sick head in your lap.
Then apply the hot cautery, whose shape will come after these actions, so that you place a tube over the tooth and insert the burning cautery quickly into it, and hold your hand for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching to the root of the tooth.
And then lift up your hand: afterwards repeat the cautery several times, as you see fit.
Then the patient should fill their mouth with water and salt, and hold it for one hour, and then spit it out.
For the tooth, motion is fixed, the gums, having become softened, tighten, and thus the corrupted moisture dries up.
Head XXIII.
When the toothache is due to coldness, or there is a chill, or a fracture, and treatment with medicines does not help, then cautery should be applied in two ways: either with butter, or with fire.
The cautery with butter is to take the melted butter, and boil it in a brass vessel or in tubes.
Then take a cloth, and wrap the affected part tightly.
Then immerse the affected part in boiling butter: and place it eagerly over the aching tooth, and hold it until it becomes numb: then repeat several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse the cloth or bandage in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth; then place a hot iron on top of it, until the fire reaches the depths of the tooth's cavity.
Its cauterization with fire, however, is to be aimed at the air tube or the iron tube. And it should be placed in the body in such a way that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the lower jaw.
Then apply the cauterizing fire, whose form will come together, and place it on that tooth; hold your hand until the cautery freezes.
Do that several times, as the pain will be moved, or on the same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary for the impression of that cautery to fill the sick mouth with good butter, and hold it for a certain time, then spit it out.
And this is the form of cautery.
Cauterize with whatever extreme means possible; this is the form of the cannula.
On the method of cauterization in straphulae.
**Chapter XXIV**
When straphulae (staph infections) are caused by phlegm, cold humidities, and do not yield to treatment with medicines or quick digestion, then apply a cauterizing iron of this form.
It should have two open ends so that smoke can escape from one end while the other is lit; place it on the affected area once, and then a second time if necessary, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then apply the cauterizing iron according to its size.
Then leave it for three days, and apply a cloth soaked in butter on top; do this until the burned tissue is removed.
Then care for it with a dental ointment until the shape of the canal is healed.
On the method of cauterization for hoarseness and constriction of the throat.
**Chapter XXV**
When moistures are trapped above the lung channel, and especially when it is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be made to evacuate with the first use of dissolvable medicines.
Then, he cauterizes the affected area just below the root of the throat in a depressed place, and be careful not to come into contact with the cautery either with your throat or your skin, unless it is absolutely necessary.
Then, he cauterizes the affected area with another cautery at the joint of the neck, ending at its last spine, and the cautery should be made in a lock according to the manner that preceded it.
Then, he continues to care for it with what preceded until it is healed.
§ On the method of cauterization in lung diseases and coughing.
Head 26.
When coughing and lung disease are caused by cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or phthisis, nor is it an old illness, then he should cauterize the affected area with two cauteries above the furcula in depressed places, with forceps and hooks.
And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts, and the cautery should be a tube according to the form that preceded it.
And if your cauterization by puncturing with a cautery, called the Punctum, precedes in puncturing the pain of the ear: and the punctures are from thirty punctures up to almost others.
Then care for the wound itself with what preceded it, until it is healed. And now it has three branches according to this form.
Why should the cauterization be done with it when you make one stroke with three cauteries.
§ Regarding the method of cauterization in Titillico, in the dislocation of the shoulder.
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to moisture and does not form itself back to its place within the allotted time until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement that occurs as we have just witnessed it, at that time it is necessary that you reduce the dislocation in the first instance.
Then the patient should lie down on his back or side of the healthy body.
Then raise the skin, which is inside the Titillico towards the upper parts with your left hand's fingers: and if the joint dislocates to the inner side.
Next, having a cautery instrument with two tubes of fire. What is the form of this?
Next, he cauterizes the wound until it penetrates to another side and reaches a four-sided shape of cauterization.
And when the cauterization is done with an instrument having three tubes of fire, then the shape of cauterization becomes six-sided, and the tubes are according to the thickness they have been drawn through.
And this is the form of the instrument having three tubes of fire.
And when one is added beyond this manner, then the number of cauteries becomes eight.
Next, place crushed salt over the cautery.
Next, apply the bandage to hold the patient still so that the member does not move until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts and it rarely occurs, then cauterize the same part of the bone with a hot iron, or make many small punctures with cauteries.
When the union is strengthened, and moisture is removed, the patient is healed.
**On the method of cauterization of the stomach.**
**Head XXVIII.**
When cold and great moisture occur in the stomach, until they extract it from its condition, and increase discharge to it, and persistent treatment is not effective; then the patient should turn over on his back, and stretch out his legs, and his hands.
Then cauterize with three cauteries, a cautery under the chest in the shape of a shell with a finger's worth of cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the single cautery, until it comes to a triangular shape of the cauteries.
And stretch between them so that they do not stick together when they form pus. And the depth of the cautery should be the thickness of two-thirds of the skin's depth.
And let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without addition; and if you wish to cauterize a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery that is made for doing this cautery be one cautery according to the circular shape according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by puncturing it which is troubled by this cautery: and it is like marks on the stomach a point according to the quantity, as if with wax when encaustic is used; then cauterize it itself with the cautery of the point; then treat it itself with the cure that preceded until it is healed.
Regarding the manner of cauterization, use a cold iron.
Chapter 29.
When, in the liver, pain occurs from cold and moisture, or from excessive swelling, until it expels its excess by a natural process, and the sick person is cured as we have said, but it does not profit him, then he must lie on his back over his head, and make signs with encaustic three cauterizations according to this figure, and the same quantity below the hypogastric region from where the cubit of man extends; and let there be space between every cautery according to the thickness of a finger: and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And the quantity of it that is to be cauterized should be according to the thickness of the skin, half as much not to add; and let the sick person stand on his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him lie down, who has already stretched his legs and raised his arms. This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to use this cautery with a surgical knife when you possess subtlety and caution in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too far in cauterization, so that the thickness of the skin does not become extreme, affecting the whole body and reaching the intestines; for the skin there is delicate, so know this.
# On the method of cauterization for the liver.
Chapter XXX.
When it happens that there is a detachment, and you need to know if this apostema is within the flesh of the liver or its tunica: then if it is in the flesh of the liver, a severe pain appears, without sharpness; and if it is in the tunica of the liver, the pain has a sharp quality. And now you see that it exhausted his doctors' treatment.
Therefore, the patient must lie down on his back.
Then, the shape of the location of the apostema with wax; then, light the cautery that is similar to a radiograph.
And this is the form of it.
And it should be cauterized with one cautery until the whole skin is burned and it reaches the sinuses, until all the pus is discharged; then the care should turn to the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
And this method of cauterization should not be used unless one has studied medicine and dealt with these diseases many times; then, and only then, should they dare to perform such an operation.
To leave it alone is better for me.
## On Cauterization for Pleurisy.
Chapter 31.
The ancients said that cauterization with the roots of aristolochia was used for cold pleurisy according to this method.
And it is, as you receive the roots of dried aristolochia, to take one root longer, which is found from that, and it should be like the thickness of a finger.
Then dip it in oil; then light it on fire.
Then he cauterizes it with one cautery in the area between the fork's continuation and the neck, and with two small cauteries beneath the guides at a slight slope towards the part that is under the beard.
And with two cauteries as well in the area between the fifth and sixth ribs towards the back a little, and another cautery in the middle of the chest, and another one above the stomach.
And with three cauteries from the back: one in the area between the two blades, and two cauteries from the two sides of the chest, below the cautery that is between the two blades.
And it is not necessary to press your hand with the cautery, indeed, it should be applied openly onto the skin, smelling of burning. And certain ancient people have said that there are men who use a cautery made of a similar iron rod: they ignite it and insert it into the area between the ribs until it reaches the specific point, and then it is withdrawn, and the pus comes out, as we have said regarding the epigastrium.
But in this procedure with the cautery, there is a fear that either the patient dies immediately, or an abscess forms at the site, which does not heal.
**On the Method of Cauterization: The Splen (Spleen) Head 32.**
When you treat a spleen illness, because of what we said regarding dividing the illness from treatment, and your treatment does not help, then cauterize it in those three ways, which are all correct.
The first way is to make three or four cuts along the length of the spleen according to the shape of the smaller livers, of which the shape precedes.
And for all cauterizations, the thickness should be that of a finger, or more or less.
And the manner of cauterization, as we said regarding the cauterization of the liver, should be equal.
And do not compress your hand with the cauterization; let the patient be lying on their back.
And another way of cauterization is as follows: having a fire with two flames, as we said in the chapter on the dislocation of the humerus, and raise the skin which is directly on the spleen where the inferior left cubit meets, and your elevation should be such that the cautery falls according to the length of the body.
Then insert two burning flames deeply, until they penetrate the skin from the other side; then extract the cautery; thus, four cauteries are made. And if you use cauterization with another cautery, holding three wounds.
Then, after releasing the pus for many days, care for the cautery, for it is more effective than any that have come before from treatment.
§ On the method of cauterization for hydrops.
Chapter XXXIII.
The cautery does not fall on hydrops unless it is properly applied.
When you treat hydrops with the modes of treatment that we have mentioned in division, and the cure does not turn out, then it is necessary to use four cauterizations around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another on the epigastrium, one over the spleen, and two behind the back between the spines, and one directly on the chest, and another directly on the stomach; and let the depth of the cautery be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then, release the open cautery so that it emits pus over a long time.
And do not delay the weak from treatment after cauterization with it; for it is necessary that two intentions be united to it, and it will hasten to itself with the aid of God towards healing.
The form of the cautery iron with which the abdomen is seared should be curved; it should follow the shape that has gone before. And the form of that with which the back is seared should be oily; it should follow the shape that has come before.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the feet and crurs: Chapter XXXIIII.
When they have been dipped in hydropic and replenished with citron water: it is necessary to sear over the back of the foot at the instep, which is between the ankle and the toe joints; then raise your hand with the cautery, without twisting it, and afterwards raise your hand again, without touching it at all.
The citron water will revive, and the cautery should be according to this form.
Then make two cauteries on each of the two crurs at every crur, and let the cautery be done with the tip of the cautery knife; and let the cautery be according to the length of the crur, one below the knee and the other lower down, roughly in the middle of the crur; and make two cauteries over all the coxa; and leave the open cautery without care for a long time, so that some water may heal from it; then take care of the cautery as we have said with the others.
Regarding the method of cauterizing in the abdominal solution: Chapter XXXv.
When the solution of the entrails has been affected by cold and humours, until the vital forces that retain and digest in the stomach and intestines become weakened, it is not truly healed but only cured, and you see the patient bearing the marks of burning vitality. Then burn that part with a great cauterizing iron over its own stomach, as was done previously with the cauterization of the stomach using a circular cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel, with a fine clavicle cautery; or with one large cautery above the anus, or two cauteries.
And if you see excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then burn that part with a cautery over the chest, and a cautery over every rib; and perhaps add two small cauteries over the stomach near the larger one.
Healing is indeed effective, whose strength does not waver.
**On the method of cauterizing hemorrhoids.**
Chapter XXXVI.
When there are many old hemorrhoids, or one large one, derived from thick, cold, or corrupted humours, and they are treated as we have said in division, but do not improve: then burn three times over the lower spine near the anus slightly triangular, and a cautery under the navel like two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled and his food not digested, and you see his face turn pale, then apply a large causter over his stomach as previously described; and another causter over his bowels, and a third over his spleen, with a caustic knife. Leave the open causter for some time, then take care of him until he is healed.
In addition to the caustics, it is important to follow proper procedures after the removal of these parts.
**Chapter 37**
When you remove the whole (part), then light the caustic that is similar to a brand.
Then insert the burning caustic into the whole part that has been removed; and with your last hand, continue until the caustic reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows: do this once or twice. If therefore there are many (parts), then cauterize each one with a causter as we have described.
Then take care of them with ointments until they heal.
And if you apply a large causter over the flame (part), it is the last resort in the treatment.
On cauterizing a fistula in the anus.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the patient does not obey the instructions given for the section and operation described in its place, and is disturbed by it, perhaps he will be cured by cauterization.
When therefore a fistula has occurred in anyone and become old, pus runs from it, and corrupted humors are discharged.
Accordingly, it is right that the fistula be probed with a delicate instrument.
Then determine the depth of it with the probe.
Then apply the cautery iron, which is similar to a radius.
Then insert the very hot iron into the fistula itself, and determine how far the clamp has entered. And repeat the cauterization over it until all those corrupt bodies are consumed, once, or twice, or three times, according to your need.
And beware of burning the nerve, if it is there, or a large vein; or if the fistula extends to the urinary body, or to the intestinal body, then guard yourself from these places altogether.
And do not perform this unless there is a fistula in a fleshy part, and you think that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
If, however, the place is sealed and the materials are removed from it, and it remains like this for a long time, then know that it has already healed completely.
And if the materials do not separate from it, then know that it is penetrating, or there is a deep hole corrupted in it, or as if those (materials) remain in their place.
§ On cauterizing wounds (a method).
Chapter 39.
When there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or excessive heat, and they are weakened by it, then one should cauterize (the affected area) with a hot iron over the kidneys themselves, with a cautery knife over each kidney, whose memory precedes it.
And perhaps we cauterize (the kidney) again with a second hot iron in the same instrument.
Therefore three lines (will appear or be evident).
Therefore, they will be more extreme in their treatment.
On the method of cauterizing the vesica (bladder).
Chapter XL. When there is weakness and relaxation in the bladder due to cold and moisture until it cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the upper side of the bladder where the hairs begin to grow, and use a iron from the right side and another from the left side; let the length of this cauterization be according to the size of a thumb knot. And cauterize it on the lower back with an iron or two if necessary, following the same method as before.
On the method of cauterizing the matrix (uterus). Chapter XLI.
When there is cold and moisture in the matrix that prevents conception and disrupts her menstruation, causing delay in its onset, so that pain occurs upon their arrival (menstruation), then it should be cauterized with three irons around the navel, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and with an iron on the lower back, or two irons if necessary; let the cauterization be in the shape of a key.
On the method of cauterizing an anch (nerve) in a dislocation.
**Head XLII.**
When the humors of the mucous membrane are discharged into the anchor (nerve), they become the cause of its exit from its place; and this is indicated by the foot being prolonged over the other when they are compared together; and the place of dislocation is found hollow in it.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weak part above the anchor with a similar circular cautery; after you have marked with wax around the anchors, as it is customary; and so that the anchor itself falls in the middle of the circle.
And this cautery, whose form precedes in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize it with three cauteries, with a large oil cautery; and make the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin throughout.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
**On the method of cauterizing in Sciatica.** Chapter XLIII.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient should be treated as we mentioned in division, but if this does not bring relief and the condition worsens, then the patient must be relieved of the thick humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial pills and similar remedies.
Then apply a cauterization.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two modes: either cauterization with medicines that cause burning or cauterization with fire.
Cauterization with fire is according to many modes.
One of these methods is to cauterize over the ankle joint with three triangular cauterizations, in this form.
And make a good or bad depth for them.
And let the space between each cauterization be the thickness of a finger; and the cautery should be oily.
However, a cauterization is made in the middle over the top of the ankle joint itself.
Why are there four incisions?
And if you use an incision in the form of a circle, whose shape precedes the dislocation of the bone, there should be one, so that the circle contains the whole bone.
And burn the thickness of the skin throughout.
This is the method of incision in sciatica, when the pain adheres to the bone itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends to the thigh and leg, then make two incisions on the side [of the thigh], above the place where the patient feels pain, and a third incision with your four fingers towards the outer part of the thigh; this is called a scalpel incision. And the depth of the incision should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the patient feels that the pain extends nearly to the toes, then make an incision there where he feels it, with a point, or three points, or four, or as many as needed.
And if he feels the pain beneath the knee towards the leg, then make an incision there with a single scalpel.
And be sure, in every cauterization that you perform, not to burn the final nerves or great arteries, and draw them through this to the inferior damage, or contraction.
And indeed I have seen many who have cauterized the wound, and ended up with cauterization, so much so that the foot was inflated until a tumor developed in it, and it was completely perforated and corrupted; then there was a rupture of the abdomen, and death followed afterward.
If there is pain in both parts at the same time, cauterize them both according to this manner.
And some wise men have said about cauterizing the anchor, whose cauterization is this method.
Make a similar one from iron, whose diameter is half a palm; and it should be near its opening according to the thickness of the finger, or a little less; and within that third part should be third part again.
And let the space between each part be equal to the length of the thumb; and make the parts open from both sides; and let their height be about a knot, or two knots; and make them a handle out of well-suited iron for the parts.
And this is its form.
Then it is heated over fire until it blazes and emits sparks. Then it is placed over the ashes of a weak patient lying on his healthy side.
Therefore, cauterize him with three round scalds in one application.
Then leave it alone for three days.
After that, apply a paste with butter and leave the open wound for many days.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says, "With this kind of cauterization, we are little used to it because of the fear caused by its appearance, and also because few people have learned to apply it.
Nevertheless, there is benefit from good cauterization for one who endures it, and he will find its place.
Cauterization with medicines is when you make two identical pieces of perforated metal, into which the pivot of its door descends from brass, or iron, of the length of the wall; and there are two knots, or something like them, at their height.
And there should be a space between both pieces of the thickness of a finger, open below and above, and they should contain each other according to this form.
Then he lays her down on the side of the sick person with the healthy side facing up.
And press your hand firmly over the side of the anchor.
Then make incisions between two circles using warm water heated with fire for a short while, and keep it there for as long as an hour: the patient will bear both the cutting and the burning because the pain itself is like fire until it subsides.
Then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the warm water from the anchor entirely with sweet water; then leave it for three days.
Place butter on it until the burning blackness disappears; then leave it for several days until pus flows from it.
This is indeed the ultimate remedy.
Then tend to it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip or the leg: make a support for it that holds water, just as you did with the anchor, equally on both sides.
And this is the way of hot water, and I have already written about it in the book on medical rectifications.
Take some alkali and unburned lime, each one part; clean both of them and put them in a new pot, with its lower part perforated with a small hole, according to the quantity that is to enter it; and place beneath the bottom of the pot another pot emptied: then throw over the alkali and lime water from sweet water, which submerges both by means of a finger: after which you compress them well with your hand and let go of the pot until the sharp water descends to the lower part of the emptied pot.
Then add all that water and throw it over another lime; and continue until it renews itself.
It is indeed then very sharp and acute, which is administered in many operations of medicine, and in the cauterization of the rest of the members.
Because it performs the operation of fire itself.
And there are medicines with which large wounds are cauterized, such as pitch, and turpentine, and myrrh, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen, narrating, revealed that a certain man from the ancients used a cure for which he had treated the pain of the hip and sciatic vein, and praised it as being very magnificent.
And he said that it did not need another cure, and that he was healed at once, until he returned, because perhaps he had entered the bath having been washed, and emerged from it already healthy. And it is taken from a fresh, green plant; if not found fresh, it is taken dry and recent, and heated with much fat, and placed over the affected area, be it pain in the foot or leg or hip, and bound, and left for three hours, or as much as the patient feels relief from the heat.
Then insert it into the bath.
When, therefore, the body becomes moist, insert it into the bed.
For the pain retreats and it is healed.
And know this, for it is not necessary that anyone use a caustic with these medicines unless after evacuating the body.
And Dioscorides, who said that goat dung, when used with a caustic on the sciatic vein, gives relief, and the caustic is made in this way.
Take wool, imbue it with old oil, and place it over the deep spot that is between the toe and the ankle, and closer to the ankle.
Then take dry goat dung, ignite it in fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wound and leave it until it is healed.
Then repeat this.
Do not cease to do this until complete healing is achieved and the pain has subsided.
And this method of healing is called the vaccination burn.
§ On the burning of the back's pain.
Chapter 44.
Sometimes a severe pain occurs in the back for many reasons, whether from accident or sudden jolt or excessive evacuation, and similar causes; and the burning does not cease unless in this special case which arises from the injection of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the feverish type and similar conditions, three lines should be drawn on the back where the pain is located, according to its width, and signs made with wax in every line; five or more burns, according to the amount of strength the nurse can tolerate, should then be made through these signs, and the burning completed when the cauterization is done.
And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with a cautery, using a claw-shaped cautery on the midline.
**On the method of cauterization for severe gangrene.**
**Head XLV.**
This disease often occurs in young children.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that a contraction occurs above them in the act of breathing, and movement; and you will find it in the lower spine and its knots, which begin to protrude above the rest of the vertebrae.
When you therefore see that, and wish to do that, then cauterize the very spot with a circular cautery according to this form.
And let the cautery take hold over all parts of the vertebrae equally; and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebrae with a point cautery, make two or three dots, and they should be close together.
Then take care of the place until it is healed as we said.
And beware, do not apply cautery to the deformity that occurs in a spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterization for podagra and joint pains. Chapter XLVI.
When joint pains are caused by cold dampness that spreads to any part of the body, and when there are pains in the feet, it is the custom of physicians to call it podagra properly.
When podagra is caused by cold, treatment should be applied in such a way that the pains are not removed, but rather cauterization is used to alleviate them.
And it is done that after the evacuation of the joint of the feet, cauterization is applied with many cautery instruments, and this cauterization is with oil.
The form of which this is.
And if you need to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cautery point.
Should the pains rise up to the knees, or other joints, and this occurs frequently, then cauterize the whole knee with three cautery instruments, or four from every side, using the same cautery iron as for the claw. If you need more than one of this cautery for your purpose, then cauterize them all. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery, but place it only around the thickness of the skin.
If however the pains rise to the knees and back: then administer what we said of cautery in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then make points around with a flame, as two lines are resolved.
If however there remains pain in the fingers, then make points on them, over every knot point, and over the palm of the hand.
If however the pains rise after days to the cubits or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not disregard the weak from good management, from receiving medicines.
For if good management is done, and the phlegm is drawn out, it will be healed with God's help using this cautery.
**On the method of cauterization in ruptures.**
Chapter XLVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, and the intestine or the scrotal sac descends towards the testicle, and this condition begins to worsen, then it is necessary to advise the patient to stop eating and drinking on that day.
And it should be treated with gentle means to allow the feces to descend from its abdomen.
Then he should sit between your hands on his back, and instruct him to hold his breath until he feels the expulsion of gas or the descent of the intestine.
Then use your fingers to reduce the swelling, and make a mark with wax beneath the rupture over the ribcage, where the end of the sign is like half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then apply the hot iron whose shape is as described, until it turns white and expels pus.
Then reduce the intestine or the scrotal sac back to its normal position.
Then have the assistant place his hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding, and you, having already opened between the patient's legs and placed a poultice beneath, place another above his legs and yet another on his chest holding the hands.
Then place the cauterization instrument over the mark, with your hand holding it straight.
And hold it [the instrument], until you achieve the desired effect on the wound; or repeat the application once or twice, if you have not achieved the desired effect with it up to the mouth.
And carefully observe the exit of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so as not to burn it itself, and let it heal through that or become infected, or cause great harm.
And know that when you do not achieve the desired effect with the cauterization instrument, your operation will be in vain.
And it is necessary that the cauterization for infants be delicate, according to their size.
Then take care of the remaining wounds with ointment until they heal.
And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary to provide his nourishment for the duration of his healing time, which will soothe his bowels; so that the intestine does not come out at the anus and defecate.
Then, when you want to rise after forty days, then administer a properly made ligature and hold it for another forty days.
For when this regimen is used, thus is healing achieved completely.
When ruptures occur in the rest of the stomach and are incipient, and appear as if they will not increase, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size: and it should be done that what is cured from thereforth becomes like a third of its original size.
Then the cure itself, with what we said: and it is not to be added.
And some have said: let the rupture be cauterized with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it is sealed with encaustic, a line is drawn which goes across the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line below it. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery clamp.
But the first cautery is easier and better. On the method of cauterization for pains due to injury or impact.
Chapter XLVIII
When it happens in certain members due to an injury or impact that the pain persists for a long time and does not yield to treatment with medicines, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with a puncture cautery.
And the cautery of every member should be according to its size, and its thinness or thickness, and its strength, and its position in torsion, and the pain coming from it.
If therefore it is healed from the first cautery, that is good.
If not: then repeat the cautery on top of it.
Since these pains have the custom of changing from one member to another that is closest to it.
Therefore it is necessary to follow them up with cautery until the sick member is healed.
On the method of cauterization for leprosy.
Chapter XLIX. Head.
However, in lepromatous patients, cautery should be applied with utmost caution.
And especially the species of leprosy, which is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy; therefore, when considering cautery on that very condition.
If leprosy begins and you have treated it as we mentioned in the division, but it does not disappear or recede: then be wary of the infirmity that allows corruption to encompass all of its complexion; then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of a clearly visible spot, and a second below it turning towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on either side above the horns, and one behind on the nape of the neck.
And finally, with your hand apply the cautery for a brief moment until it makes a slight impression on the bone, causing the skin to detach; in order to release the expulsion of thick vapors from it, and cauterize it once more with cautery over the spleen, as mentioned previously.
But if leprosy is now already scattered over the infirmity and appears clearly manifest: then it is necessary to apply cauteries with these cauteries that we mentioned on the head, and cautery over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on either side of the maxillas, and two cauteries on either side of the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one near the anus, and one above it; in addition to two cauteries on each ankle, namely, one over every ankle, and two over the shoulders, and two over the elbows, and two over the wrists, and two over the softness of their chest: and cauterize it over all the joints, from the joints of their fingers and toes. And cauterize over every calcaneum of their feet, and the folds of their hands.
And be aware of the nerves that are above the back of the heel, so as not to burn them. And sometimes a cautery is applied over the bones of the ribs, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another over the epigastrium.
And know that the more cautery you add, the greater the strength and the greater the benefit.
And know that the weak do not feel pain from cautery as the healthy do; for their body is already stupified.
And the cautery should be of appropriate size and strength according to the members and joints; as it has been described in detail regarding various instruments.
**Head**
When a limb becomes stupified and treated with medicines, oils, poultices, but does not heal, then cauterize the affected limb according to its magnitude or smallness.
And let your cauterization be through the thickness of the skin somewhat.
Then care for the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And when it is cauterized to some state of numbness, which occurs to the hand and foot, at the spine of the back near the exit of the nerves that move that limb; then the numbness is relieved.
Indeed, one should not presume over it unless one is wise in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of nerves that move the body.
**On the manner of cauterization according to Albucasis.**
Head (LI)
When Albucasis is outdated and does not bring anything new from the skills of medicine; then cauterize over that cautery deep somewhat, according to the amount of thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is relieved, and the color of it changes.
Then care for the wound with a paste of herbs and lentils with rose oil, and arni-gooseleaf, and pigeon's blood, and vulture's blood: take a portion from each; mix them all together, and apply it to the cloth, and let it adhere at the site until it is healed.
On the Method of Cauterizing a Cancerous Growth.
**Chapter LII**
When the cancer is just beginning and it does not yet protrude much, cauterize it with a hot iron in a circular motion around its circumference as required.
However, it has been said that it should be cauterized with the hot iron in the middle.
But I do not think that this is correct, because I am afraid it might ulcerate, and I have seen it happen several times before. And it is better that it should be cauterized around its circumference with a circular motion, as we have said, or with many hot irons. On the Method of Cauterizing an Abscess.
**Chapter LIII**
When someone has an abscess that is delayed in maturing, or because of its excess, or because of the age and weakness of the patient, when there is little blood, or because of time, and it seems to hasten in the maturation of the abscess, then cauterize around its circumference with many small hot irons pricking.
Then release her.
It will also ripen as it matures.
However, if you wish to make an incision in it with a cautery, then use fire for the cautery, which has this form.
And place the same in the middle of Adubelat, until it penetrates the skin; and let the cautery follow from it as it proceeds, so that the course may be cleansed pure.
Then care for it until it is healed.
§ In the manner of cauterizing, it should be done on something slightly corroding. Head (of the cautery)
The cautery that corrodes is nothing but the corruption within a moving member, and it corrupts itself; just as fire consumes dry wood.
If therefore you see the corrosion at a place that can endure fire, then use many cauteries with fire, small and large ones, according to what is suitable for that place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the entire corruption is removed and nothing remains of it completely. Then leave it for three days, and place over the burned areas ground sulfur mixed with oil, until all the scabs and all the corruption are eradicated.
Then treat it with ointments that nourish the flesh.
If therefore you see that after three days the flesh is born with a healthy newness in which there is no corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization over what remains from the corrupted places.
And the corrosive [agent] is treated sometimes with sharp medicine.
It indeed arises at the place of cauterization.
However, cauterization with fire is more expedient: and I have indeed already said that its treatment with sharp medicine is in division; therefore take it there when you need it.
# On Cauterization in Claws and Warts. Chapter LVI.
This affliction often occurs in the lower parts of the foot; it is a thick, putrid matter that injures the foot. And indeed there is cauterization in them according to two methods: cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
As for when using fire, it is like cauterizing with a heated iron similar to the shape of a quill; it should be made of iron containing enough claw from all sides and be thin-edged.
Then place the heated iron on top of the claw. Then turn the hand with the cauterizer around the claw until the cauterization reaches the depth of the claw, and leave it for three days until it starts to discharge pus. Then apply it with a paste made from crushed garlic mixed with salt, and leave the paste on top overnight. It will indeed be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with a healing ointment made from meat until it heals.
If they are not improved and various occurrences happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then apply cauterization with hot water to them. It is as if you take a tube made of copper, iron, or quill, and place it over the claw or any other part.
Next, insert a small quantity of warm water into the tube: hold your hand, and twist it slightly with the pressure of your hand so that the edge of the tube is pressed against the root of the nail, and the warm water finds its way down to the root of the nail; and let the patient wait for a short time after the application of the warm water.
Then release it, for the nail is detached along with its roots.
Do this with each one, one after the other, until you have passed over all that are present in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been eradicated, with what generates flesh from ointments.
§ On the method of cauterization in tremor.
Head LVI.
When tremor occurs in anyone due to cold in a nerve, or quartan fever, or any other cause: then it is necessary to cauterize that person four or five times over the spinal bones, and between every bone with a cautery, and also over his chest and stomach with a cautery.
For tremor ceases with the application of oil cauterization, and hastens the healing of cold disease. On the Method of Burning (or Cauterization) according to Albucasis.
Chapter LVII.
When foreign bodies, such as pustules formed from the corruption of coarse materials, are expelled from the body.
Therefore, when they appear (pustules), they should be burned with a delicate cautery tool made of myrtle wood, whose tip is ignited with fire.
Or with the root of the longist stem of Aristolochia.
Or with a semicircular cautery iron. And when they (pustules) are burned, they should be done so after this manner, following their initial expulsion, and they do not increase; the excess is broken off, making them heal.
However, it should be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
On the Method of Burning (Cauterization) within a Blood Flow from an Artery to the Vein.
Chapter LVIII. Often, a flow of blood occurs from an artery that has been cut near a wound that happens externally or near the incision of a fistula or cauterization of a limb, and similar things: and it becomes difficult to remove it.
If this should happen to someone, then quickly with your hand press over the opening of the artery, and place your index finger on top of it: and squeeze it tightly until the blood is blocked by your finger and cannot escape from it. Then place a small oil lamp and many more of them on fire, and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, or a few, or a large one according to the wound and place it over the artery where it is cut, after which you quickly remove your finger: and hold the cauterization until the blood stops.
Which if it is expelled with the removal of your finger from the opening of the artery, and the cauterization is extinguished, then quickly take another cauterization prepared in the fire. He should not cease doing this with one after another until the blood stops.
And beware, do not burn the nerve that is there, and cause another harm to the weak patient. And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to cut off that very artery; especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four methods.
Or when using cauterization, as we have said.
Or when using extraction, when it cannot be extracted. For when it is extracted, its ends oppose each other, and blood is cut off.
For when it is extracted, its ends oppose each other, and blood is cut off. Or it is tied with a strong ligature thread.
Or they place on it medical preparations that cut off blood flow and tie them with a proper constricting bandage.
Whoever administers the cutting off with ligature and constriction with cloth, or positioning of burning things and similar methods, does not do it thoroughly unless rarely.
If this should happen to anyone and there is no present doctor or medicine: then he should begin with positioning his index finger over the wound's vein opening, as we have said, and constrict it strongly, until the blood flow stops from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery.
And let the finger not be moved, but keep it above the cold water, continually increasing the cold until the blood congels and swells, then cut it off. And meanwhile, consider what it needs from cauterization or medicine.
§ End of the First Part.
The Surgical Textbook of Albucasis, Part II. § On incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds and similar conditions.
We have spoken at length in the first chapter about every disease that involves fire, either through cauterization or burning medicine, along with its circumstances, causes, instruments, and types of cauterization. And I have placed chapters there from the beginning to the end.
And I will proceed in this chapter along the same path, so that everything that needs to be asked is answered. And before I begin that, it is necessary for you, O son, to learn from the fear that is in the first chapter about cauterization, what will be discussed in this chapter.
And for this reason, it is necessary that caution be taken with greater care, because in the operation which is described in this chapter, the condition often deteriorates when there is bleeding, with which life is endangered at the opening of a vein, or incision over an abscess, or opening of a fistula, or treatment of a wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision over a stone, and similar cases; from all of these, trembling and fear arise, and in many of them death follows.
And I advise you not to neglect that which causes hesitation, for sometimes people with certain conditions fall into your hands, and it is up to you to adapt to these modes of illness.
For there are those who become angry with their illness, and for them death is light; because of the urgency that they find from their illness and the length of their suffering.
And when illness arises from the fear of death,
And there are those who give their last breath and entrust themselves to you with it, hoping for health, and their illness is destructive. Therefore, it is not necessary that you agree to someone who comes to you from such conditions.
And let your caution be more urgent than your greed and ravaging.
And do not presume over anything from that, unless after a certain knowledge which verifies with you that successful outcome to which it has come.
And use all your knowledge of the care, prognosis, and treatment of all your patients, so that it is appropriate for their salvation.
In that very thing, indeed, lies your aid in acquiring fame, glory, memory, and praise.
God's Spirit inspireth you, His Son, with His understanding, and do not let Him take from you guidance and inspiration, for it is in His hand.
And I have indeed ordered this chapter to be distinguished by sections, according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from head to feet; so that you may find whatever you seek from it, and whatever you need.
§ On the care of water collected at the joints of boys.
Head I.
Know that this condition often occurs in boys at birth, or when the midwife tightens the child's head without ease.
And whenever anything happens, it is also due to an obscure cause that is unknown.
And indeed, I have not seen this disease in others as much as in children, and to every one of them death ensued; so it has been necessary for me to abandon surgery on them.
And indeed, I have seen a child from whom the head was swollen with water, and his head was magnified every day, until he could not sit down on himself due to the size of his head; and the swelling increased until he died.
And this swelling, either it is aggregated between the skin and the bone, or it aggregates beneath the bone on the surface.
And the operation on him, if there is swelling between the skin and the bone and an abscess appears, then you need to make a crack in the middle of the head in width; and the length of the crack should be like two knots, until the swelling drains.
And this is the form of the abscess.
If the swelling is increased even more, and the abscess becomes larger, then make those two cracks according to this form.
And if the swelling is beneath the bone and its sign is that you see the temples of the head open from all sides, and water sinks down when you press it with your hand towards the interior, and this does not escape you, then you need to make three cracks in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And after the cut, extract all the moisture.
Then, sew it up with wine and oil for five days.
Then, loosen the ligature, treat the wound with bandages and ointments.
And do not loosen the head equally.
And feed the weak patient with dry food containing little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of cutting as you consider the extent of the swelling and the collection of water.
Because sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or at the forehead, or on the right, or on the left.
Therefore, with the cut, where you see the swelling and the collection of water: and split it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, do not cut the artery, and avoid a flow of blood, or the weak one will die from that flow with the evacuation of moisture.
On the incision of arteries that are behind the ears.
**Chapter II.**
When someone suffers from cataracts affecting the eyes or chest, and it becomes chronic and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final cure lies in the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when one decides to cut them (the arteries), it should be done so as to remove the diseased part of the head.
Then, using a rough cloth, make the arteries visible (by cleaning the area).
Then the patient should tighten their neck using any cloth available.
Then consider where the pulse of the vein is.
And the places of both (arteries) are the areas behind the ears that are depressed; and they are rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then mark them with wax on both; and cut each one with a sharp blade from both sides accurately towards the bone; and this should be done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert a blade under the artery and cut it towards the upper parts with an incision.
And the length of the incision should be like two joined fingers.
For when the vein is incised, blood flows out with a pulsating movement, which rises towards the inside with frequent jumps.
However, if the artery is not visible to the eye, then it is necessary that the measurements from the gold should be a quantity of space equal to three fingers.
Then mark with wax and find until it reaches the bone.
And that which needs to be released from blood is six ounces and perhaps you release more or less from it. All of it according to the amount that appears to you from the state of the patient and the fullness of its artery.
Then consider the wound.
Then if there remains anything towards the bone from the cure, cut that so as not to allow a hot fistula; then tie the wound with linen strips.
Then he should be cared for with a poultice until he is healed.
On the extraction of arteries, which are in the limbs.
Chapter III.
When a person suffers from an old hemicranea, or acute catarrh due to sharp humours and heat in the membranes of the limbs, or old ulcers, painful and similar conditions, and the usual medical treatments do not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries from the limbs or cauterizing them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is to shave off the weak hairs from the limbs and draw attention to the visible artery in the limb.
Indeed, it is shown to you from its pulse, and it is rarely hidden unless in a few people or severe coldness.
If it is hidden from you, then the weak person should tie his head with any cloth he has: then place fear in a rough place with the cloth.
Or place vapour in a hot water place until it appears to you with a manifest sight. Then take the instrument I formed earlier. Then use the instrument to scrape the skin easily until you reach the artery.
Then insert a hook into it and pull it towards the upper parts until you extract it from the skin, and make it glide out of the tunics that are below it from all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then pierce it with the tip of the hook.
Then make an incision from that part according to the length of its ends, and pull them against each other, so that there is no flow of blood.
For if it is not incised and not completely separated, the blood will not rise to its full extent. Then extract six ounces of blood, until three ounces remain.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread made of silk or catgut, so that it does not flow into the same putrefaction before the wound heals and blood flows.
Then make an incision over the excess that is between the two ligaments.
Perform that procedure at that time, or after another hour. And if you see that it is still raw, cauterize it with a hot iron up to the mouth, with a knife cautery; until its ends are formed and it takes the place of the same operation.
And it is better work unless the patient has fever or is of hot complexion.
Because cautery is from those things that promote the ending of moisture.
Therefore it is better to use cautery.
And after the arteries are extracted, it is necessary that the place be filled with cooked fat; and small pieces well-formed are placed on top of it.
And after the wound is cleaned with dry medicines that promote the healing of the flesh, and with lint, until it is healed.
If, however, during the operation a flow of blood from an artery occurs, then quickly proceed to cut it off with cautery, or fill the place with a plug; and tighten your hand until the blood stops.
If none of those things is available to you, then place your finger on the place until the blood stops.
And when the location is embrocated with cooling water, until the sharpness rests and tightens according to what is necessary.
And because it is easier to extract an artery from a softer and more pliable location, it is done by cauterizing the vein with this cautery that has two knives; and the sharpness of both knives should be similar.
However, they have much less sharpness than the two knives.
Because if they are sharp like two knives, each one causes cold; and they do not cut the flesh with speed.
So, when they have a little less sharpness, heat from fire is retained in them, and flesh is cut quickly; therefore, with this, the work is better in every way and easier and lighter.
And there should be a space between the two knives equal to the thickness of a finger, after you mark two places with encaustic; and put out both firebrands very quickly, until they reach the vein, and cut the vein at two places: so that what is between its extremities will be elongated.
For they do not solidify completely with this cautery.
And this is the form of cautery.
On the care of a continuous, acute flow of tears from the eyes.
**Head IV.**
When tears flow continuously, and a stream of them flows from the eyes, which are on the outer surface of the skull, and medical treatment with remedies does not help, and you see the face of the patient already reddened, and he feels a trembling in his forehead as if it were a tremor of ants, and his eyes are weak and wet, so that their hairs are already corroded with tears, and his eyelids are inflamed from the intensity of the tears, then the ancients sought help in this treatment, and called it 'the operation with the sword'.
And it is as if you urge the patient to shave the hairs on his forehead.
Then make three cuts evenly spaced across the forehead according to its length; and the length of each cut should be about two fingers, with one cut placed equidistant from the middle of the nose on the forehead, a second slightly higher than the movement of the eyebrows, and a third on the other side. And be careful to avoid incising the arteries located on both sides. And extend your hand from the continuity of the lower jaw, making the distance between all cuts equal to three fingers; and have a piece of sponge prepared or a large piece of dried cloth with which to absorb the blood.
Then insert the blade at the acute ends of both cuts, after which follows the form.
From the cut which is from the temporal part to the second incision; and the scar, with it, all the skin which is between the two incisions, when healed, which is above the jawbone. Then make it from the median cut to the second incision as well.
Then extract this spatula, and insert another tool into the first incision again, which is called a sharp knife, one side blunt, the other side sharp.
And this is its form.
And place its sharp side towards the attached flesh with the skin, and its blunt side towards the jawbone; and push it until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut along with it all the structures that descend from the head to the eyes; except for the incision which appears on the skin.
Then make it in the middle fissure until another fissure.
And when it flows from the blood, the quantity is equal; express the places from which the clotted blood has been removed. Then put into each fissure a plug made from old skin, and place over them poultices soaked in wine, oil, or vinegar.
And see that a fever does not occur.
And on the third day, loosen the ligature and administer a large amount of infusion with warm water.
Then apply that remedy with basilic ointment to the wound, and to all other wounds as well, until it is healed.
§ On the treatment of acute tears and cataracts on the eyes from internal head injuries.
Head V.
When a person suffers from acute, severe, and persistent cataracts, you will see their eyes becoming weak, with a feeble appearance, and the eyelids are damaged, and hair falls out of them, and there is a deep, sharp, painful sensation in the head, accompanied by sneezing. In such cases, take from these occurrences that these materials do not come out of the eyes unless through many openings.
And the better treatment for them is this.
And it is, that you should order the sick person to scrape their forehead.
Then make one cut into that groove in the middle of the forehead, or another slightly narrower one on either side, and begin with the cut from the left tempora to the right tempora: and continue the incision until it reaches the bone: and extend your hand away from the jaws that move around the chewing. Until the bone is reached, then absorb all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between the two lips of the fissure with a hot knife or with linen lintels.
Then bind it from above with threads: and moisten the threads with wine and oil, so that a hot ulcer does not occur.
And when you have loosened it and see that the hot ulcer is already approaching: then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then take care of it with a drying treatment that promotes the growth of flesh: as if you would take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of pitch, prepare from them a paste and apply it to these wounds to promote the growth of flesh.
§ On the care of that which falls into the ear. HEAD VI. Everything that falls into the ear belongs to one of four types: a mineral stone, or something similar to stone, like iron and glass; or from a plant, like chickpea and beans; or something fluid, like water, vinegar, and similar substances; or some animal.
When something falls into the ear that is a stone, or of a similar type that does not add to or grow within the ear, expose the ear to sunlight: if you see the stone, then some oil from the fat or saliva may trickle into the ear.
Then he should perform the extraction of the foreign body, and make the patient sneeze when ready, and press the nostrils upon approaching the sneeze, after you place a thin piece of cloth or wool around the ear and extend the ear towards the upper parts.
This treatment often proves effective.
However, if it does not come out, then perform the extraction with a gesture, that is, with delicate plucking using pinzette. Its form is as follows.
If it therefore comes out with the gesture, it is good.
And if it does not, then perform the extraction with a fine, curved, hooked instrument with a slight curve. If therefore it still does not come out through that, then make a tube from metal and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole deeply, and press the matter around the tube with softened wax mixed with oil so that there is no passage for air except through the tube; then extract it with a strong draw. This often proves effective with what we have described.
If however it does not come out in that way, then take from the chimney or from wire, that is, prepared glue with which birds are caught, a small amount: and place it on the tip of a fine radius after you have properly wrapped it around a cotton ball; then insert it easily into the ear hole after drying the ear from moisture.
If therefore it does not depart with all that we have narrated, then approach to divide, before it happens a hot apoplexy, or cramp.
And the manner of the incision is, as phlebotomists do in the first place on the head: and extract from his blood according to the measure of his strength.
Then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear towards the upper parts, and find a small incision in the root of the ear near the fat at the depressed place: and let the incision be in the shape of a crescent, until you reach the stone: then remove it with what is possible to you from the instruments.
Then take care of that incision with your hands quickly, and treat it until it heals.
If the matter falling into the ear is from one of the grains that grow and inflate: then administer its extraction.
If however it does not obey you for its exit, then take a thin, delicate spatule in this form.
And administer with it the incision of that kind from the grains that fall into the ear, and do not think, when you consider that grain is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, until you put many strokes; then remove them with hooks, or with a subtle gesture, or with suction, as we said, for its extraction to be alleviated.
When water is introduced into the ear, it is necessary that the patient use a sneeze after having prepared the ear with some warm oil at first; and he has already filled his ear with some cooked oil to some extent, and lies over that ear where the water is.
If therefore it comes out through that, then it is good.
And if it does not: then take many small stones, according to the length of your finger, thin and soft, and heat them with a little fire, and let the patient insert one of them into his ear opening; and he should pull out one from that side on top of his foot, and strike with another stone the one that is in his ear.
Therefore he should not stop doing that with the stone and the stone until all the water has come out.
And the water comes out so that you take one from the fire or from a coal with your finger and insert its end into the ear; and light the other end with fire until it burns most of it.
Then take another twist and do that many times until all the water has come out; and extract it with a tube according to what was mentioned above in the stone.
However, when extracting an animal that has entered it, if it is a small body, like a flea or something similar, treat it with care as I said regarding division.
But if there is a large body that appears to the sense, then administer its extraction with gestures and hooks; for it is easier than all that is held in gold.
However, when treating a hernia generated in gold, and you care for it as we have said in division and distillation, but your treatment does not improve it, then you should look at the gold in the sun.
If something appears there from the hernias, then extract it with gestures or with delicate hooks.
If nothing appears there from the hernias, then take a tube whose form is narrow below and wide above, and insert its thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck with it strongly.
Do that many times until all hernias protrude.
If they do not obey you for the exit, then tie the catheter around with cerate, as I said on the stone.
If they do not come out with what I said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have already experienced in the treatment of hernias; and you will find it in the book on distillation.
And let your discharge be as you pour oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is depicted here.
As you can see, make it from silver or brass, below tightly closed with a small opening at the top large enough to insert a finger.
It should therefore be so designed that what is within the cavity of the tube pushes outward; it must be made neatly from brass.
And if you wish, take a rod and insert its smooth end into the tube with a proper insertion; then pour oil or any other liquid from these medicines into the tube, and place it in the ear. Then apply pressure with your hand until the oil enters the cavity of the ear, and feel it inside; and what is inserted into the ear should be slightly warm with a little fire: do not let anything cold distill into it, because medications cannot tolerate that.
**On the care of surgical wounds in the ear.**
**Head VII.**
Sometimes certain infants emerge from their mother's wombs that have not been circumcised.
And it has also happened to some people that the wound in the ear from a cut or born in it has required surgical treatment.
And this operation is sometimes performed in a deep hole in the ear, which does not follow the usual course; and sometimes it occurs on the outer part of the ear hole, and then follows its normal course.
Therefore, what happens in the deep ear, and which does not follow the usual course of sight, is difficult to heal in many cases.
And in those cases where it follows the course of sight, you should place the ear in a warm bath and examine it; then if you see the operation appearing, open it with a fine forceps, whose form follows this: its end should have some slight width, and one part of it should be acute; and the rest of the forceps should be made of two soft sides, so as not to harm the ear.
If the operation is caused by flesh grown in the ear canal: then hold it with a fine hook and cut it away easily until all the flesh is removed.
If the operation is in the deep ear: then take a thin, soft, and heated radius with some fire; then insert it into the ear canal.
If therefore you feel the operation with that which the patient feels with great hearing difficulty, try to open it easily; and be careful not to wound the ear's nerves.
Next, insert into the wound a quantity of lint according to the size of the opening you have cleaned with Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are free from the healing of the wound.
Or take the lint, and immerse it in rosewater, then sprinkle over it powdered treacle, and use it.
If you see that the wound has begun to heal: then you should remove the lint and replace it with new lint that you have immersed in the cerate made with rose oil, until the heat of the healing subsides; then take care of it until it is completely healed.
If, however, there is bleeding: then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the wound; use the remaining treatment as described in the distillation process to stop the bleeding.
**On the care of eyelid inflammation.**
**Chapter VIII.** These inflammations of the eyelids occur when they are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
Therefore, you must hold them with pincers or a hook and cut them off at the roots with a blade.
Then place a tri-folded veil over the wound.
However, if blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cautery.
And cauterize them, it is better after the incision.
Indeed, they often return when something remains from their roots.
And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and they do not return.
§ On the care of the granulated eyes.
Chapter IX.
It often happens in the eyelids that something similar to granule in its strength and hardness is formed, and because of that it is called Granular; and it is a thick aggregation of moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid.
The operation on them is therefore such that you should consider then, if the Granule is proceeding in it, which appears from the eyelid, and they move to every part, and its condition is easy.
Therefore, find the gap (fissure) over it by width.
Then scrape it off from all sides easily until it is smooth.
Then hang it with a hook and cut it off.
However, if you do not prepare to cut it off, except after you have penetrated the eyelid with a slight incision, then it will harm the sick person in some way.
If the fissure is large: then gather it with stitches and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, it will not cause you harm from that.
Blood will restore it and make it flesh again.
And if the declivity is great towards the inner part of the ear towards the surface within, then turn the eyelid inside out and hang the lump with a hook; besides needing an incision, press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is lengthened with an incision, it will not harm anything.
Then he washes the eye after making an incision with a mixture of water and salt, and treats the place with something that promotes healing until the patient recovers.
**On the care of eye sockets.**
**Chapter X.**
The adips (tears) produced in the upper eyelid socket is a common occurrence in children, causing their eyes to water and leading to cataracts in the morning, preventing them from seeing sunlight, as tears flow into their eyes; this causes them to rest their faces down and sleep on their eyelids, which become damp due to the accumulation of moisture. The prominent appearance of the adips can be felt when you press the area with your fingers.
And the method of treatment is to have the patient lie down on your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare it with care, making a circle from it according to the amount of adips contained by the eye socket from all sides.
Then place it over the eye socket and press from all sides with your fingers to collect the adips in the center of the circle.
Then it is found in the middle of that humidity with the knife cutting the cracks across the width, and there is no crack larger than that which is made in phlebotomy deep within.
He must therefore find the entire skin, until he reaches the axira, for axira proceeds from the crack according to the form of the white, fat-like fragment.
Therefore, extract it with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers towards the exterior, and turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: be careful, however, not to add to the crack, so as not to reach the eye with the knife and cause harm to it.
However, if the axira does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, add to the crack with a little ease until the axira proceeds.
Then extract it as we have said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them over the site, and tighten it with bandages.
And there are people who rub salt on it and place it into the cavity of the crack so that what remains of that humidity becomes liquid.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
If, however, a fever breaks out at the site of an ulcer, treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.
On the ways to restore proper vision, that is, when the eyelid softens and the eye becomes irritated as if it were not supposed to be so.
Chapter XI.
When hairs grow in the eyelids beyond their natural course under the skin and become old: they then harm the eye and cause various diseases, such as continuous tears, eyelid softening, and opacification, until that causes the destruction of the eye.
And the restoration of proper vision takes place according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire.
Or with sharp medicine, according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
Or the restoration of vision takes place through incision and stitching.
Or through tubes, as I will say.
You must place the head of the patient in your lap.
Then, with your left hand, turn the eyelids of the eye.
If it turns around, then it is good.
And if it does not turn around: insert a needle into the fold where the thread is located at the lower part of the eyelid, and make it penetrate above with the thread, and place it near the individual hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs are born; then pull the thread towards the upper eyelids and turn it with the finger.
Then, find the inner part of the eyelid below the added hairs with a spatula, passing from the larger tear gland to the smaller one.
Then, extract the thread and place a small piece of cotton or cloth under the eyelid; then mark on the eyelids with wax, which should be like the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the shape be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid: for it varies greatly among humans.
From them indeed there are those who need to be incised from the eyelid in a great quantity, according to the amount that is softened by the eyelid. Then, using the scalpel, find the two lines that you marked and begin from the larger tear to the smaller one, and there is one fissure near the natural hairs, as in the thickness of a radius.
Then insert the hook into one of the two angles of the skin. Then strip off the entire skin from that area. Then sew together the two edges with a needle and fine thread, drain the blood, and make what exceeds from the threads stick to the upper eyelid, with some things pricking, if you want to do that; and if not, don't worry about it.
Then leave the suture and thread until three or four days; after that, take care of it. And if you want, leave the wound without sewing it up, and take care of it so that it dries and shrinks.
The eyelid should be lifted at the sealing of the wound and its closure; but it will get better in the future.
This method of treatment was taught by ancient doctors.
However, there is a concern about the patient, and it is from good surgery, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another method in ataxmia, which is as follows: and it is that the signs on the eyelids should form a figure like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have described.
Then separate or join the eyelids with three hooks according to this form, and then cut off the surplus with small scissors according to this form, with equal cuts.
If, however, it is not possible for you to hold the hook or it does not align, then take a sharp tool where there is a thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and insert another thread near the larger tear and a second thread near the smaller tear, and join the threads between your fingers equally.
Then raise your hand with an equal elevation, and raise the skin above which the mark is made, as we have described.
Then join the two edges of the wound with stitches, and take care of it until it heals.
If, indeed, there occurs a gangrenous condition near your cut or crack, then treat that gangrene with a poultice and similar remedies from soothing ointments.
And when it happens that the eyelids turn their hairs inside out.
On the care of the axilla with dogs.
And it is done, as you turn the eyelids and split the gap inside, according to what I have described.
Then, with skill, make two tubes or two thin sticks; whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid, and whose width is smaller than the space between them; and you have already cut at both ends on each side where you hold the thread.
Then join each one with care to the excess from the eyelid, and tighten the two tubes on both sides with a strong tie, and leave it for several days. The skin, being tightly stretched, will die, rot, and decay until it falls away on its own.
If it delays, then cut it with scissors.
Then take care of it until it heals.
When it has healed, raise the eyelid; and then the hairs will not hurt.
And this is the form of the two tubes, which you make according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
On the elevation of the punctate pilars (or vessels) in the eye with a needle.
Chapter XII.
The operation is as follows: take a fine, sharp needle and insert it into the eyeball with a thin, flexible thread of silk. Then gather the ends of it, and tie each with a very thin knot; and the length of the threads should be one palm.
Then, under these threads, compose another very thin thread in an alternating pattern, and tie the ends of it if you see fit.
Then, the patient should place his head in your lap, close to the light, so that the operation is shown, for it is a delicate or minute operation.
Then, insert the needle with the silk thread into the root of the eyelid and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly until you extract it from above the natural pillar.
Then, pull the thread up to above the silk threads, and insert that thread into the silk threads; if it is one, or two, or three (threads), not more.
Then pull your hand along with it until the hair comes out together with the hardened eyelid and like a natural hair.
However, if the hardened eyelid is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, pull the eyelid towards the lower part, using the thread that you have made in it, until the eyelid comes out from the upper opening, and you see the eye. Then pull the eyelid and the thread, and extract both of them, and close the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place again, and flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then either associate it with a longer hair from its natural hairs and pull them together, or leave it until it grows out to a certain length, and then pull it.
§ On the care of the alxatration (or hardening) that occurs on the upper eyelid.
Head XIII.
When this alxatration (hardening) occurs on the eye, it is called leporina.
And this alxatration (hardening) is either natural or accidental.
Accidental alxatration (hardening) occurs due to the healing of a wound, or cut, or cauterization, and similar processes.
And the manner of operating is that you should find that consolidation, and separate its lips, and place therein a linen lintel, and bind it until it heals.
And you must not use things that drain and constrict in its treatment; for if you do so, it will return to Alxatratus worse than before. Rather, use things that soften, such as chamomile: boil it in water with althae seed and linen, and apply a ointment made liquefied with some oil; and wrap the lintel with it and care for it thereby.
And the treasury of your care is that you should preserve every faculty so that it does not harden according to the form it had in the beginning.
And this very operation that we have described is nothing but a correction of Alxatratus, so that it does not return to the form of the place according to what it was completely. § Regarding the care of Alxatratus that is done on the lower eyelid, and it presents as a bulge or contraction upwards towards the right and left.
Head XIIII.
This condition of Alxatratus below is what is truly called Alxatratis.
It is natural, and it is accidental.
And accidental injuries occur from wounds, or cracks, or cauterization, and similar conditions.
And the method of operation is as follows: you take a pair of scissors, where there is a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left tear to the right tear, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh towards the upper parts with a knife, and cut it with a broad spatula.
If the shape of the eyelid thus returns to what is necessary, it is good.
And if it does not, take a pin, and put it into the crack, and turn the eyelid with it; and find two cracks on the inner side of the eyelid, and let the ends of these two cracks be at the two angles of the cut, until they meet and form an angle: until, when they are joined, this figure is restored, and it becomes a Greek letter omega.
Then remove that flesh according to the length of its sharp lower side from what follows the eyelid.
Then join the separate parts; use a woolen thread for that.
Then treat them with the softening medicines and bandages until they are healed.
And if an injury to the eyelid occurs from a crack, and it needs stitching or cauterization, then one should find a flat spot for the crack beneath the eyelids' hairs, according to what preceded.
Then separate between the two lips with a bandage, as we said.
And in conclusion, regarding the care of an eyelid, whether it is above or below, the treatment should proceed as per the preparation from Albucasis' method.
Indeed, it (the eyelid) varies greatly in form: a prudent artisan prepares the treatment with whatever means possible, until it restores the figure to its natural form or nearly so, and itself heals, as appropriate for him from the operation and tools in various arrangements.
§ On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Head XV.
This hardening occurs in many people such that the upper eyelid becomes stuck to the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural functions.
Therefore, it is necessary that you insert the tip of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up; or extend it with a hook; then incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp like the spatulas used for incision, but rather slightly obtuse: so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatula is removed without causing harm to the eye with its sharpness, and the adhesion is removed easily until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adhesion is healed completely.
Then apply to the eye a salty water, either by washing it with water or by dropping some distilled water made from a dissolved compress in water.
Then separate the eyelid and the eye with a delicate thread; place a cloth soaked in albuginac on top of the eye, and use a compress and warm applications for three days until it heals.
§ On the incision of the nail and the prominence of the flesh around the tear ducts.
Head XVI.
You should know that the nail has two types of attachment. Either it is bony, resembling a hard and thin needle, or it is like a nerve, soft and delicate.
It is not nerve-like, but resembles frozen white humidity: when it touches a hot iron or tries to grasp it with a hook, it separates and the hook does not stick to it.
And each of these conditions does not begin unless it is preceded by a greater tear, which gradually increases until it blocks the vision and obstructs light and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operation for this cut is to have the patient place their head in your lap.
Then open their eyes and lift the eyelids with your hand.
Then take a hook with a few twists and extend it upwards.
Then take a needle and insert it through the eye with a thread from a horse's hair, or a thin wire: make sure the thread is strong and tie both ends of the needle slightly, fixing it in the middle of the nail. Then pierce the eye with the needle and bind the nail with the thread, extending it upwards. And pull on the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were squeezing it with the hair until its end.
Then cut the remaining part at the base of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, leaving the natural meat of the tear duct intact so that it does not cause a continuous flow of tears from the wound.
And sometimes the nail extends with a single hook, or with a thread, as we said.
Then it will be scraped with a soft spatula, which has this shape.
And because the spatula should not touch the corneal tunic, it might cause a rupture in it and the pupil would be perforated.
Then after the incision, pour into the eye some crushed salt, or something made from a mixture of spices, and leave it until the next day.
Then take care of it as necessary until it heals. If the nail is not bony and you cannot insert an axe into it, nor does a hook figure in it, then this type of nail heals often with medicine, and it recovers as if divided.
If you need to cut it, then open the infected eye and take a soft, thin, weak spatula according to this form.
And shave the nail from above with care using a thin instrument.
If you see that it thins and contracts, and the shape is impressed on it, then from your own preparation pour into the eye at that moment some spice, or red lead, or finely ground salt; and bandage the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the procedure over the entire area until it is completely removed.
Unless there is no sign of heat in the affected eye, leave it alone and treat the ulcer until it heals. Then repeat the operation over the same area with reason until it heals.
However, if the prominence of the tissue causes great inconvenience to the eye, it should be suspended with a hook and cut from that part, but not the final cut, so as not to disrupt the flow of tears.
Then stop the flow of tears, either because it is red or due to inflammation, until it heals. § On the incision of the Alguardene (a specific surgical technique) and the flesh grown in the eye.
Head XVII.
In some human eyes, a red flesh is sometimes born, either composed or overlaid, until it covers the pupil, draws near to it, or tightens on the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outward; and it resembles a rosebud.
And the operation on it is also such that it places the weak head in your bosom.
Then he opens her eyes and collects all that flesh with hooks fitting to it; and holds it with one forceps or with gestures.
Then he incises the flesh at first until it is completely finished with the knife.
And be careful from the eye so as not to hurt it during the operation; and let your cut be where you are cutting it, or with a spatula, which we have described in the chapter on the nail cut, or with small forceps, with which the flesh is collected according to its shape after this chapter.
When your cut is complete and all the blood has been drained, then fill the eye with crushed salt or sprinkle it with red powder from corrosive medicines; and place a cold compress on the outer side of the eye with alum so that it is protected from heat and gangrene.
If there remains something from the blood loss and you feel hot blood and fear a hot gangrene; then release the eye and care for it with whatever calms the gangrene.
Then repeat the operation on it until it heals.
And similarly do with the added flesh that occurs in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that with every weak eye, cure should be applied either by the natural way or by the accidental way, through operating with a tool: and do not introduce your hand into any of these operations until you understand that that member can endure that operation.
§ On the removal of a sebum plug from the eye.
**Chapter XVIII.** The sebum plugs (or "sebels") are red veins that form over the eye and prevent its natural function, and they weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, it is necessary for you, first of all, to consider whether the eye in which there is a sebum plug (Sebel) is strong and has no other illness besides the Sebel, then collect (or remove) the Sebel from that eye.
And it is necessary to encourage the weak one (patient) to place his head in your lap.
Then hang those veins with one or two hooks according to your discretion: and the hook should be a thin one of double plication, formed in this way, or there may be two hooks in one body, graduated according to this form.
Then carefully collect those veins with subtle forceps and gently remove the blood drop by drop until you see the veins moving out of the eye and they resolve, and be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the forceps.
And let your operation be in the midday before the sun, and be firm in your operation greatly: so that you do not cut except those veins.
And when you have extracted it, then it will trickle into the eye either with a green or red color: so that its acuteness corrodes what remains of the pus.
If, however, it is not possible for you to collect all of that at once in that time, then apply a compress to the eye with what soothes the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days until the pain is settled; and protect it from further harm by warmth; then repeat over it according to the same method until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps.
§ On the reduction of Arissat to the nose.
Head XIX.
The surgeons of Arissat call the fistula, which they treat with cautery or acute medicine, as described in their preceding account.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it; unless you find a gap at its origin and extract all the moisture and pus that is in it until the bone is exposed.
When, therefore, the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackening therein, then cut it with this instrument, which has this shape.
And it is called the "Asperi capitis," or the "Scalpel.
Let it be made of steel, and let its head be rounded like a diamond, which is marked with a fine point of the knife or a thin chisel; and place it over the corrupted bone. Then, hold it between your fingers, and press it slightly with your hand, until you know that the corruption is completely shaved off; and do this several times.
Then, hold it between your fingers, and press it slightly with your hand, until you know that the corruption is completely shaved off; and do this several times. Then, restore the area with absorptive medicinal powders.
If, therefore, the area hardens, and flesh grows there, and the discharge of pus ceases; and it remains for forty days without any further discharge or relapse, then you will know that it is already healed.
And if not, then there is no skill involved, except to reopen the fistula to the nasal passage, according to this form.
And it is, as you remove the bone a second time with steel or sharp medicine; and when the bone is exposed, then take the drill according to this form, let its end be pointed like a triangle; and the wood of its handle is tapered towards the end, as you can see.
Then place it over the eye itself: and let it be near the tear duct: and stretch your hand away from the eye a little.
Then bend your hand with the knife, until it penetrates the bone, and feel if the patient feels weak: by which he finds the flow of blood coming out from it, when he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore, at that time, restore the place with astringent medicines that dry up, as I taught you.
When therefore flesh is formed and the place hardens: then the matter that was exuded to the outside returns to the nose: thus it becomes lighter over the weak part.
## On Reducing the Protrusion of the Eye Chapter XX.
When the eye protrudes with its entire globe, and there is no pain or reduction in vision, nor any diminution: then you should relieve the weak part: then use phlebotomes on it: after that, place moistened gauze on the skin without scraping, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a linen dressing made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolla.
Then, close the eye firmly above the plaster with many small particles.
And the manner of the particles is that you should take many soft cloths, and double each cloth four times, making many layers, then place them one on top of another according to the need of the eye, and finally close them firmly with a strong hard cloth.
And repeat the process with suction without scarring.
Then remove the bandages and leave the eye closed both day and night.
However, if the ligature becomes soft again, it should be tightened more strongly; then, after a day and night, remove the ligature as we have said.
If therefore you see that the eye has regained its new skin, it is good; and if not, repeat the bandage, and the particles, and the tightening, and the suction until it heals.
## On the Incision of the Skin Tunica
Chapter XXI.
When there is a rupture in the skin tunica, then it protrudes and extends beyond the eyelids like a grain, causing disfigurement of the face because of that, and one should cut it; then the operation on it is as I will describe: and it is, as you insert an acute knife into the root of the lid from below towards the upper part.
Next, insert another needle where there is a double thread from the tearful side, and make it penetrate; then let the first needle go according to its position.
Next, incise the location of the double thread, and tie it with the edge of the needle around its circumference; then tighten it greatly.
Then extract the needle, and place on the eye a cloth soaked in alum; and leave it until the thread falls with the tear.
Then care for the eye with it, so that it is strengthened until the wound is healed.
And when the tear is drawn from all sides with the circle of cloth, until the eye acquires a great prominence.
Then it is pierced with a delicate instrument that reaches the depth of the eye, and the moisture of the alum runs out, and the eye descends and enters immediately; then tighten it until it heals.
**On the cure of alum (Alcomnati)**
Head XXII.
This affliction called Alcomnati is not, but rather a health that collects in the eye, similar to water flowing down, and it is not itself.
And the method of operation is such that you make the invalid sit on a prepared or straight seat.
Then take the head in both hands and move it until you think the blood has reached the lower part of your eyes.
Then it is stabilised, and it does not fall, and the light is restored: and the invalid sees things as he used to see them: and if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
However, if the descent of the blood is not prepared as we said, then make the invalid sit between your hands. Then take a fine spatula and find it slightly above the corny membrane, near the connection of the joint with the corneal tunic in the crown, until the blood flows out.
When the blood has thus flowed out, then pour warm water into the eye in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey; then it is treated with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
§ On the care of water that flows into the eye, or cataract.
Head XXIII.
We have previously discussed the types of water in division, and those that are suitable for perforation, as described in the discourse and explanation, then take it [water] according to its health.
Therefore, you should make the infirm person sit with their face squared towards your hands, opposite to the light, near the sun. Then bind their healthy eye tightly and press it hard. Afterward, with your right hand, if the affected eye is on the left, hold the eyelid of the left eye, or with your left hand, if the affected eye is on the right, hold the eyelid of the right eye.
Then take your right hand (or left hand if the eye is on the left) and apply alum to it.
Then place the end of the alum near the edge of the eyelid, according to the thickness of the radius, at the white part of the eye where the tear duct is visible. Then push the alum with force and turn your hand with it until it penetrates into the eyeball. And you will feel that the alum has already reached the hollow part.
And it is necessary that the distance traveled by the alum to reach the depth should be measured according to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part: and this is the crown of the eye.
You will indeed see that in the same pupil of the eye, due to the clarity of the cornea's tunic.
Then place the almand (almond) paste up to the place where water is.
Then press the same part once below, after another above.
If therefore the water descends immediately, then the patient should see that over which he opens his wound immediately, and almond paste in his eye.
Then rest for a little while.
If therefore the water descends, then place it down a second time, except that almond paste should come out.
When therefore it (the wound) is closed and does not rise up: then extract the almond paste easily, and you return your hand slowly. Then dissolve in water some clear salt of gem (stone): and wash the eye with it internally.
Then place over the eye the whole pad, or cloth soaked in rose oil and alba (a white substance, possibly alum): and bind it with it the healthy eye.
But we, and those of our time, place on it ground cumin (cumin) crushed with alba (a white substance, possibly alum).
If the surgeon does not obey you and enters the eye due to its hardness, since the eye of man is hard in a great way, then it is necessary that you take a spatule, called an Alberid, which has this form.
Therefore, when performing this procedure, only connect the proper joint and do not use your entire hand in the wound channel; it is only necessary to create a narrow space for the surgeon.
Then introduce the surgeon according to what we said.
And for the completion of your work, prepare an infirmary bed decently made, in which he should sleep on his back in a dark room; and let all movements be prohibited, as well as coughing; and provide him with that food by which nature is soothed; and let him not move his head to the right or left at all.
And the bandage should be left according to its disposition until the third day. Then loosen it in that dark room and examine his vision; and make him see things.
Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do this during the hour of healing or immediately after cutting; on the contrary, he should let someone else do it; because water ascends quickly through a freshly cut wound.
If, however, a hot abscess occurs: then it is necessary to drain the eye before the seventh day: and straighten it with something that soothes the abscess until it is healed: then absolve its sight, and place on top of its face an oral application that regulates its sight for some days, while it remains in that dark house.
Then it should gradually leave the house and return to its case.
And know that in zeal the student is not excused from sight for some time: then indeed he dares to engage in surgery.
And indeed, some of those from Al-Andalús have now come to us, who said that something had been done in Al-Andalús, a pierced magdan through which water is drawn.
Therefore, no one has ever been seen in our land to have done that; nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the shapes of species of magdas so that it stands on those who ignore them.
They should be made of proper air: and their ends should be triangle-like with the same subtlety, and the acute end.
Great forms.
On the care of flesh grown in the nose.
Head XXIV.
Sometimes various types of flesh grow in the nose, among which there is something that resembles a scorpion with many feet; and from this comes cancerous, stone-like flesh, of a dark color; and from this comes soft flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, for that which is soft among these meats, neither frail nor cancerous, you must make it sit between your hands opposed to the sole, and open its nostrils, and insert a hook into those meats; then pull them out towards the outside, and cut what you have taken from them with a thin, sharp spatule on one side, until you know that all the flesh has already been removed.
If anything remains from that whose separation is not possible, then scrape it with a thin tool easily until nothing remains from it.
If blood dominates you or a hot abscess occurs: then oppose it with what is necessary; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then apply cauterization to it until the blood stops and all flesh is removed.
Next, after making an incision, pour vinegar or water onto the nose.
However, if the nose opens up and moisture flows from it to the palate, then you will know that it is already healthy.
If indeed moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that there is a growth inside the upper bones of the nose, to which the surgical instrument did not reach.
Therefore, you should insert a line of thread with some thickness and knots in it; place the space between each knot equal to a finger, or less: then twist it weakly, sending one end of the thread into the nose with a curve, or as much as possible after making it similar to a hook: and pull its scent until it reaches the base and comes out above its throat.
And indeed, many children do this like atoms in schools: and it is an easy matter for whoever wants to.
Next, place the two ends of the thread: one end that emerges above the nose, and the other end remaining inside the nose.
Then, using the assistance of the knots on the thread, apply pressure to the flesh where the knots are. Continue with that treatment until you know that the flesh is already united with the nodes by threads.
Then extract the thread and place it in the nose after bloodletting using the Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or longer, until the ointment has entirely dissolved what remains of the flesh.
Then, at the end of the process, insert a lead pipe into the nose for several days until it heals.
However, if further treatment is required to drain it, use that method.
For the purification of the head, when oils are distilled and other medicines are applied to the nose, make it from silver or bronze; which should be similar to a small lamp, open like a conch shell, and its passageway likewise.
And if you wish to make the pipe closed like a reed.
And the conch-shaped instrument used for head purification should be hollow and open; it should have a handle at its end, with which you can hold it when heating oil or any other liquid inside, or when applying things that become fluid.
And this is the form of the instrument. On the care of the nose.
**Chapter 25.**
Often, a growth on the tip of the nose is born, and it swells and grows larger with each passing day until an agreement is made about its appearance.
And because of this, it is necessary to remove that growth at its initial appearance and eradicate the whole of it.
Then apply to the site either a caustic, or a burning medicine that takes its place.
If the incision is delayed until the growth has swelled and become hard, dark-colored, of little sensitivity, then do not touch it with iron; for it is a malignant cancer.
Often, I have seen that when a person cuts out an apostema (a type of growth), it results in great harm to him who had it.
And if the apostema is soft to touch, not dark-colored, and you see that an incision can be made throughout it, then encourage the sick person, and cut out the growth without fear or hesitation, and treat the wound with what extracts and constricts until it heals.
On the stitching of the nose, lip, and ear.
**Head XVI.**
Know that when there is a rupture of the continuity of one of these cartilage structures, only a little skill is required to repair it, except in certain cases.
Therefore, when any part of it happens to be affected, you must consider whether the wound is recent and still oozing its own blood; then stitch the wound in two places with sutures; afterward, take care of it until it heals.
And if the continuity of the lips has already been separated and one part has become healthy, then it is necessary to remove the scabs from all parts that are visible on the skin until they bleed.
Then stitch together the two lips with sutures and tighten them; sprinkle over it dragon's blood and pounded frankincense, and place a fragment of a medicinal paste above it, and use either another patch from a consolidative plaster or any other suitable plaster; leave it bound for two or three days.
Then loosen it and change the medicine; leave it until the stitches dissolve on their own. Then take care of it with ointment until it heals.
The method of sewing is to aggregate the solution of continuity, or with a pad, as we have described in the sewing of the entrail; or to aggregate the solution with thread, as I have made you know.
**On the Extraction of Nodules of the Lips**
**Head XVII** Many people suffer from hard spots inside their lips, often resembling small grains of herb, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to bend the lip and find each node, and suspend it with a hook, and cut it off from every side.
Then, after the cut, fill the place with a clean cloth until the blood stops.
Then it should be washed with vinegar, and the place treated with it where there is stiffness, until the wounds are healed.
**On the Incision of Flesh Growing Above the Gums**
**Head XVIII** Many times flesh is born over the gum that the ancients call ablucs.
Therefore, it is necessary that you suspend it with a hook, or hold it with pincers, and cut it near its root, and let the blood flow, or the bloodletting be performed.
Then place over the wound a third layer of bandages or other stoppers, drying agents.
If the flesh returns after healing, as it often does, then cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
§ On the reason for teeth with iron.
Head 29.
Sometimes teeth become encrusted on their surfaces from the inside and outside, between the gums there form hard, painful, and sometimes discolored cortices that turn yellow and then decay from that point until they become infected through the teeth.
Therefore, you must make the sick person sit between your hands, and rest his head in your lap, and rub the tooth with a smooth stone until the hard patches disappear, and do the same for blackness, whiteness, yellowing, and other discolorsations until they are gone.
If what is in them from the beginning of reason can be removed, it is good; and if not, then continue to reason over them again on another day, second, third, until the ultimate study is reached in that which you see.
And you should know that a tooth needs to be shaped by various tools of different forms, according to what is prepared for your operation; for the tool that shapes the tooth from its lower part is different from the tool that shapes it between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these shapes of tools should be prepared for you, as you see.
**On the Extraction of Teeth Pain**
Chapter XXX
It is necessary to cure the tooth from its pain with all skill, and do not hurry in its extraction.
For indeed, what I have seen does not replenish the tooth after its extraction; for it is a precious substance: until there is no excuse for its extraction, then when the patient is compelled to extract it, he must do so firmly and certify to you that the painful tooth has been extracted.
Many times the patient is deceived by pain, and thinks that it is in a healthy tooth and extracts it; then the pain does not retreat until the diseased tooth has been extracted.
For we now see that is from the operation of phlebotomists.
When therefore the painful tooth itself is certified to you as sound, then it is necessary that you make an incision around the tooth with a scalpel, in which there should be something of power, until the gum is dissolved from every part; then gently move it with your fingers, or gradually with fine forceps at first, until it is cut through.
Then place large forceps firmly on that spot, and grasp the head of the tooth between your fingers, holding it firmly so that it does not move; then pull the tooth straight, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take some of those instruments and insert them under it from every part with ease, and try to move it as you did at first.
If however the tooth is perforated or corroded, then you should fill that hole with cloth, and tie it tightly with the tip of a thin wire so as not to break it when you apply your forceps on top.
And it is necessary that you handle the incision around the gum very carefully from every part much.
And guard your strength so as not to break it, and let the part remain, and return from that illness due to its greater harm that caused the first pain.
And furthermore, do not do what the ignorant phlebotomists do in their haste and overconfidence regarding its removal, apart from administering what we have mentioned.
Indeed, they often delve into great weaknesses in men, which are more difficult to break, and all the roots of these remain, or certain parts of them, or they extract it with some jawbones, as we have been testified many times. Then it should be washed after its removal with wine, or vinegar, and salt. If there is a flow of blood from the wounds (which often happens), then apply some bandage and fill the place with it; and if not, cauterize it if it does not stop bleeding.
The forms of the pliers should be delicate, with long tips, a short handle, and a thick head, so that they do not double over when pressed against a tooth; they should be like you see with the thick handles, until when you squeeze them, they do not bend or double over themselves; they should have short extremities, and be made of good iron or some other material carefully formed, and at their tips should be teeth, some of which enter into certain places and grip tightly with constriction.
And when the extremities become like the shape of an eagle's beak, which is called a crook, and they possess strong constrictive power.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of fractured mandible bones.
Chapter 31.
When, during the removal of a broken tooth, something remains stuck in the socket, it is necessary to place a custom plug there with butter for one or two days until the socket softens; then insert the proper forceps or pliers, the ends of which are shaped like the beak called the ciconia.
The shape of these forceps is as follows:
The ends of these forceps are shaped like a sawtooth or like the blade of a skinner's knife.
If, therefore, it does not obey you in coming out with these forceps, then you must make a cut on the root and remove all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lever, which is shaped like this.
Its end should be short and not too thick; it should not be soaked to avoid breaking.
If, therefore, the root comes out through it, it is good; if not, it should be cut with other instruments of these shapes.
The form of the first triangular extremity, which has a certain thickness.
The form of the delicate triangular extremity.
It is also cut with this instrument having two branches, of this form. And with other instruments and tools that preceded it in terms of teeth.
It is also gripped with this instrument that resembles a large hook, of the form of a twisted triangular extremity, which has certain thickness so as not to break, and it is not soaked.
And you should know that there are many instruments of teeth, and similarly the other instruments are not counted; a prudent artisan, subtle in his art, found this very instrument himself, according to which he intended to perform the operation and cure the illness itself.
Because from the illnesses to which they were not accustomed to an old instrument, due to the diversity of species of them.
However, if the bone breaks from the jaw or from other bones of the mouth, or putrefies; then it should be examined in its place with what is appropriate for it from among the instruments and pincers I mentioned regarding the extraction of roots, and cut with movements, whose form is this.
Sit in it something of a thickness gradually, so that it may be drawn together or held with it a bone, and let it not escape or waste away, until the bone is removed; then restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
However, if there is a small putrefied part on the bone, remove it from its own putrefaction and care for it until it heals.
Of the locking of the prominent teeth above others.
Head XXXII.
When the teeth protrude not according to their natural course, an ugly form results from it; and especially when this happens in women and girls, namely, the vulvas.
For if a tooth grows after another and is not moved or has no possibility of being locked or filed, then it should be extracted; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument, which has this form.
It is similar in shape to a small face, and it is made of iron, with an extremely sharp end.
And let your incision be such that it penetrates just as far as you need for many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that no other tooth is disturbed.
However, if it protrudes prominently from its excision: then the edge of the knife itself is smoothed with another knife, whose shape is as follows.
It should be entirely removed from the root, and its handle has small notches like a needle; with which the tooth is smoothed gradually over many days without disturbing it, and it falls out; then it becomes smooth, finally very thin with some rasors.
If a tooth breaks off and injures the tongue, then its edges must be filed until the roughness of the fracture is removed and it becomes smooth; it should be smoothed out, so as not to injure the tongue or disrupt speech.
**On the relationship between teeth and golden threads.**
Chapter XXXIII
When the front teeth suffer a shock or disturbance from impact or accident and the weak patient cannot hold them tightly enough to prevent loss, and treatment with astringent medicines fails to heal them; then there is in them a property that causes them to cling together when bound with golden wire, since gold remains bright and does not corrode even after many days, unlike silver which turns black.
And let the thread be of a middle size according to its quantity that it can hold between the teeth.
The shape of the retraction is such that you should take hold of the thread and insert its double length between two healthy teeth; then, weave it with both ends of the thread among the moving teeth, or a single one or multiple ones, until you reach the fabric up to the healthy tooth of the other side.
Then repeat the texture until you reach the part from which you began; and tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not move at all: and let your grip on the thread, near the roots of the teeth, be firm so that it does not slip.
Then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors; aggregate and twist them together; insert them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, so as not to harm the tongue; then let go gently until it remains tight.
If it loosens or is cut, tie them again with another thread and it will remain stable with it for the entire time.
And this is the form of teeth, and the shape of the retraction of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you can see.
And when a tooth becomes loose or two teeth fall into their places and remain as we have described, it is not achieved by anyone other than an experienced, prudent, and skilled artisan.
And sometimes a certain bone becomes inflamed, and it takes the form of a tooth, and is placed back in its place, from which the tooth is supported and tightened, as we said; and it remains and serves for a long time.
On the incision of the ligament that occurs under the tongue, which prevents speech.
Head XXXIV.
If there is something of hardness and knotting in it, and it arises from the healing of a wound, then insert an hook into it and find its width, until you cut through the ligament, and the knot is released.
If, however, there is bleeding, then apply a triple bandage to the site. If indeed the blood is severe, then cauterize the site with a hot iron suitable for that part: then tend to it as well as the rest of the wound until it heals. § On the extraction of the ranula, which is done under the tongue.
Chapter XXXIV.
Sometimes there occurs under the tongue a swelling similar to a tiny toad, which obstructs the natural function of the tongue: and it may become so severe that it fills the mouth.
If therefore you see that it is of a pale or dark colour, hard, and without sensation on the part of the patient, then do not touch it, for it is cancer.
And if it has declined to whiteness with moisture, then insert a hook into it and cut it away with a fine knife, freeing it from all parts.
If blood clots during your surgical procedure, place a crushed veil over it and remove the clot until all the blood is drained; then return to your operation until you extract it along with its contents.
Then it is wrapped with vinegar and salt, and the wound is cared for as necessary until it heals.
§ On the treatment of an apthous ulcer between the two mandible glands.
Head XXXVI.
And then either you will pierce it, or it will rupture on its own.
If it is of a white colour, round, and its root is thin, then it must be cut.
And the operation on it is such that you consider your previous operation, if the abscess has completed its heat quietly or is reduced by some diminution: then, therefore, make the sick person sit before the sun, and let his head be in your lap, and open his mouth, and have the assistant take hold of his tongue between his hands, and press it downwards with the instrument, whose form this is. It should be made of silver or bronze, which is as thin as a knife.
When you have pressed the tongue against it and the abscess appears and drops onto your finger, then take a hook and fix it in the groove, and extract it as much as possible towards the outside, except that you pull with it some of the tunic.
Then cut it with the instrument, whose form follows this:
It is treated with shears; however, its tips should be protected so that the opening of each one faces the other's sharp edge: hence it should be made of iron or coated with a substance (the text does not specify).
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatula, whose form is as follows.
A sharp point from one side, not from the other.
And after you have cut through one of the intestines, cut the other according to this same pattern of incision.
Then after the incision, wash the wound with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If, however, there is bleeding, wash with water in which cortices of madder roots have been boiled, or leaves of myrtle and similar herbs from astringents, until the bleeding stops; then care for the wound until it heals.
And when other spots appear in the throat, apart from the two tonsils.
Therefore cut those according to what I have said about the cutting of the two tonsils equally.
And I myself have already treated a woman from a spot [in her throat] that had been born, which was drawing her towards darkness, with little sense, which was almost closing her throat; and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and she had forbidden herself eating and drinking water; and she would have reached death if she had remained for one or two days.
And the spot would only rise so far that it emitted two branches, until they emerged above the two nasal openings.
We therefore proceeded with haste and fixed one of their hooks.
Then I pulled it straight, and a large portion came out from it.
Then I severed it where I grasped it from the nostril's opening.
Then I prepared for it what protruded from the other nostril's opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; then I fixed a hook into the opening itself, after which I severed part of it, and nothing came out but a little blood; thus is completed the throat of the woman, and she began to drink water immediately, and afterwards she took some food.
I therefore did not cease to make cuts from that opening for a very long time; and an opening succeeded the place where I was cutting until it became too long and when she could no longer endure it.
I therefore devised a plan, and cauterized the opening between the throat.
She therefore stopped bleeding; then I moved away from the side, and I did not know what God had done to her after me.
§ On the cutting of the bird's throat.
Chapter XXXVII.
When the catarrh descends to the lung and becomes chronic and persistent, it is then called perpendicular. And if it is in the lower part thick, rounded, then it is called a uua.
When it is cured by the method we described in division, and treatment does not help, you will see that the abscess has cooled down and become thin; then it is necessary to incise it.
And the rounded aggregate that is not elongated and is of a bloody or pale or black color without sensation, then it is necessary to carefully make an incision in it.
For indeed, there is fear of damage when making an incision into it.
Therefore, when you see it according to the way I have described in terms of its whiteness and length, you should make the affected person sit before the sun, and press its tongue with the instrument mentioned previously; then fix a hook in it and pull it downwards, and make an incision in it with one of the two instruments used for incising the tonsils.
And it is necessary not to make an incision from that unless the portion added beyond the natural limit without adding anything.
For if you cut further from it, you will injure the voice and speech.
Then, after the cut, use what we have mentioned about the two glands' incisions; and care for it until it heals.
But if the patient becomes worse after the cut, then you must use your skill for cauterization without fear or alarm.
The method of cauterization is not applicable there unless with sharp water; and it is as if you place the patient's head in your lap.
Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned.
Then take the water I told you about in the chapter on cauterization, and make a ball of it not too wet or dry, and place it not too thick nor too thin in this instrument's cavity, whose shape is as follows.
Place the tip of it over the part where the medicine is applied, just as the concave part of the radius' coil.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same wound: and have the patient lying on his side so that the salt from his mouth flows out due to the medicine's inherent properties, without any of it descending into his throat and harming himself.
Then hold your hand with the medicine.
And from the beginning, place it on the wound with the quantity of a half hour, until you see that it is already healing and the pain has subsided through the medicine.
And if you wish to take a poultice and apply it directly over the end of the radius and insert the poultice with the medicine into the tube from above, until the poultice adheres to the wound. Do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound.
Then allow it to fall away: for it will indeed heal and drop off after three or four days.
If you need to apply more medicine, apply it again: after cauterization, clean around the wound with a cloth dipped in butter and purify it with what is around it from the medicine; then bind it with cold water.
And it will heal externally with bandages, and internally with gargles, until it is healed.
This, therefore, is the kind of cure that is healthier through cutting and longer-lasting from fear.
And sometimes even a wound that is subtler than cauterization and incision is cured with this method, namely with suffumigation.
Take some calament, hyssop, oregano, rut, fennel, chamomile, and abrotum, or similar herbs; mix them all together, or some of them in a pot, and soak them in vinegar, boiling: the pot should be sealed with decent clay: there should be a hole in the middle of the pot for the insertion of the surgical instrument according to this method.
It should be made of silver or bronze; the end with the pomegranate is inserted into the lower part of the wound until steam rises to the surface through the tube, blocking the wound significantly.
Then repeat this over the same area many times until it heals.
And be careful not to perform this cure at the very beginning of the onset of the apothema.
For indeed, it adds pleasure to the apothema, and you should not perform that unless at the turning point of the apothema's heat.
If this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and wrap it with cloth at the tip; this prevents the lower bone from burning, as the cloth of the reed prevents the steam from burning the bone, and this is a good cure that brings health.
On the extraction of spines and bones from the throat.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Often a bone, or a fish spine, or something else, adheres in the throat.
Therefore, you must extract what is apparent among them, upon which the discharge falls, after you have pressed the tongue with an instrument at the root, and it will be declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before food has been digested in the stomach.
Perhaps something attached will come out through vomiting.
Or the patient swallows a piece of raw cloth, or a root of lettuce, or a crust of dry bread; or takes up a piece of soft, dry sea sponge and ties it with thread, then swallows it.
When it has reached the place where the spines or bones are, and they have been extracted, then it (the problem) departs. If it does not depart with what I have said, then use an instrument of lead in this form.
Sit more forward than the radius bone for a short distance, and at its end there should be tenderness, which will easily permit it to enter his throat; and he himself should have his head lifted upwards.
And he should be cautious with the touch of his epiglottis, so that it does not cause him to cough, and force the bone, or push it, or allow the doctor to insert it with his hand.
Indeed, it is better for the patient to insert it himself because of his knowledge of the location of the matter attached, and he should push it downwards or pull his hand upwards with the instrument, according to the amount prepared for him, until it comes out.
**On the extraction of the bloodsucker.**
Chapter 39.
When the bloodsucker is treated with those things I mentioned regarding the division from cure with medicines, and it does not yield, then consider in the throat of the patient before the sun, or near the sun after you have placed his tongue with the instrument I told you about.
If therefore your hook slips off the bloodsucker, extract it with a small hook or with delicate gestures.
If it is not possible with them: then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient all the way to the throat; afterwards, insert into the hollow of the tube a burning red-hot iron with fire.
Perform this procedure frequently, and have the patient abstain from water throughout the day.
Then he should take a full cup of cold water and open his jaw in it; he should then suck on his own bone with it, without swallowing any of the water, and move the water from one hour to the next with his hand.
For immediately when he feels the water, the suction cup falls.
If, however, it does not come out as we described, then smoke the patient with lice or with a tool like that which I described for the fumigation of the eye.
Do this frequently, as it will fall by itself.
And the manner of operation in fumigation is to take a pot, in which there are young shoots with fire, and the pot is covered with a lid, in which there is a hole, and the end of the instrument is placed in that hole.
Then he should release the fumigation and place his jaw at the end of the tube, and close his jaw so that the fumigation does not escape, until you know that the fumigation has reached the suction cup.
For the suction cup will fall immediately.
If it does not fall, then repeat the application of sweat many times.
And the weak person should endure thirst, eat spicy foods and other things, but not drink water. Therefore, it is necessary to depart from this regime.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker is extracted from the throat when it falls upon that place.
It is similar to pincers, as you see: except that it has that curved part which goes into the throat.
And the end of it is similar to a bird's beak called a crook, in which there is an uneven edge: when it grasps something, it does not let go entirely.
§ On the opening of fistulas, and their division, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
There are many kinds of fistulas, differing according to the manner of their occurrence, that is, one and only one in this book; they differ also in perforation and division from two directions.
Of these, one is a type of ulcer that resides within itself and by virtue of what it comprehends from humours.
And the second manner is due to the places where it happens from the body.
Since the ulcer occurring in the head is different from that occurring in the anus; and the ulcer occurring in a fleshy place is different from that occurring in the joints; each of these has its own judgment based on its operation.
And there are ulcers that should not be perforated unless after the purification of the humours within them and their completion; and these are some of those that need to be perforated while they are raw and not purified according to completion.
As for ulcers that are close to joints.
Since when an ulcer occurs near a joint and persists until the putrefaction that surrounds it causes perhaps the corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint, then it is the cause of its closer contraction to that member.
Or it is an ulcer near the principal member; for if you delay its perforation until it matures, it will harm either that or the principal member through it.
Or it is near a bowel; so do not perforate an immature ulcer that is close to a bowel unless it is left untouched until the putrefaction does not penetrate deep inside and extend into the interior of the anus, and thus becomes a fistula or remains in its terminal state where it does not heal. You must know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, which has ripened according to its completion: and it is at the diminution of pain, the retreat of fever, and the lessening of redness, and pulsation, and the acuteness of the abscess head: and other signs. And you must make the same perforation in a lower place of the abscess, and of greater eminence: and the perforation should be direct in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the joints, and cords, and nerves, and arteries, and to the end in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that reflect, proceed with the perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places: then it is better to leave the perforation until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to completion.
For if you perforate it before that, the course of the virus is prolonged from it, and there is much obstruction and hardness, and perhaps its edges harden, and its depth increases.
And certain abscesses are perforated according to the width of the body where it is necessary, or according to that which the member needs.
And you must administer to small abscesses a small perforation, and to large abscesses a large perforation: or many sections according to the similarity of their size.
And there are some incisions from which the skin must be carefully separated; and it is cut when it has already formed like a cloth, and has reached its limit, which is now dead: as happens with many, with swellings, and buboes.
And from these, some are cut using an incision having three angles.
And among these, there is one from which an incision is made resembling the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Like the incision of the groin.
And from these, some have a round incision, and others have a lunar incision; and there are similar incisions from which they originate.
Indeed, where there is no head, like the soft and shallow incisions, it must be perforated with a single superficial perforation or merely flat.
And when the incision is deep and has already absorbed a lot of blood, and you perforate it, you must not suck and drain all the pus at that time; on the contrary, extract some part from it.
Then cover the incision until the next day.
Then extract something from the pus again.
One should repeat this process many times according to the stage, until it is discharged; especially if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a very young child, or an old person who has declined: for indeed, the animal spirit often leaves the body with the emission of blood, and perhaps the patient dies, and you do not perceive it.
Therefore, this chapter requires great caution.
And after your puncture, through which you make these punctures (incisions), you must clean the wound; and consider (the following):
If the wound of the small apothema (incision) is shallow or there is a flat section, then apply a lint or an old cloth.
And if it is a large apothema (incision) with many cracks (from the puncture), then you should insert lint into every crack until they heal again.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin from the apothema (incision), or have chafed it in the surrounding area, then you should fill it with an old cloth, or as when a piece of fabric is sewn together, or rubbed with dry flax without moisture; and fasten it until the third day.
Then remove the bandage and take care of it as necessary with ointment until it is healed.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs during your hour of operation, then administer cold water and vinegar after it has been soaked up by a cloth, and place the same upon the place where the flow of blood is occurring many times.
If, however, the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment, care, and cleansers as described in many places in this book, and according to division.
If, however, it is in the winter season and the affected area involves many nerves, then you must apply small pieces of cloth soaked in warm wine and oil, and place them over the area.
And if it is in the summer season and the areas are fleshy, then you must place cloth soaked in water, oil, or wine and oil, all of which should be cold.
Until the third day, as we have said, then you must open up the abscess, clean it, and administer to its care what is appropriate for it until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of treating abscesses universally.
According to the way of distinction, I have indeed spoken about every abscess, how it is the path to its cure, detailed individually.
On the division of fistulas occurring on the skin of the head.
**Head XLI.**
Fistulas of the head may occur, which are of a small size and resemble nodules contained within tunics that act as sacs; they seem to be swollen like the bowels of a chicken.
And there are many varieties of these types.
From them come fleshy ones: and from them are those that contain a moisture similar to pus; and from them are those that contain a moisture resembling phlegm and purules; and suchlike, and from them are those that become hard like stones.
And in the division of all [fistulas], there is no fear of their extraction as long as an artery does not oppose their section.
And the operation in the division of them is such that you should experience it with an instrument whose shape comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if there is that which contains moisture, then dry it by dividing it along the length of the section according to the superficial section; in this form.
And begin with the incision from line B to line G. When the humidity is evacuated, then remove the skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave anything completely inside.
For often it repeats if anything remains from that humidity. Then immerse the bandage in Egyptian ointment if it is available; otherwise, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound, leaving it until another day.
It (the ointment) indeed corrodes what remains from the cyst. Then repeat the application of the bandage with Egyptian ointment twice and three times, and if you need it, keep doing so until you trust that nothing remains from the cyst, then cure the wound with ointment until it heals.
If it (the wound) contains a white nodule: then dry it according to this form, making an incision in the shape of a cross, and remove it from all sides, and try your strength in extracting the skin that contains it.
If, however, an artery opposes you, then do what I will tell you next.
And similarly, for an abscess if it is hard, perform the same incision and cure as I have said. And the incision over the apostema of the stone is easier because there is little blood and moisture.
And sometimes there are certain of these apostemata (apothemas) which are in the head of some men, in which there is no humidity at all.
Or make a perforation of them always from the lower part, so that the flow of blood (or pus) may drain to below.
Then take care of them as is appropriate for their cure.
**On the incision of strophula (staphyle, a type of skin growth) on the neck.**
Head 42.
These apoptesis often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they happen in other parts of the body.
And regarding those that occur above them in the neck, there are both few and many; they originate from one another, and every strophule that arises from them is within their own tunics, as with the nodes and apoptesis of the head, as we have described.
And there are many kinds of these strophules.
And indeed, there are stones from them; and some contain humors; and others are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, regarding the good disposition you see from them by touch, whose manifest proximity to the skin's color is evident, and it moves towards every part, and it is not attached with the nerves of the neck, nor with ligaments, nor with an artery, and it is not deep: it is necessary that you cut it off with a superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along the line, b. to the line, g., and peel it from every side, and extend two folds of skin with a hook, or with many hooks if needed, as we said in the apoptesis of the head, and extract it gradually.
And it is on caution that one should not injure a vein or nerve.
And it should not be a blunt knife, for it will not help you with your cut and will disturb the patient, and you will cut what is unnecessary.
However, if you cut a vein, an artery, or something that prevents you from operating, then make a small wound with a sharp knife or some powder that stops the bleeding, and bind the wound, but release it when the acute pain subsides and the wound becomes softer; otherwise, it will begin to putrefy and rot.
Since blood is stopped by cutting, go back to your operation until it is completed.
Then, take care of yourself.
If the clot is entirely cut, then you should close the two edges of the wound and release them immediately after you see that there remains nothing superfluous.
If you see that there remains an excess due to the size of the staphyle, then it is necessary that you direct yourself to cut and extract the root of it, and apply the suture as we have said.
And if the staphyle contains moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture to reveal its point of ripeness, and make the incision from that which follows below the body, as we have said.
Then apply a linen and ointment after the puncture to corrode what remains from the corruption, until you see that the wound is already clean; then care for it with a generation of flesh ointment until it heals.
§ On the cutting of the epiglottis from an aperture inside the throat accident.
Head 43.
The ancients said that this cutting in the epiglottis was not seen done by anyone on our land, and this is their written account of their speech.
However, in cases of synanche, the cutting of the epiglottis must be made with caution; when it does not cause a rupture through that part, because all veins and the lung are below.
In those who have a hot aperture in the mouth, or throat, or both tonsils, when there is no affliction in the channels, it is necessary to use the cutting of the epiglottis to escape from the destruction that occurs from the previous fever. Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis into three or four sections with a small cut along its width, in that which is between two circles, so that the cut be on the side (not on the cartilage), this place belongs to the cut because it is enclosed by flesh, and the blood vessels are distant from it.
If the physician is timid, then he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook.
Then he should find the skin, until he reaches the canal: he must inspect the blood vessels if he sees anything from them.
Then he should cut the side we mentioned: and it is indicated above the canal section from the phlegm that comes out of it, with what it is broken apart, and the incision is made with forceps.
And leave an open wound at some time.
So when the time comes that he fears an advanced inflammation, he should bring together two lips of the wound's skin and leave its own alone without cartilage.
Then he should administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow, until it is healed.
Says Albucasis.
The summary of this discourse that we have related is an exposition only when they see that one of these apostemes has already soaked the throat of the patient; and the patient, having overcome death, desires to be cut open so that he may breathe through the wound in some way, and thus be saved from death. And for this reason they hastened to leave the open wound until the evil of the illness is consumed, which takes three days, almost as if it were itself; then they hastened to close the wound themselves and care for themselves until they are healed.
And what I myself have seen is that a servant girl took a knife and sent it into her throat, and she cut with it part of the trachea.
And I was called upon for her cure, and I found her groaning as if it were the groaning of a dead person.
I therefore examined the wound, and I found blood that had come out from the wound of the lung.
I am therefore convinced that she did not sever the vein, nor tie it off; and air was coming out from the wound.
I therefore attended to my own wound and cared for myself until it healed; and the servant girl suffered nothing but a hoarse voice, and after several days she returned with improved condition.
Therefore I say that there is no fear in the sectioning of the epiglottis.
**On the Sectioning of the Gut Hernia**
**Head XLIV**
This hernia, called the gut hernia (hernia gutturis), is a large hiatus, according to the colour of the body, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it occurs according to two modes: either it is natural or it is accidental. In the natural case, there is certainly no skill involved.
The accidental case is according to two modes: one is similar to a thick knot.
And the other mode is similar to the hiatus that forms from the knotting of an artery.
And there is fear in it, and it is not necessary to make a supposition about it with the iron unless it is very small, and you should test it and explore it with the instrument.
If therefore you find it similar to a thick knot and it is not suspended with any veins, then dry it as knots are cut, and extract it with what it contains from the cyst, if there is one; and if not, then carefully examine its whole extent.
Then care for the place with what is necessary from treatment, until it is healed.
§ On the division of nodules.
Head XLV. There are many kinds of nodules, and I have already described all their types in division; and it is necessary that I tell here the difference between a node and an excrescence, which causes doubt. I say therefore, that when the excrescence is characterized by heat, fever, and violent pains, until the efflux of excess fluid is checked and putrefaction completed; then indeed, fever and heat subside.
When the node does not have heat, nor fever, nor pains, and it contains a cyst filled with its own sac, which has a color according to that of the body; and it is captured as a grape, and becomes like a bullet, and there are large and small ones.
And they are according to two kinds: either fatty or containing moisture.
And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in division. Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, it is necessary that you experience it and examine it with the first instrument called an Intromissum, according to the shape it has in the chapter following this one.
And the manner of examining the abscesses and all the nodules is that you take this instrument and insert it into a wetter place than the abscess: then gradually withdraw your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin.
Then place your last hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess.
Then extract the instrument and consider what comes out in the wake of its withdrawal.
If therefore moisture comes out, whatever its colour is: then dry it with a superficial section, as I said regarding the other abscesses.
And if moisture does not come out in the wake of the instrument's withdrawal, then know that it is fat: so dry it by having a section over it in the form of a cross, according to this form as I taught you: and suspend it with hooks, and strip the skin from all sides easily: and guard the cyst if you can above it, so that you may extract it whole with the nodule.
However, if the cyst breaks apart during the operation and it is not possible to extract it whole, this often happens: then extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
For if anything remains of it, whether little or much, the nodule will return according to the most part.
If the wound is shallow and remains open for a short time, then fill it with some sharp, corroding powder at its closure, tighten the wound, and place a hot compress on top of it, treating it as you would any other part of the body until it heals.
If it is a large knot, then treat its two edges and tend to what becomes flesh around it. However, if you have a vein that either pulses or does not pulse, then dig and fill the space with third-degree burn dressing, and leave it contracted for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the blood flow ceases; then return to cutting away what remains of the knot.
§ On external instruments for cutting and piercing.
Head 46.
From these are the forms of introjections, and they are of three kinds.
Indeed, there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They should be made of iron so that the ends fit well into the wound aperture.
And these are the forms of experience and, indeed, perforation: one is called a bore, that is, a perforator, and there are three kinds.
From them there is the great, the medium, and the small.
They converge so that they can be perforated and exit through them, and they form fistulas and buboes because of what is between them (the bones).
And others become round, smooth, flexible, like a large needle on which they are mounted, from citron, or brass, or iron, or steel, or silver. And the best of them are those made from citron.
And they (the instruments) are also made of black lead, which converge so that through them one can experience fistulas, the cavities of which reflect because of their softness, reflecting those images.
And there are again three kinds. Because they (the instruments) are long from some, medium from others, and short from others, according to the amount of the width and tightness of the fistula. The form of the punctures, and they are of many kinds. Since they are simple, that is, having only one hard part, and there are three types as you can see, namely Large, Medium, and Small.
And from them are the blind ones: and they are of three types.
And from them are those that have two hard parts and are of three types; and there are also those that have three hard parts and are of three types; and all these are necessary in their respective places.
And these are the forms of scalpels by which knots and ruptures are cut and incised; and they are of three types, since there is the large one, the medium one, and the small one.
The ends by which they make the cut are sharp, while the other ends are not; and they are not used that way unless there is a need for them to assist in incising knots in the vicinity of veins or nerves; so as to heal the patient through them, and to gain some rest from the heat as it did during the excision of the apostema.
These are magdas, and they are of three types.
They are made of metal, and are similar to a radium, with which alcohol is produced; and on its end there is a hidden point of the spatem, through which it flows to the inside and outside when you look, as you can see.
The shape of the spatums which are hidden between the fingers at the perforation of the aposteme: and they are not perceived by the assistants; and there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
The forms of the winds through which the flow of blood is divided: and they are of three kinds, great, medium, and small.
They should be made from air or amber, round in shape, slightly longer than they are wide, as you can see, and to the right thickness.
And you must have these kinds of winds—the great and the small—with you, so that you can divide the blood with them swiftly when necessary, and then when you do not have any medicine at hand.
However, you should not use them to divide blood in every part of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy places, such as the legs, hips, arms, mammary glands, belly, groin, and similar places—from the fleshy, moist parts.
And at times, they are made into small instruments similar to the shape of nuts, by which blood is divided when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or near a vein or artery cut, and at times they are made round according to this form.
§ On the care of the mammary glands of men which resemble the mammary glands of women.
Head XLVII.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell up at the time of sleep (that is, when they begin to have erotic dreams) until they resemble the breasts of women; and they remain so after awakening from sleep.
Whoever dislikes this, should cut it off with a lunar incision, in this form from the line b to the line g. Then scrape off the entire puffy skin.
Then fill the wound with an ointment of dried medicine.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitching, and take care of it until it heals.
If the breast, however, descends lower and softens due to its own weight, as happens with women, then it should be found in both its upper sides by making two similar lunar incisions, of which each one is contained with the other at their ends, until a larger line contains the smaller, according to this form from the line b to the line g. Then scrape off the skin that lies between the two edges, and remove the puffiness, and apply what we said about stitching and poultices, which are necessary for healing, until it is cured.
If, however, you do not complete the incision that you should make because of the patient's restlessness or because of the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with a submerged ointment that corrodes, and leave it, until it corrodes what remains of the puffiness.
Then care for it until it is healed.
On the perforation of an apothema, which occurs under a titill (itch).
Head XLVIII. These apothemas that occur under the titill (itch) are of a hard kind, resembling strophulas, which contain cysts, and from them spring those that contain humors.
What are those that come from the ones containing humors, they should be cut with a lunar section, according to this form, from line b to g. When all that is in the apothema is drained out through the sanie (purulent discharge), then fill it up with some clean cloth, and leave it until another day.
Then the cloth should be removed and the wound should be cared for with a suitable ointment until it is healed.
If the apothema is of the kind resembling nodules of strophulas, then cut it through, as we said regarding cutting into strophulas equally.
If, however, the wound extends to this point that it emits pus, then apply a cautery to it, according to what was said regarding that which has been mentioned above.
On the division of a fistula that occurs due to an artery and vein.
Chapter XLIX.
When an artery ruptures and the skin above it hardens, a fistula often forms there; the same occurs with veins, leading to a fistula and swelling.
And the signs by which it is known that a fistula and swelling are due to an artery or vein are: for when a fistula is caused by an artery, it is long, deep in the body; and when you press the fistula with your fingers, you feel as if there were a hissing within it.
And that which is due to a vein is round, prominent in the body.
And the incision over this fistula is erroneous, especially when it is under the armpits, groin, neck, and many other places of the body; and it is very dangerous.
Therefore, it is necessary to take care of it with the knife, and what remains from them at the extremities, or on the head, should also be taken care of.
Therefore, over that which remains from them due to swelling at the opening of an artery, make a cut in the skin along its length.
Then open the wound with hooks, and afterwards the artery; then free it from the tunics until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle beneath it and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread at two places, as I taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the space between the two ligaments with a spatule until all the blood therein has escaped and the hemorrhoid is dissolved.
Then administer treatment that forms pus until the ligaments fall off; afterwards, care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an abscess due to the incision of a vein, then you must hold it with your hand as best as possible from the abscess along with the skin.
Then insert a needle beneath the place that you held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and put a double thread in it until you extract it from the other side.
Then bind it tightly with a good ligament; as I told you regarding the new ligament, from both parts with both ends of the thread. But if you find that the thread is extracted, then insert another needle with a different thread beneath the whole abscess near the incision of the needle; press it and tie your threads at four places.
Next, cut a groove down the middle of the ulcer until the excess tissue is exposed. Then, incise the skin's surface and release what is bound to it.
Next, place on it the small piece that you have dipped in wine and oil.
Then apply the treatment, which is done with lint and ointments, until it heals.
§ On the ulcer resulting from the twisting of nerves.
Head (L.)
Just as an ulcer occurs in arteries and veins, so too does it occur in nerves; this happens due to compression or excessive strain, and similar conditions, and is particularly common in areas of support (such as the legs and feet) where there are many joints, and it can be quite severe. It resembles the rest of the body in colour and is present in many configurations without pain; however, when it contracts with tension, the patient feels a weakness similar to fainting.
And the ulcer is not deep in the body, but rather lies under the skin; it moves to all parts and does not extend forward or backward, nor to the sides.
Therefore, what arises from them at the joints should not be attacked with a blade.
Indeed, it may happen that contraction occurs.
However, for what arises from them in the head or on the face, find the skin with a blade.
If therefore there is a deviation of the joints, then hold it with pincers and cut it off at its root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and scrape it; then remove it, and dress the wound with sutures, and take care of it until it heals.
**On the cutting of a deviation (in the abdomen)**
Chapter LI. Some men suffer from numerous such growths (called "fungal" due to their resemblance to fungi) on their vessels and other parts of their bodies.
Whose root is thin, and whose head is large, and their lips are folded over.
And from them there is a few, and from them what is magnified greatly.
And indeed I have already seen a man, and there were two testicles within his abdomen, which were more similar to other things like small roots; there was no difference between them, white or slightly red, and their lips turned inward, they split open, and moisture always flowed from them.
Therefore, cut them, and I found one weighing as one and eight ounces, and the other almost six ounces. And the operation in their incision is such that you should consider at that time, if the sick person is humid, and the color of the testicles is white, like a subtle root; then cut it with a wide scalpel, and there will be cauterization for you in the fire.
For indeed, much blood is often expelled during its section; therefore, if it catches you, cauterize it immediately.
If you see that it is weak and timid from the incision with iron, then take a thread made well of lead, and tie it with it; whose manner we have said, and release it in two days.
Then add to the tightness of the lead.
Do not therefore cease to tighten the lead, as long as it presses against the testicles, until it is completely severed and falls by itself without effort.
If, however, the swelling of the root is great, then there is something to be feared and afraid of in making an incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to make an incision through its middle.
Then cauterize it thoroughly so that it does not reopen.
Then take care of it until the wound is healed.
And do not suppose that you should incise any swelling that has a dark colour, little sensation, and an unpleasant odour; for this is indeed the aposteme of cancer: and I will speak of the remembrance of cancer after this.
§ On the care of the umbilicus.
Chapter II.
The care of the umbilicus should be given much attention for many reasons.
Or from cracks or openings above the abdomen; and it may come out through that opening, or through an intestine, according to what happens in other breaks.
Or from blood flowing from a vein, or an artery, according to what has been mentioned before.
Due to its constriction, it is impeded there.
However, if it is due to a crack in the skin and the opening becomes inflamed, then its colour resembles that of the body's flesh; it is soft, without pain, and appears in a different area.
And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is in accordance with what we have described, with a greater variety of differences.
Therefore, when you press it with your fingers, it becomes hidden and then reappears, and perhaps there is a sound associated with this, and it appears very prominent at the entrance of the bath, causing great discomfort.
If it is indeed due to humidity, it is soft, then it will not be hidden when you press it with your hand, nor constricted, nor added to.
If it is due to blood, then with these signs, an ulcer appears blackening the skin.
However, if it is due to new flesh: then the ulcer is grey, thick, hard, and takes on a shape according to its quantity.
If it is indeed due to windiness, then its texture is soft. And the operation in that case is to consider if there is an elevation of the navel due to the blood of an artery, or vein, or flow; then it is necessary to prevent from treating it.
For in that case there is fear and dread, as I taught you in the chapter where I spoke of apertures due to an artery and vein.
If the elevation of the navel is due to an intestine or gas, then it is necessary to urge the patient to retain his breath and stand stretched out.
Then mark the signs with wax around the navel of the whole body.
Then instruct him to turn over onto his back between your hands.
Then encircle with a wide spatula around the navel above the place that you marked with wax.
Then extend the opening of the aperture towards the upper parts with a large hook.
Then tie him around the strong circumference with thread or a strong silk string; and let the knot of the ligament be loosened.
Then open the extended aperture above the ligament.
If you find that it is already freed from the ligature, then extract the bone, insert your finger into it, and push the intestine towards the inner part of the abdomen; and if you find the gallbladder, then take it with a hook and cut off its excess.
If, however, it is against you an artery or vein, then surround it greatly.
Then prepare for your operation.
And take two needles, and insert into them two strong threads: and insert two needles into the circle that you made around the wound in the form of a cross, which you make to penetrate.
Then tie the wound at four places above the needles; and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the flesh is putrefied and falls off by itself; or cut it when it becomes thin and putrefies.
Then take care of it with what is necessary from ointments until it is healed.
If the prominence of the navel is from tough flesh in it or from moisture, then it is necessary to make the wound hollow, as we said.
And extract the blood or moisture that you find in it.
Then he treats it with what strengthens the place.
**On the treatment of cancer.** **Chapter LIII.**
For I have not been able to heal anyone from it; nor have I seen anyone else before me who has succeeded in treating it.
And the operation on it, when located as we have mentioned, is, as I have said before, to precede and relieve the patient from the black cholera several times.
Then, if you notice a distinct fullness, it is a phlebotomy.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is spoken to during the operation.
Then insert into the cancer hooks that are suitable for it.
Next, make an incision deeply into it from every side with the skin, according to the examination, until nothing remains of its roots; and permit the blood to flow, do not cut it off quickly, but express the parts strongly, and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or, if possible, with instruments there.
However, if the flow of thick blood from the artery or vein causes you trouble, then cauterize the vein until the blood stops.
Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
**On the care of hydropsis.**
Head (IV)
We have discussed in detail the division of the types of hydropsis and how water accumulation occurs; we will also describe the symptoms of each type and their treatment with medications.
And those that are treated with iron are nothing but a mere appearance of medicine; and they do not approach the species of tympanitis with iron; nor do they fully adhere to the species of hypodermis, for it is deadly.
When you have already treated this species of hydrops as tympanitis with medicines, and your treatment has not improved it, then consider this:
For if the weakness has already taken hold, or another illness besides hydrops is present, such as coughing or a relaxation of the intestines, and similar conditions, then be wary of treating it with iron, for that is a danger.
However, if you see that the patient has abundant strength and no other illness besides hydrops alone, and is neither a child nor an old person, then the method of treatment is as follows: you should lift the standing patient into your hands, and have the assistant press his belly afterward by pushing water downwards with his hands.
Then take a small, sharp spatula, according to this form.
It has two sharp points at each end, elongated like a spatula.
However, it should be done with a slight curve so as not to penetrate too far during the operation until reaching the intestines, and to avoid damaging them.
Then consider.
If there is a swelling due to fluid accumulation in part of the intestines, then it is necessary to extend with a cut from the navel, a quantity of three fingers, towards the lower parts in a straight line above the breastbone.
If the swelling is indeed due to liver disease: then your cut should be left of the navel, with three fingers.
And if the swelling is due to the spleen, then the cut should be on the right side: and it is not necessary that a cut be made on the left side as well, so as not to cause excess fluid to flow to that weak place.
Then pierce the skin with an instrument throughout its entire thickness.
Then insert your hand into that cut and with a spatula, lift the skin as if you were peeling it: and the amount to be peeled should be about the size of a fingernail, or somewhat less.
Then pierce the membrane until the spatula reaches a void space: and this is the place of water.
Then extract the membrane, and insert an instrument into the opening, which has this form.
And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or brass, or copper, soft, smooth; it has a small opening at its lower part, and on its sides there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other; and its end is cut, according to the manner of cutting a quill, as you see: on its upper end there is a ring.
For when the instrument reaches water, then it descends immediately onto the instrument, so that at once the same amount of water is drawn up into the instrument.
Because if you draw up more water from it than necessary, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his animal spirit; or he suffers a fainting spell that approaches death.
Indeed, draw up water from it according to its strength, and according to what you understand from the disposition of the patient's pulse, and from the goodness of his condition.
Then extract the instrument and retain the water.
This is because it is retained immediately due to the skin that retains the opening which is above the siphon; of which I spoke, so that you pierce it according to that manner.
Then repeat the procedure with the instrument on the second day, if you see that the patient tolerates it; and also extract a small amount of water from it. During those days, perform that procedure without fear, and guard yourself against error; until there remains no water except a slight amount.
However, if you have to deal with a weak patient who has released a large amount of water, then take care of them with burial in warm sand, and much sweating in a bath and under the sun, and they should be kept awake for thirst; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed; and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the water, as I have described above.
Regarding the care of infants who are born in places where their urinary tracts are not pierced.
Head (50th chapter) When an infant emerges from its mother's womb, and the opening of its head is not pierced, or the wound is tight, or it is not in the proper position.
Therefore, it is necessary to assist with the piercing immediately after birth using a delicate forceps, in this way.
Then place a thin lead clamp in the opening and tie it; hold it for three or four days.
When the infant tries to pass urine, it should be moved and encouraged to void.
Then reduce the hernia.
And if you do not place lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not allow it to close.
But he whose opening is narrow should be treated with lead, as we said, for many days, until it becomes larger.
But those in which there is an opening in an improper place are damaged.
This is because the opening is near the end of the handle of the scalpel; therefore, it cannot be cleaned towards the front until he raises the scalpel with his hand to the upper parts. It is not born in the right way, because the sperm cannot reach the matrix straight; and it is a severe illness indeed.
And the manner of operation is such that the patient should lie on his back.
Then extend the scalpel's head with your left hand, stretching it greatly, and cut the head of the scalpel from its previous place with a sharp point or a fine chisel; just as you make an incision on a reed or radish, so that the opening falls in the middle as it should.
And be careful not to have bleeding during your operation.
This often happens.
Therefore, oppose it with what stops the bleeding and treat the wound until it heals.
§ On Albucasis regarding incidents in the prepuce and scalp, corruption, blackening, and adhesions.
Head (LVI)
These Albucasis incidents often happen in the body, and there is corruption of the flesh.
And from those, some are malignant, and others are not.
Therefore, for the non-malignant ones, you should suspend them with a delicate hook and cut it off until they are all clean.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat the whole area afterwards with dyed ointment until it heals.
If the ulcer is malignant and has a discoloured appearance, then after making an incision and removing the affected tissue, it is necessary to apply caustic to it.
However, if the ulcer is on a captive foreskin that is not circumcised, and it affects part of the foreskin inside and part outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside first, until it heals, before taking care of the outer part, because when you treat the ulcer at the same time as the foreskin, the foreskin will not be secured unless pierced.
And it also happens with the testes, where there is a darkening and rotting of the foreskin.
Therefore, it is necessary that you clean thoroughly everything that has already turned black and what wants to rot or has already rotted.
Then apply a line over it after that with honey mixed with flour of grain crushers and crushed herbs.
Then take care of it as with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
However, if there is bleeding, then apply caustic with a lunar cautery in this form.
The caustic indeed has two uses at the same time, namely to stop bleeding and heal a wound when it is rotting.
If the head of the weapon is corroded and destroyed completely in an instant, then it is necessary to insert a leaden cannula into the meatus first, so that the wounded person can urinate over it.
In the true adherence of the prepuce to the head of the weapon, and this adherence does not occur unless in one whose prepuce is healthy, and no circumcision is required over it; and sometimes adherence happens due to a wound or ulcer: therefore, it is necessary to peel it away with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the weapon is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to discern these precisely, then it is necessary to peel away something from the head of the weapon and from the prepuce.
This is because when the prepuce is thin, it may be easily perforated due to its own thinness quickly.
Then separate them with a thin linen cloth that has already been soaked in cold water so they do not adhere again.
Then treat it with a styptic wine until it is healed. § On the purification of infants and the cure from errors that befall them.
Chapter LVII.
Circumcision is not a remedy for continuity, as with other wounds; nevertheless, when it is from our own operation, according to our will, and its use is proper for boys, it is necessary that we mark in this operation a better method, one leading more gently towards health.
I say, therefore, that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books; for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only something we have acquired through experience.
This is because I find a greater part of the work, and the use of scalpel-bearers and bloodletters, to be based on circumcision with a needle and with shears; they also use cauterized instruments and ligatures with wire, and incisions with nails.
And I myself have already tried all these methods, and I do not find a better method of cleansing with shears and binding with wire.
Because in cleansing with a needle, the skin often escapes.
Since the skin of the foreskin has two layers: therefore, perhaps the upper skin is incised and the lower layer is injured; hence it is forced to cut again to incise the other one, and future pain is incurred.
And when the purification that is done through incision, that is, the digit (the one used by surgeons), does not secure the incision at the extremity of the male member, because perhaps it enters into its opening.
However, in purification with the nail, perhaps the iron is bent and corrupts your operation, and the skin of a boy has a brief nature, and many are born like this so as not to require purification. And you will already have seen that.
However, purification with shears and tying with thread has revealed to me a good experiment: because the shears are of the size of the incision, therefore, the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below.
When therefore you apply your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate and they cut according to one operation at the same time, and a compression is made in a similar way, containing the skin of the sword from every side so that no error occurs at all.
And the manner of operation is such that you can judge, especially a boy, if he understands a little what you do not do, except for tying the thread to his sword only and leaving it until another day.
Then make him enjoy and be happy in every way possible for you from what he receives intelligence.
Then insert your hand into his armpit, and blow into the skin, and pull it upwards until the head of the weapon emerges.
Then clean that which is collected on it from that filth.
Then bind the marked place with a double thread.
Then bind the lower part with a slight ligament according to need. Then hold with your index finger and thumb, securing the lower ligament well, and cut between the two ligaments.
Then quickly lift the skin upwards and extract the weapon's head.
Then allow the blood to flow slowly (it is better this way), and clean the wound from above; and place a cloth over it which has been soaked in the prepared rosewater and crushed with rose oil. Lastly, apply it well and leave it until the next day, and take care of the rest of the wound until it heals.
The form of the scalpel for purification is as follows.
There are two ends to the knife, and they meet at an angle; let no branch of the claw extend beyond them; and the length of the two edges should be equal to the length of both handles.
An error occurring during purification is that perhaps the entire inner skin or a part of it escapes from the cut. Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch it from the beginning with your finger before marking the place and cut it equally.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and cut it.
If, however, they exceed three days and there remains what is under the nail inflated and marked, then leave it until the mark becomes hot, scrape it off easily, and cut it according to what you have prepared, and be careful from the head of the nail.
It will not harm him, indeed.
Take care of it with what strengthens the wound from the dust that we mentioned in the treatise on dust, and if it is cut into the skin beyond the required depth and extends to the upper parts, it will not harm it even then.
Therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
**On the Extraction of a Retained Pin (or Splint)**
**Head VIII**
The retention of urine in the urethra occurs due to a blockage caused by stone, congealed blood, pus, flesh growth, or similar conditions as mentioned earlier in the treatment methods for division.
And if the urine is not relieved and you see its retention due to a stone that is located at the neck of the urethra, then he should be laid on his knees for treatment.
Then his feet should be placed on his back, and he extends his breath from the upper part of his back, and tightens his weak breath as much as possible.
Therefore, it is effected by pressing the neck of the urethra towards the rear to expel the stone, which releases the urine.
If it is not relieved as we have said and the condition of the patient is serious, then he should undergo extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: made of silver, thin, flexible, smooth like the stalk of a feather, about the length of one's palm from the middle knuckle. It should have a thin canal at its tip.
And the method of removing a thorn is through itself to take a doubled thread and wrap it around the end with wool or cloth, a good ligature; and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syrinx; and cut away any surplus wool with shears, and insert it into the cannula with caution.
Then, soak the syrinx in oil or butter and albut (a type of herb); and make the patient sit on a seat, and insert the vesica (urinary bladder) probe, and the urethra probe with moist oils, and olive oil, and warm water.
Then insert the syrinx into the urethra easily until it reaches the root of the urethra.
Then double that part above the navel. Then push the syrinx inside until it reaches the vesica (bladder), and the patient feels that it has reached the empty place; and this is not done in this order unless the passage through which it flows is one where there is curvature.
Then extend the thread with the wool slowly.
The thorn will follow the wool.
Then extract it and let the thorn pass through the urethra; repeat the syrinx and do not stop doing this until the vesica is empty and the patient feels relief. On the quality of enemas with a clepsydra.
**Chapter LIX**
It is indeed closed, that is, blocked.
And it has three openings; two from one side and one from the other, as you can see.
And the concave space where that which drives it is located, corresponds to the amount by which it expands itself without addition, until something is drawn out with it from the humidities; and when it is driven, with it is expelled far away; according to what the clepsydra does, through which naphtha is discharged, that is, Greek fire in martial contests.
When water is therefore discharged into the urethra, insert the end of the clepsydra into the humidity and draw it with that which drives it towards higher regions, for humidity is drawn into the concave space of the clepsydra. Then insert the end of it into the syringe, as we mentioned.
Then he drives out moisture with what drives it, for the moisture reaches the wound immediately, so that the patient feels it. The form of a delicate enema used for cleansing the wound.
Then insert a strong thread into those holes as they open. Then, add a circular bandage, as you would a splint; after which, place what you wish from moistures, oils, and water within it.
Then, tie the bandage tightly with an instrument; and make it as you did with the wet cloth from expression with your hand, until moisture reaches the wound.
§ On the Extraction of Stones.
Chapter LX. We have discussed the division of stone types, their treatment with medicines, and the distinction between stones formed in the kidneys, bladders, and their signs; I also described the stone which requires manual operation and incision, and that one which is naturally expelled from the bladder; and I am recounting them here with clear exposition and abridgment.
I say therefore that stones formed in the bladder most often occur in children.
And from its signs, it is that urine exits the bladder similar to water in its fineness; and white sand appears in it, and the weak man rubs his penis, and struggles with it, and often hangs from it. Then it protrudes, and the anus exits with it in many of them.
Healing is easy for children, from the age they reach fourteen years old.
And it is difficult in the elderly.
But in young people it is medium, because it is between these two: and the treatment is easier for him whose condition is better; and if his condition is poor, the cure is more difficult.
When we come to the cure, it is therefore necessary, in the first place, to cleanse the patient with a clister, to extract all the filth that is in his intestines: for this itself sometimes prevents the stone from passing near the inquiry. Then the patient is to be taken with his feet up, and shaken, and moved towards the lower parts: so that the stone may descend into the depths of the urethra, or sometimes jump out from its high position.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and let his hands be under his hips, so that the urethra may be entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and feel him externally.
If therefore you feel the stone in the passage, then at once approach with a knife to cut over it.
If it does not fall completely under your touch, then you should wipe the index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is a young boy; or the middle finger if it is a fully grown youth. Insert it into their anus and use the stone until it rests under your finger, then gradually turn it towards the base of the urethra.
Then press it with your finger and push it towards the outside, towards the place where you made the cut; and tell the helper to press the urethra with his hand, and order another helper to stretch the testicles with his right hand upwards, and with his other hand to remove the skin that is under the testicles in the area of the cut.
Then insert the forceps, which have this shape.
And find where it is between the anus and testicles, not in the middle, towards the left side of the birth canal; and make the cut above the stone, and place your finger inside the anus; and make the cut transverse so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow, according to how much it is possible for the stone to come out from there without being too large.
Perhaps the finger that is inside the anus near the stone, at the place of the cut, will press it and it will come out without difficulty.
And know that since the stone has angles and edges, this makes its exit difficult because of that.
And from it, it becomes soft, resembling a gland, and round, and thus facilitates its exit.
Therefore, those who have angles and margins, add them to the fissure.
If it does not come out in this way, then one must use skill over it; either tie a string over it with gentle movements, whose end is like the Moon, which ties over the stone and does not slip away from it; or introduce under it a fine instrument, carefully handled.
If, however, you cannot perform the above, then enlarge the opening slightly.
If something catches hold of you with blood, cut it off along with the jagged edge.
If indeed the stone is more than one, then push the largest first towards the opening of the wound.
Then incise over it.
Then push the smaller ones after it; and do likewise if there are more than two.
If the stone is very large, then it is done without knowledge, cutting over it with a great slice.
Since it happens to a sick person that one of two things occurs, either he dies or persistent urine discharge happens to him; for the place does not heal at all.
Indeed, the administration of expulsion should be done until it comes out; or use instruments in its fracture with shears, until you extract it piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with turpeth, and aloe, and dragon's blood; and bind it, and place over it a cloth dipped in oil and wine, or rose oil, and cold water, to soothe the hot fistula.
Then lay the sick person back on his collarbone, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
When you have loosened it, then rub the place with much water and oil.
Then care for the wound with the ointment of dyafinic and basilicum until it heals.
If, however, there occurs in the fistula a hot, sore, and similar ulcer; as if the blood is congealed in the veins, and urine is forbidden from exiting from it; then that is known from the release of blood with urine.
Therefore, insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood from it.
For if it remains, it causes the vein to corrupt and its putrefaction.
Then, clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt; oppose every kind of thing to it that is suitable from treatment until it heals.
And during the entire course of treatment, it is necessary to bind both thighs and compress them because of the medicines placed on the site.
If a stone is small and sits in the urethra, and it is fixed in it, and blocks the passage of urine, then treat it with what I have mentioned before you reach the point of dissection.
Many times I have avoided dissection through this treatment, for I have already tested it. And it is, that you take a perforator of iron, whose form this is, with three pointed ends, sharp, fixed on wood.
Then take a thread and tie the stone to it under the skin so that it does not return to the urethra.
Next, insert the piercing iron into the wound with ease until it reaches the perforating stone, and then gradually turn the perforator with your hand on the same stone. Keep turning until you make the other side penetrate.
It is immediately emptied (or drained).
Next, press your hand over what remains of the stone from the outer part of the wound.
It breaks off and is expelled with the urine, healing the patient.
However, if this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from being done: then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Next, dry the stone on the wound between the two threads.
Then, extract it (the stone).
Then, loosen the thread and clean the congealed blood in the wound.
And it is not necessary to use a thread under the stone unless it prevents the stone from coming out; and another thread above the stone, unless when the lower thread is loosened after the stone's removal, the skin returns to its place and the wound is healed; and for that reason, you must tie the upper thread so that you pull the skin up, so that it returns to your completion point, and heal the wound, as we said.
On the extraction of women's stones.
Chapter LXI.
A stone in women is not uncommon.
However, if someone develops such a stone, then the cure is difficult, and it is prevented due to its many modes.
One reason is that a woman may be a virgin. And the second is that you will not find a woman who refuses medical treatment when she is chaste or has a husband.
The third reason is that you will not find a woman well-versed in this art, especially in manual operations.
And the fourth reason is the distance from the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision, and there is fear involved.
Which, if it becomes necessary, then you should take a woman who is well-versed in medicine, and she is hard to find.
If indeed you desire this, then seek a chaste, subtle physician and a present woman well-versed in obstetrics, especially one who has learned this art, make her present, and to her, perform all that you command her regarding the examination of the stone. First of all, one must check if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to insert a finger into her vagina and feel for a stone.
If she feels a stone, she should squeeze it with her finger and then immediately call the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone; after that, she places her left hand over the opening and squeezes firmly. If she feels the stone, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the opening of the vagina down towards the root of the coccyx with the utmost care.
Then she should cut it at the level of the middle of the thigh near the root of the coccyx, from whichever side it is positioned, and feel for the stone; her finger should not move away from under the stone, which should be squeezed firmly, and the incision should be small initially.
Then she should insert the knife blade over that cut.
If she feels the stone, then she should adjust the cut according to the amount that the stone emerges from her.
And know that the types of stones are many. From it, there emerges a small and great, soft and hard, long and round branch.
Therefore, know the nature of it, as this will indicate to you about that which you see above.
If therefore blood binds you, then add to the place three layers of cloth and hold it for an hour until the blood stops.
If the flow of blood binds you, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then place dust over the place, and tie it with small strings tightly: and do not loosen it, and let go of the stone, and do not extract it itself.
Perhaps the weak woman will die.
Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place putrefies, then prepare for your operation until the stone is expelled.
On the incision above a water-filled hernia.
**Head of Chapter LXII**
A water-filled hernia occurs only when there is an accumulation of moisture on the inner surface of the skin covering the testicle, which contains a sac; and it is called a sac. And sometimes it is confined within its own bag, which nature has prepared for it in a certain part, until it can be expressed; which is another sac, and is the skin of the testicle between the white sac we spoke of; and this occurs rarely.
The cause of this formation of these branches is the weakness that occurs in the testicles, which is why this material flows to them.
And it also happens due to impact or striking above the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or it may have a decline to yellowish-green, or it is red-blooded, foul-smelling, black, or water-white; and that is the worst.
For if there is any change in the wound as we have said, then the fistula is round and of a length somewhat like that of the figure: and the testicle does not appear since it is contained by humidity from every side.
And if there is humidity in the flesh itself, then the fistula is round with a certain part of it, and because of this, a person thinks that it is another testicle.
And if there is humidity between the skin of the testicles and the white wound, then it falls under the sense.
When therefore you observe the colour of humidity, then examine the colour of humidity in the fistula with a square intruded, whose form precedes.
Accordingly, according to what comes out in the sign of the intrusion, judge of that which is between them.
When therefore we come to treatment with iron, then it is necessary that you urge the patient, if possible for him, to have blood drawn, and see his body full.
Then he should be laid on his back over a high place slightly, and under it many cloths should be placed.
Then sit you on his left side, and bid the helper to sit by his right side, who shall stretch his patient's leg to one of the two sides of the skin of his testicles, and to the part of his heart.
Then take a broad blade and dry the skin of the testicles from the middle along its length down to near the chest. And let the incision be made according to the straight line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white part that encloses them: then peel and observe, or carefully cut away this part, so as to peel it yourself. Let your incision be where your peeling begins, from the part that hangs down with the egg more than others. And examine the peeling minutely according to what is possible for you.
Then make a wide perforation through the white part filled with water, and extract all the water. Then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the white part upwards, without touching the skin enclosing the testicles: and cut into the white part as is possible for you to cut it yourself, either in its entirety or in pieces, especially its thin side.
For if you do not carefully examine the incision, there will be no security in it, but water will remain.
But if the egg proceeds from its skin during your surgical hour: then when you have completed the incision of the white part, bring it back.
Then join the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a stitch.
Then take care of it like the rest of the wounds, until it heals.
If you find a wound corrupted from blackness by another, then it is necessary to use ligation tools, which are the suspenders, in order to prevent the flow of blood.
Then cut the testicle with its suspender and extract the wound; afterward, take care of it as we have said.
If indeed water is aggregated in two parts, then know that they are two branches; therefore, dry the other part equally as you did with the other.
And if it agrees with you, so that it becomes one operation, then do it; afterward, wipe away the blood.
And insert into the sections a thread soaked in oil or rose oil; and place from outside another thread than you soaked in wine and oil, and spread it over the two testicles and open the abdomen; and place double cloths on top of them, which are small; and bind them above with a ligature, which has six according to this form.
Then take two cloths, and soak them, and fill them with dye according to this likeness; and make the ends by which it is pressed from cotton or wet wool; and join them with a tight band around the waist; and one end should be taken over the anus up to the back, and the second should be taken towards the chest area; and two other ends are taken over the lower thighs, and the other two ends are taken over the inguinal regions, and the whole tightness is joined around the waist.
And sometimes, this ram is medicated artificially with a cauterizing iron at the site of section: and it is as if you take a delicate scalpel and cut the skin with it along the testicles; and it is ignited, as we have mentioned, until it reveals a white surface containing water. Then take the cauterizing instrument in this form.
It is assimilated to Greek letters.
Then perforate that white substance with it, and ignite it until all moisture is expelled.
Then extend the white substance with hooks and scrape it away with a delicate, ignited cauterizing instrument, cutting it as much as possible until you completely remove it.
And cauterize from there, so that it does not touch the original fire.
And know that this operation is more salutary and prolongs blood flow less, and is better than an operation with section.
If indeed it causes you contraryness during the time of section or during the time of cauterization, or a warmth, or blood flow, or something else: then you should care for what contrariety it causes from that with the cure it is accustomed to, as mentioned above.
If, however, the patient is timid and does not expect this surgery because of his fear, then administer the puncture as I describe that it is.
When you have certified to yourself through what we said about the signs, that the patient has a water-like pulse: then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then puncture the fistula in the lower part of his body with a wide-bladed instrument: and place the puncture along the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place over the wound a clean dressing, tie it tightly, and let it flow until all the remaining water has drained out: then care for it until the wound is healed.
If, however, there is opposition to the flow of water during the time when you puncture it, and this is not due to a white skin flap obstructing the wound opening and preventing the water from flowing out; then you must insert a needle into the wound or an instrument with which the hydropic water is extracted, whose form has previously been described: or add a little to the operation of the wound.
And know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or about those times.
When it accumulates again, then it will be healed in the same way, and the patient will pass his days.
On the treatment of flesh wounds.
**Head XIII.**
Know that in this section about the ramicum (flesh wound), there are many dispositions to fear, leading to harm.
Therefore, it seems to me that its dismissal is salutary from that (condition).
And I am reminding here of the operation (involved) and the appearance (of the wound).
I say, therefore, that there are many apostematas (flesh wounds) in bodies, from which the testicles are composed; and this (wound) arises from many causes, namely. Or from the overflow of an acute (or sharp) wound, which flows down to the testicles.
Or from (the effect of) pounding (or striking).
And the color of the apostema (flesh wound) is according to the color of the body, and it does not cause pain; and this (wound) is a gray apostema.
And perhaps it is a stone-like (flesh wound), whose color is dark brown, and there is no sensation (of pain).
And sometimes it arises from the constriction of arteries and their swelling, as has been mentioned before; or from the swelling of veins.
What is therefore due to the swelling of arteries is known by the appearance of the apoplex when you press it with your fingers.
And it is not necessary for you to touch it directly at all.
What is done due to the swelling of veins does not disperse anything from it when pressed with fingers. And it is now possible that an incision can be made over this type of condition and over the other parts of the body; and it is like cutting the skin of the testicles.
Then extend the flap upwards and extract it with a clean knife; and free the suspensory from its origins, and tie the vessels; and cut the suspensory after you have freed it from all parts of the surrounding tissue.
If therefore the flap has become consolidated with those born tissues, then you must grasp the flap and cut it. And if there is an adhesion between something of the flap or in what is between the vessels, then you must free all that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If, however, there is a birthmark of the flesh in a place where adhesion occurs, which is at the rear, then it is necessary to cut out the whole of it and remove the adhesion, as we have said. Having thus completed your operation, then fill the wound with the ointment prepared from rose oil and wine; thereafter care for it as you do the rest of the healing process until it is cured.
**On the Care of Ramics (which is with Vine)**
**Head 149.**
It is a condition known as apoplexy, when there is an inflammation similar to a botch that affects the testicles, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk.
In the treatment of this illness, fear plays a part due to the remembrance of what preceded it.
Indeed, we must say that the operation on it is as they (the first ones) did. I say, therefore, that you must make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then make an incision with a sharp, straight blade across the vessels until they are detected.
Then scrape it from all sides, as we told you during the extraction of the arteries in the temples.
Then cut it in the middle with a straight section along the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from putrid, foul humors.
Then care for the wound with the same treatment as the other wounds, where pus is generated, so that the vessels nourishing one testicle will fall.
It is not, after all, a bad thing.
If, however, all the vessels happen to be affected, then they must be extracted for this reason, so that the testicle is not deprived of nourishment because of the incision, and it does not become gangrenous or wither, and there is no lingering pain with them.
On the care of the intestinal ramus. Head XV.
Why the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle.
And this rupture is either from a simple cut or from the extension of that cut.
And these two types occur from many causes. Or from impact. Or through a spasm. Or from noise. Or from the elevation of a grave condition, and similar things.
And the sign when it is from the extension of a cut.
It is that which happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and it is a deep gap opposite to the cut, because the cut compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from a clean cut, because it causes a sudden severe pain from the beginning: and it is a diverse opening, visible under the skin nearby: and that is due to the exit of the intestine, and its course towards the external sifach.
And when it comes out with the intestine twisted, and this is called the intestinal twist, or twisting of the intestine, and sometimes it occurs with a twist.
And when feces runs into the intestine and gets stuck there, it brings about great danger for a weak person, since it causes severe pain, especially when pressed upon.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear with regard to wounds, therefore one must be careful about cases involving it.
And the method of operation is to urge the patient, so that he reduces his intestine by hand to its own inner cavity, if he obeys it returns.
Then he is placed back over his collarbone between your hands, and raise his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin towards the upper parts, and dry the skin of the testes along its entire length.
Then fix in two jaws of the cutting instrument hooks, according as you need to open the cut with them; and the cut is made according to the amount that it is possible for him to come out from it.
Then scrape the skin from the channel and what is under the skin of the testicle, until it detects white, hard from every side; then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, where it is between the white channel below the skin, and between the second channel, and completely with it adheres to the posterior part.
Then move with the right hand towards the inner skin of the testicles: and as this extends the white channel upwards with the left hand, encourage it to move with the channel; and then, carefully, pull back the channel to loosen the adhesion at the rear, completely.
And ask your fingers to ensure there is nothing left intact from the intestine inside the white, hard channel.
However, if you find anything left from it inside, then push it towards the center below.
Then take some wax, in which there is a thick thread made from ten threads, and insert it at the rear of the channel, that is, the tunic, which follows the cut under the skin of the testicle; then cut the ends protruding from the thread until four threads remain.
Then arrange some of them over others in the form of a cross and bind them with the channel we mentioned, which is under the skin of the testicle; do this until no part of the vascular tissue can be seen to come out of them; so that there will be no risk of infection from heat.
And again, place the second ligament according to the first, distant from it by less than two fingers.
And after these two ligaments, separate them from each other using a knife, which is beneath the skin of the testicles, in the amount of the length of a finger; and cut through the rest entirely according to its roundness, and remove the ovum from it.
Then, cut through the lower part of the skin of the testicles where the blood flows from, and drain it as we described in what has been said above.
Then apply a strip of linen soaked in oil to the wound, and place it over the cut; and apply the ligament as we described.
And when the white skin we mentioned has been cauterized after the cut, be careful of the flow of blood.
Indeed, this often happens.
And leave the ligament until it falls off on its own.
If, however, the case delays, then it is moistened with hot water; and place over it what we mentioned, until it falls off.
Then take care of the wound with the rest of the treatment for the injury, until it heals.
About the Rapidly Flowing Stream (referring to blood flow)
**Head XVI.**
In this book, I have not seen anyone who has dared to perform surgery with a sword.
And indeed, they said that it is done as we have narrated in the book which is called "The Canon" with respect to the heart.
Which is to tie the threads after making a cut over it with ease below; then dry it in the middle, and treat it afterward with what opens it, until the threads fall off; and treat the wound, as we said, until it heals.
§ On the disruption that occurs in the groin.
Head XVII.
When a rupture occurs in the groin, as we said, and the opening protrudes and does not extend down to the testicles involving any internal organs; and if it does extend, it is but slight and returns to normal within a few hours. However, if it prolongs with that condition for some time, an additional fissure develops in the scrotum until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And this occurs because of the extension of the scrotum, which is in the groin, as we said.
Which is because the scrotum extends: then it softens, and the opening shifts, and it protrudes.
And its treatment is with a cautery, as was described previously.
And sometimes it is treated with iron, in this way: and the patient lies on his back between your hands.
Then dry the place of the rupture and the prominent part, cutting across the width, according to the length of three fingers.
Then tighten the strings to the parts beneath the skin until it shows a clear white, which is under the skin that follows it.
Then take the knife and place it over the prominent part from the white, and press it deeply into the entrails.
Then prepare two prominent parts on the ends of the knife from the white, and attach one to the other with a stitch; then remove the end of the knife.
And do not cut the white at all, nor stretch any other part, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal branches. Then treat it with the care of wounds.
When therefore you cut the thread, clean it, and heal the wound until it is consolidated.
The suture is contracted, and no eminence of rupture is added.
And the cautery is better in this place, because it is closer to health.
§ On the softening of the skin of the testicles.
Head LXVIII.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in certain men, because the flesh surrounding them becomes soft, and the appearance of it is disfigured.
Therefore, he who is asked for his treatment should make the sick man lie down on his back, and cut away all the softened skin that has become detached from the natural skin. Then he should close the two lips with a suture: and if there is any surplus of the softened skin, he should make three or four sutures to secure it.
Then take care of the healing of the remaining wounds, until they are healed, and the threads fall off.
**On Castration**
**Head LXIX.**
**Know that castration is excommunicated by our law; and for that reason, I shall not mention it in this book of mine, and its remembrance is not necessary except for two reasons.**
**One of these is that a doctor should be familiar with it when asked about it, and know the treatment for those who have suffered from it.**
**And another reason is that we often need castration for certain animals due to our needs by it, such as sheep, pigs, cats, and similar animals.**
**I say, therefore, that castration is performed according to two methods.** **Or by friction.**
**Or by making an incision and opening.**
**In the case of those done by friction, the method of operation is as follows: we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles soften, relax, and hang down; then, with your hand, press them until they separate and no longer appear under the skin.**
In castration through incision and separation, you must hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
And this method of castration is better than that which is done by traction, because the traction may leave something from the testicles, which is why the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
§ On the care of hermaphrodites, two methods.
Head 70.
The hermaphrodite is from men according to two methods.
One of them is because it appears to have a space following it, or on the skin of the testicles, where it is between the two testicles, resembling the figure of a woman's vulva, and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the testicles.
However, in women there is one characteristic, and the female organ above the breast resembles the small male testicles, projecting outward; of which one is like the male's penis, and two are like two testicles.
And the treatment of three types, two from males and one from females, is as follows: because it is necessary to cut through the added flesh until the impression of them escapes.
Then, the care of these wounds is with the treatment of the rest of the injuries.
However, in the second type of males, from which urine passes, which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is there any cure for it at all.
§ On the cutting of the clitoris and the protruding flesh in the women's vulvas.
Head LXXI.
The clitoris may be enlarged beyond its natural size, until it becomes disfigured, and when it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it reaches the size of a man's, and even reaches the point of coitus.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess of the clitoris with the hand or a hook, and cut it; and not too deep into the cut, especially at the root, so as not to cause bleeding.
Then care for the wound itself with treatment, until it is healed.
However, in the middle stage, there is a part that is born from the mother's orifice and does not fill itself until it reaches its proper size; and perhaps it will emerge outwardly in a shape similar to a tail. And for this reason, some people call this illness "tail-borne disease".
Therefore, we must treat it as we do the tentacle, and care for it until it is healed.
§ Regarding the care of the Alratic, which is a woman's vulva not pierced.
Head LXXII.
The Alratic is such that it is the woman's vulva not pierced, or has a small opening.
And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is from a disease that precedes it; and itself becomes either from the flesh that has grown there, or from a subtle discharge, or a thick one; and it appears either in the depths of the matrix, or on its sides, or at the top of itself, or at the bottom; and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation.
And knowledge of it is gained through examination of the obstetrics, if the opacity is apparent and close.
However, if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
However, if the opacity is from a very thin membrane and is close to both lips, then approach it and break it open.
And it is, as you place two small pieces of cloth over the lips.
Then place your two hands together and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart.
Then extend the lips firmly until the thin membrane breaks and the opacity opens.
Then take a cloth, soak it in oil, and place it on the area; have the woman press it daily so that the wound does not harden again.
However, if the membrane is thick and hard: then it is necessary to cut it with a sharp, similar broad leaf of myrtle.
However, if the opacity is from flesh grown over, then suspend it with hooks and cut it; and use medicines that stop the flow of blood without bruising, such as Acacia and Dragon's Blood, mixed with alum and wax.
Next, insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal quickly, and hold it for several days. Then apply linseed oil, after which it should be treated with the remaining remedies until it heals.
And when a birth occurs within the womb of living flesh, it must be done in this manner: as long as there is no sign of cancerous decay, for the cancer that is within the matrix should not conflict with the use of iron entirely.
§ On the care of hemorrhoids, Athhelil, and the red botch on women's bodies.
Head LXXIII.
Hemorrhoids indeed are the opening of the veins' outlets, as long as much blood flows out from them persistently.
When hemorrhoids become severe, they turn into botches (thehil), and I have already spoken about their types and signs. Here, I will say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
I say, therefore, that hemorrhoids which are within the matrix's opening and do not appear to the senses: then there is no cure with iron.
But those which are from them within the matrix's opening, on which the senses fall, are those that are treatable.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce a woman into a cold house.
Then extend the edges with scissors or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.
Then clean them near the flow of blood from one of the cuts without causing an infection, such as oak sap, dragon's blood, pitch, and similar substances.
Then push her feet against the wall at that moment.
After that, place her in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, and rhubarb bark, and gallstones, and similar substances.
Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If blood comes out with it, that is good; and if not, make the back and breasts adhere without scarring.
Then take a thread, dip it in tarash (a dye), or in sea snail extract, or in the sap of winged elm bark, that is, in alum, wine, and make it adhere to the wound.
When the abscess has healed, then treat the wound with ointments until it is cured.
The true red (fever) is similar to the heads of garlic, and it has a rough appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what appears from it, according to what I said in those parts equally, and treat (the wound) itself until it is cured.
§ On the perforation of the uterine neck that occurs in the matrix.
Head LXXIV.
Many types of abscesses occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone-like abscesses, ulcers, festers, and erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, cracks, and pustules, and hot abscesses.
And I have indeed already spoken about all these ailments and their kinds, and the signs of each, and their treatments in division: it is necessary that I should speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the matrix, when it is from abscesses that gather blood, and we must know how its opening is made with a blade.
Therefore, it is necessary that you should consider.
Then if the pain of the apoplexy is acute at its onset with its blow, and with flame and fever, and you see it turn red, and if the sense falls upon it, then you will not rise with the perforation of that wound, and treat it with what is beneficial beyond its over-ripening, until such time as the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
Then you must make the woman sit on a seat that supports two cushions, and recline or lie down on her back, and bring her feet up to the lower part of her belly; and let her hips be spread apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them with both corresponding bands.
Then the midwife should sit on the woman's right side, and use an instrument to open the orifice of the mother's womb.
Which is the form that comes into those that are afterwards.
And when you see to administer this instrument, you must insert it into the deep part of the woman's womb, so that what enters from the instrument is not deeper than the womb itself and does not harm the patient.
If, however, the instrument is deeper than necessary, then you must place small pieces of material over the cover of the deep part of the womb, to prevent the instrument from entering entirely into the womb itself, and you must ensure that the spring which runs in the instrument extends from its upper side, and hold the instrument steady until the deep part of the womb is opened.
When the opening appears and is touched by hand, and it is soft and supple, then it should be cut off near its own head with a wide scalpel.
When the wound is thus cleansed, then it is necessary to apply a thin layer of oil of rose or oil of myrrh, which has some astringent quality, and place the poultice, then extract the section deeply into the matrix.
And place on the outside over the matrix, and over the comb, a clean woolen cloth soaked in water with badles (bulliae).
Then it is treated after two days with the appropriate ointment until it heals.
And when the matrix and the wound are cleansed so that it is washed with water and honey, then afterwards with water in which a root of lily or long aristolochia has been boiled, and finally return to the ointment.
If the wound is hidden inside the matrix, then it is necessary to prevent treatment with iron, but rather take care of it as we said regarding division.
**On Obstetrics: How embryos outside the mother's body should be treated, according to their non-natural form of exit.**
Chapter LXX: Head
It is necessary for the midwife to understand the natural form of childbirth first.
From these signs, therefore, if you see a woman pressing down below and desiring to smell the air and feel relief above her from childbirth, and she hastens the exit of the child, then know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the second stage follows with it: either suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord. Therefore, when you see these signs, then it is necessary to press her belly so that the embryo descends quickly.
However, any childbirth outside of this one is unnatural, reprehensible.
For when the foetus emerges on its feet, and its body before its head and feet and one hand or foot, or its head and hand, or turns around over its collarbone, and such like from unpardonable forms.
Therefore, the midwife must be prudent and subtle in all these matters, and guard herself from error and deception, and I am showing every figure from them, and how the skill is in it, and it is indicated by that, and stands over it.
When the fetus comes out from above its head in a natural delivery, and it becomes burdensome for the woman, making childbirth difficult, and you see that its strength is already weakened, then make her sit on a seat or have women support her. And apply vapor to her womb with fennel seed cooked in moist oils.
Then the midwife should insert her finger between her lips and find the second [spasm], and cut it with her nail until the fluid runs clear from it; and she should press on the woman's womb until the fetus descends.
If, however, the fetus does not descend, then the woman should be given a enema with fennel mucilage mixed with sesame oil.
Then after the enema, tell her to press herself, and make her sneeze with the mixture, holding her nose and mouth at the same time.
The fetus will come out immediately.
If both hands of the fetus come out first, then you should gently pull them back one at a time.
If, however, she does not obey during the introduction, then place her on a seat and raise her feet up; then quickly tilt the seat over the ground, and have someone hold her to prevent her from falling during the tilt.
If the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies, then cut them and extract the remaining parts of the fetus, and tie its hand with cloth, and extract it carefully, for it will emerge.
The outcome of the fetus on its own feet.
When the fetus emerges on its own feet, it should be gently pushed upwards; then gradually turn the fetus; afterwards, leave it alone.
Then take one of its feet and gradually stretch it out.
When they emerge up to the thighs, then strongly press them and make it sneeze with a condition; for it will emerge if God wills.
And if it does not emerge as we have described, then gradually reduce the fetus until you place it according to its natural form.
For it will emerge then with easy exit.
If it is prevented from emerging as we have described: then take some mucus of the womb, and oil of the navel, and dissolve the gum; and strike all of it well in a mortar; then line with it the vulva of a woman, and below its entrails.
Then make her sit in warm water until she achieves relaxation.
So, when you see that her lower parts have been warmed, then make a poultice of myrrh and apply it to her.
When she can hold the poultice for an hour, then make her sit on a seat.
Then make her sneez, hold her mouth and nose closed, and gently press on the lower part of her belly.
The foulness will leave immediately.
The fetus emerges on the knees and hands.
When it exits in this manner, then slowly insert your hands while delivering.
Then the woman should lie back on her collarbone, hanging her feet down below, and she herself should rest on the bed, covering herself with her hands.
Then gently press above her belly gradually.
Then extract what is under her feet from the particles, until she is prepared in the lower part.
If the fetus does not come out, then take its feet and move them with a gentle motion.
Then press gently what is above the hypogastric region slowly until the fetus ascends to the upper parts.
Then he should insert his hand and gently extract the fetus slowly, and especially instruct the woman to press until the fetus comes out.
The fetus, hanging laterally from the hands.
Use your hand for its reduction.
If, however, it cannot be reduced, then support the woman and make her walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed and gently strike her legs with a rhythmic motion.
Then apply the liniment prepared from mucilages.
If she feels the pains of labor, then make her sit on a chair.
Then focus on reducing the hands and aligning the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and instruct her to press herself until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus is over its own neck, with its hands expanded, and its face is towards the back of its mother.
It is necessary for the midwife to hold the fetus' hand, then gradually unravel it, and align it with ease.
When it is aligned, then place over its head what we described as oil and mucilage.
Then instruct it to move gradually.
After having done that, then have it sit on the seat and instruct it to lean towards its right side.
Then instruct it to compress itself, and have it sneeze when ready.
The exit of the fetus is prepared on its side.
When it descends to the mother's opening in this manner with the plug, then cut the plug with your finger, until it is emptied of moisture.
If it hangs over the fetus' face and neck, then make an incision from its navel, so that it does not get trapped and die.
Then push the fetus towards the inside until you place it as it should be, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times; for thus it will emerge through the vaginal opening.
On the emergence of twins or multiple fetuses.
Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born.
However, that of having three or four is rare and unusual.
Indeed, it is a matter outside of nature, and they do not live completely; and they contain themselves, even when they multiply, in a single sac; and they separate through a natural opening, distinguishing each one from the other, joined at the navel to their common umbilical cord.
And sometimes they emerge as one fetus does through a natural opening easily; and they emerge through a terrible opening, as we have narrated. If some of them are difficult during childbirth and reach that which we have said from unnatural figures, then care for them as we have narrated: and let it be a narrow obstruction, and do what it does with ease or slowness, and stretch according to every figure as it is prepared for it by the skill leading towards salvation.
Sometimes one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, or even more than ten are formed in the matrix, and as I write this, it has come to my knowledge that a woman, during abortion, gave birth to seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
Which is done according to the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore, all of this must be known by the obstetrician. Perhaps she may find something similar to it; therefore, she should oppose it with what is necessary.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
When you treat a dead fetus that does not come out after division from the medication and you need to extract it with your hand, then you must consider:
If the woman is of healthy constitution and is not suffering from any of the conditions which one fears might lead to her loss, then she should be laid on her back with her head lower than her feet, and her legs raised; and let someone support her from both sides or bind her to the bed so that her body does not slip out during the extraction.
Then he moistens the mother's wound with wet oils mixed with mucilage, fennel, and flaxseed. Then she greases her hand with these oils and mucilages, and then introduces it into the mother with ease.
Then he seeks with it the place where the hooks of the fetus enter, and suitable places for that.
Therefore, at that time, if the fetus is prepared to descend over its own head: then he fixes the hooks in its eyes, or its neck, or its mouth, or its palate, or under its beard, or in its furca, or near its ribs, and under its ribcage.
If, however, the descent is over its feet, then in its pelvis, and its middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the hook with his right hand: and places his fingers of his left hand within it: and introduces it with ease, and fixes the hook in one of those places we mentioned, until he reaches the natural opening.
Then it should be extended equally, and not only in a straight line, but moved to every part so that its outlet is relieved, as is done with a tooth during extraction.
And it is necessary that there be softening of the extension in what lies between.
If a part is retained from that, then it is necessary that the midwife apply some fingers lubricated with oil and insert them from the side to break free what is retained.
So if the fetus part emerges, then the hooks are changed to another place that is higher: do this until the whole fetus has emerged.
If therefore the hand comes out before others and it is not possible to reduce it because of its contraction, then it is necessary that a cloth be wrapped over it.
Then extract it until the whole thing comes out, cut it or incise it at the joint of the plant (finger) or at the wrist: and thus you should do with the other hand and both feet.
If however the fetus' head is large, or there is a contraction when it comes out, or water has accumulated on its head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a sharp-pointed instrument called a Spatumile and hold with it the head, and extract the water; or break it itself with an instrument called Almisdac, whose shape corresponds to that of the other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly, if the foetus has a large head by nature, then it is necessary to cut open the mother's abdomen and extract the child with misdelivery, as we said.
Then, take hold of the bones with pincers.
If the head gets out and is stuck at the level of the fork, then it is necessary to keep trying until the moisture that is inside the chest is discharged.
However, if it does not complicate or obstruct the exit, then cut the head as much as possible for you.
If the lower abdomen is infected or there is hydrops inside it, then you have to pierce it until the moisture runs out of it.
If indeed the foetus is above its feet, then its attraction is easy and its direction towards the mother's mouth is lighter.
However, if it gets stuck at the level of the abdomen or chest, then you have to extract it with the cloth that you wrapped over your hand, and open the abdomen or chest until the moisture inside runs out.
If the remaining limbs are removed and the head is brought back, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the opening of the matrix is wide, then he should insert his hand into its depths and feel for the head with it, and draw it towards him with his fingers until it reaches the matrix's mouth; then he should insert one hook or two hooks in there and draw it towards him.
If the matrix's mouth is constricted due to the heat that has befallen it, then one should not strive over it, but rather administer emissions of moist substances, fat-based ones; and apply plasters; and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
If the fetus is positioned on its side, then it may be able to reposition; then one should administer what we have said regarding a living fetus.
If that is not possible, then it should be cut open fragmentarily, and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave anything from the second layer inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said regarding the hot apoplemas that occur in matrices.
If there is a blood flow, then it should descend into stipulative waters, and administer the remaining cure.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb was dead within; then she became pregnant again on top of that, after which the other fetus died too.
After a long time, an abscess formed in her navel, which became inflated until it opened, and then it began to discharge pus.
I was therefore called upon to treat her, and I medicated her for a long time; but the wound did not heal.
I then placed some strong plasters over it; and an opening appeared in the place.
Then several days passed, and another opening appeared.
I was therefore amazed to see that there was no opening in the abdomen.
I therefore thought that it was because of the bones of the dead fetus.
I then examined the wound, and removed many bones, while helping the woman to be in better conditions; and it had not been thus for a long time, and it began to discharge pus from the place little by little.
And I did not stop here with this foreign matter, except because there is knowledge and aid to it, which the skilled physician administers by hand from treatment.
On the shapes of the instruments necessary for the extraction of the fetus.
Chapter LXXVII.
Here below is the shape of the forceps, whereby the books are brought together, having two notches at each end of the two wooden arms.
However, this notch should be made more delicate with a forceps, and it can be done from either ebony or wood.
And the width of each piece of wood should be like two fingers; and the edge of each is like one finger, and their length is a palm and its middle part; and in the middle of both pieces of wood are two additional parts of the same kind of wood, already fixed on both sides, whose length is the middle part of a palm and a little more or less: and the width of each is like two fingers, or a little more or less.
And these two additional parts are inserted into the mother's womb so that it opens with them when you remove both notches.
The shape of the forceps when it opens the womb.
Another shape similar to it but more delicate and lighter.
Make it from ebony wood or bushy, according to the shape of the forceps.
However, at the end of it, there are two additional parts, as you can see above; and the length of each addition is about the palm, and the width of each is the span of two fingers.
When you wish to open the wound with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down, and open what is between her legs.
Then insert these two joined additions into the wound, and you hold the end of the instrument below between her hips.
Then open your hand with the instrument, as you would with scissors, equally according to the amount that you wish to open from the mouth of the wound, until the midwife does what she wishes.
The shape of the other vertigo as mentioned by the ancients, the shape that impels the fetus, what it is impelled by.
The shape of the almucant (a surgical instrument) which is used to compress the head of a parous woman (a woman who has given birth). The shape of the instrument used to hold one spine.
The shape of the instrument used to hold two spines.
The shape of the forceps with sawtooth edges, which is used to compress the head of a fetus.
The shape of the instrument with two ends, used to sever the head.
The shape of the two wide scalpels (spatumilia).
All these instruments are used, and the more varieties there are and the better they are prepared by the craftsman, the faster they can perform their function and the higher their value among people due to their quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any of these instruments, but ensure that you have prepared them for use.
The need for these instruments is indeed inexcusable.
## On the Extraction of the Secondine (a surgical term)
Chapter LXXVIII.
When the second stage of labor is prolonged, it is necessary to support the exhausted mother so that she can retain her breath.
Then make her sneeze when she is in a calmer state: and place your hand over her mouth, and her nostrils.
If therefore it emerges through this, it is good.
If this does not work: then take a pot and perforate a small hole in its lid; place inside some herbs that open the mother's womb, such as calament, rhubarb, aneth, chamomile, fennel, and centaury; or any of these herbs alone, and immerse them in water, then place them on the fire.
Then place a hot compress made of birch bark over the opening of the pot, and its other end against the mother's womb; and hold it until steam reaches the depth of the mother's womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we said.
The second stage will then pass with ease.
If, however, after this cure, it does not withdraw, then instruct the midwife to dip her hand in sycamore oil or alum water. Then he should insert into the vagina and feel for any signs of the second stage.
When he has found it, then he should take hold of it and gradually stretch it out.
If, however, it is attached deep within the mother's womb, then he should insert his hand as we have described, until he finds the second stage, and extract it gradually according to its right position, so that the womb does not fall during the strong traction; indeed, it must be turned with ease to the right and left; then add to the amount of traction.
It then obeys and tightens, and is released from adhesion.
Which if the womb's bone is constrained, as we have already mentioned: treat it with sneezes and from the poultice of herbs.
If, however, it does not withdraw with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeating the process of extraction.
Indeed, it is necessary that what comes out from the womb to the woman's hip be bound.
He then cleanses it with a four-ingredient ointment.
Indeed, it will putrefy and dissolve after a day, and then it will come out.
However, when it putrefies, a bad smell is released from it that affects the stomach and head, and it harms the patient.
Therefore, it is necessary for them to administer appropriate fumigations to it.
Some of the ancient ones were already experienced with the fumigations of nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for fumigation for women during childbirth and menstruation.
Let it be made from a similar kind of pipe as the alcama or from clay: and place its broad end over the fire; put the fumigation on top of the prunes; hold it until that fumigation is consumed, then take another one.
§ On the healing of an unperforated anus.
Chapter LXXIX.
Many children are born with their anus unperforated, which has already been successfully treated by a skilled surgeon.
Therefore, the midwife must pierce it with her finger if it is not already pierced; and if that does not work, pierce it with a sharp spatula, but be careful not to touch it.
Then place over it a cloth soaked in wine and oil.
Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
If, however, it does not heal, then insert a lead pipe into the wound for several days and remove it when the child wants to pass stool.
And it has already happened that the anus is pierced during the healing of the wound or the fistula.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut that consolidation, then treat it with what we said from healing and lead. **On the healing of fistulas occurring in the lower part.**
Chapter LXXX (80)
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are a matter of inflammation and enlargement that happen near the anus or in the space between one part and another, and they can be one fistula or multiple.
As this inflammation ages, it opens up, allowing moisture, either clear liquid or thin pus, to drain from it.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate from within.
And there are fistulas when they penetrate in the space up to the vesica and even the urethra.
And they can penetrate up to the hip joint and even to the node of the tail.
From the recognition of a penetrating fistula up to the anus, even from one that is not penetrating, it's as if you insert your index finger into the anus; and try to gently insert a thin instrument into the fistula with air or iron: when there is no curvature.
If there is curvature in it, then insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
If you do not feel any sensation within, and nothing comes out through the wound in terms of discharge, or swelling, or pain as I mentioned, then know that it is not penetrating. Therefore, proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates to the urethra or the bladder, then its meaning is the discharge of urine from it, and its prohibition from this so that the place may heal with medicine.
If it indeed penetrates to the hip joint or the socket of the hip, then its sign is that it reaches there without any curvature up to the socket, and pain is felt around the area, and pus comes out from it always, and treatment does not heal it, nor does it improve with ointment.
And for all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure at all; their treatment is a struggle and vanity from foolish doctors, over whom it is built. However, in those that are not penetrating and are not old, there is hope for healing with a bandage; as I will tell you, and I have already tried it: and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back, and lift his legs up to his hips, and his hips are inclined towards his breath.
Then insert a lead or air probe into the fistula if there is any curvature, until you know where the attempt reaches.
If, however, the patient feels weakness around the anus, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger into the anus.
If therefore you feel in your finger that it is trying to penetrate by itself, apart from what you feel between your finger and the anus or the flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating. Do not therefore exert yourself on it, because its healing is not as we said.
They also said that in some men, the flesh heals and relief is obtained from the application of a hot cauterization, as described previously, subtilely following the extent of the fistula, and insert the burning cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus.
Then repeat the process twice or three times, until you know that all those added and filtered flesh have become dry, similar to a feather's thin tube.
Then care for it with lint soaked in butter until the dried flesh is shed; then care for it with balms that produce and strengthen flesh.
If therefore it heals, it is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other cure ever.
If the attempt (to extract a foreign body) succeeds but does not reach your finger, which is inside the anus and between the point of impaction and the wound, thick with flesh or filled with pus: then you will see a fistula following the surface of the skin. You should dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and as you cut through the attempt that is in the fistula, continue cutting until the sectioning reaches the end of the attempted point, and the attempt is freed and falls out.
Then cleanse those filtered meats, which resemble feathered tubes of the ear, so that nothing remains from them.
However, if the blood binds you and releases between you and your surgery so that you can cut those meats, then it is better and more quickly healed with heat or with sharp medicine.
Since cauterization with fire associates good habits, it adds to the burning of those meats, and stops the flow of blood, and dries up moisture.
Then care for it with lint wrapped in butter, or crushed scales, until the place emits pus, and those dried meats emerge from the pus.
Then care for the wound with consolidating ointments that harden the flesh: and these are medicines in which there is constriction and drying.
For when you restore, then it is already healed; and do not fear repetition. However, if a fistula has already reached down to the deep anus and extends from excess fluid of the body: then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
If therefore you feel a trial, and between yourself and it there is a wound from healing or flesh, and it is close to penetration: then there is no operation on that unless according to faith and hope.
Which is, because it is administered in three ways: either by cauterizing it, as we have said; or by cutting it off, until you obtain its detachment, so that it becomes possible for you to introduce the license and healing from next.
And do not proceed too much with the cutting, so as not to injure the ligament containing the anus, and cause a breach in the weak outlet of excretion without will. Then take care of that as we said. Perhaps it will be healed: either by stretching the wound itself and cleansing it after you have dried it close to the anus, as we said, or with attempts, or with another sharp instrument.
Then clean those filtered meats which are in the cutting, where you can with scrutiny.
Then attempt to restore the wound of the whole with a section, and the superior opening where it is being consolidated. And there will remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be lighter over the inferior part.
And sometimes a fistula is sought after in this manner: and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the skin and margin of the anus; then take hold of the perforated ends, which are like a scalpel, that is, the preparing coria, in this form.
And insert into it a wet thread from five threads around it.
Then insert the probe with a thread into the fistula until it reaches its fullness.
If it is penetrating the inner margin of the anus near to it, then extract the thread from that opening; so as to insert your finger into the anus and extract the end of the thread, and bring together both ends at once: and tighten each one, and release it after one or two days; and the more the thread penetrates into the flesh, tighten it well until the meats situated between the two ends of the thread are affected and fall off; then tend to the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
It is not for you to make that cut because of the laceration, lest you cut through itself.
Then do as we said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like fissure that forms a fistula, whose hardness is acute and sharp, and the other part is not sharp so as not to cut what is unnecessary, as you can see.
§ On the stitching of haemorrhoids, from which blood flows due to cutting them; and on the treatment of fissures.
Head LXXXI.
There are haemorrhoids according to two modes.
Or they are either inside the anus, like the seeds of figs or prunes, or as if they were new grains.
And from them there are small and large ones: and blood flows from them always, and it is one, but they are many.
And they are outside the anus, and at its extremes.
However, those that are outside the anus are for the most part of little humidity, from which the citrine water flows, or with a slight frequent flow of blood: and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the treatment of that which is inside the anus is to encourage the patient as you would a weak horse, and it should be expressed until the anus is relaxed and appears healthy to you.
Therefore, for that reason, also suspend them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail.
Then cut them at their roots.
If, however, they do not retain the hooks because of their humidity and the softening of both, then take them with a rough cloth or with cord made from double-twisted yarn, and extract them with your fingers.
Then cut them, and afterwards apply some warm, powdery substances over the cuts to help them heal in place.
Or, cauterize them according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization.
Then take care of them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not yield to evacuation, then the patient should be given a enema with a small amount of medicine to facilitate what is in the rectum and obey the evacuatory process quickly when it expresses itself.
However, if the objects are external and attached to the anus, then they are softer and easier to remove; and it is as if you can catch them with your finger or with a hook and cut them off.
Then take care of them with what we have said until they heal.
And if one avoids cutting with iron, then it is necessary to administer their stitching in this manner.
Take the soaked thread and insert it into the wound with precision.
Then pull out the objects towards the upper parts and allow them to penetrate with the needle from the other side of their root; and wrap both ends of the thread around the needle on its lower part, so that they are lateral and tight.
Then dry the thread and pull out the needle.
Do this with all the objects and leave one behind; do not let it drain excess blood from itself.
Next, place a cloth soaked in rose or saffron oil on the affected area, and then place the cloth directly on it. Instruct the patient to rest.
Then release it until it falls.
When therefore the blisters have burst, treat them with ointment and any other necessary care until they heal.
**On the care of fissures.**
For they often occur from dehydration and the natural constriction of the body.
When they have become old and are no longer responsive to medication, then you should use a knife or your finger to make small punctures in them, until they become moist and the upper layer of skin that prevents their healing is removed.
Then take care of them until they heal as necessary.
If however they do not heal: then repeat the process with a stronger reason than before, until they bleed much, and then take care of them until they heal.
**On the treatment of wounds that do and do not open, as well as blisters and bed sores.**
Then take care of it: and if you want to cauterize it, do as was mentioned in its preceding chapter.
However, from the athelil (skin) after it is cut off, there remains a small eminence, rough, filigree, round above the surface of the body.
And often, these occur in the hands of children.
And its treatment is to stretch the skin, and cut it deep; or tie it tightly with silk thread; or with hair, until it falls off.
And if you want, cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine as was mentioned before; and thus the skin will fall off, either turned inside out or not, without using any instrument that I have said. Formica, however, is also a small prominent eminence filtered and coarse, extending to the surface of the body, penetrating deeply within it; and when cold reaches it, it feels like a bite from a formica, and this occurs throughout the body, especially in the hands.
And its treatment is that you take a small tube from the feather of a goose or a strong vulture, and place this tube over the formica until it contains the entire circle of the tube from its parts.
Then, with your hand, turn the tube until you remove what is around the formica, and insert it deeply into the flesh, and extract the formica from its root. And if you wish, make it with air or iron in this form.
Place your finger on top of the tube to draw out the dead tissue so that it does not grip or twist around your digit.
And if you wish to cauterize the formica as mentioned above in the cauterization of Athelil in the chapter on cautery, do so.
§ On the forms of instruments used for clistering in cases of ano-rectal disease, and of enema solutions, and for colic.
Chapter LXXXIII.
Sometimes the clyster (enema tube) is made of silver, or brass, or cast iron, or hammered metal.
And sometimes these instruments (enema equipment) are made in different sizes, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, what is administered for the treatment of young children should be light (in strength), and likewise their enemas, especially if their anuses are weak or painful.
Large enema
Small enema
His instrumenti (enema noozle) constructione habent sic ut supra diximus: the upper part of its head where the uterus is tied should be wide, and it should have a distinction (a specific shape) so that the uterus may be tied as you see, and its lower end which enters the anus should be blunt, not open, soft, very flexible, and on one side there are two openings, and on the other side one opening.
The size of the opening should be according to the thickness of the radius, and it should be slightly larger than a palm, and the uterus (in which medicinal substances are placed) should be from goat's intestines or from paper tubes shaped like a small crook, whose root is one palm wide.
When, therefore, the other thread is placed in it, tie it at the end of the catheter between two strong constricting points.
Then use the catheter.
And this is the form of the ring and holes as depicted here. The quality of using the catheter is as follows: to fill the other thread or use a warm wash from medicine according to the amount of tolerance of the sick person; and be careful that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs towards the upper parts; and place under him a pillow, that is, skin or linen upon which people lie.
Then moisten the end of the catheter with oil or alum or with a mucus of fennel or similar substances.
Then introduce the instrument into the anus with ease.
Then the assistant should take hold of the instrument with both hands simultaneously, and express it with vigor until all that is in the bladder is discharged into the intestine. Then remove the bladder, and elevate the patient's legs towards the wall. If the medicine encourages him to defecate, then he should retain it as much as possible.
And if he sleeps with it throughout the night, it is the final step in the treatment.
However, if you perform the enema on a patient suffering from abdominal pain due to the solution, and hurry its expulsion, then repeat the enema until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful fissures in the anus, then use a mild enema, gently, from the enemas that are used for children.
And this should be the form of a mild enema, over which the skin should be tightly stretched.
§ On the healing of head wounds without bone fracture.
Chapter LXXIV.
I have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section of this book, and I will now describe here how to treat them with the hand and medicines as required.
Therefore, I say that wounds differ according to the type of wound and the place on which the wound falls.
The nature of the wound often resembles a stone thrown, or a cut with a sword or knife, or a blow with a lance, wood, or arrow, and other similar things.
Wounds that occur according to the places in the body are like a wound that falls on the head, neck, chest, belly, or limb, and similar ones from other parts of the body.
And I am describing the treatments for certain wounds in order to set down this reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, since the reader's memory of the composition will come at the beginning of chapter three.
Therefore, I say.
When a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no fracture of the bones, consider whether it was caused by a blow from a stone or something similar, and has already damaged only the skin: then it is a large wound, and you should apply a cold compress to ease the flow of blood from the affected area. Act quickly and perform a cephalic phlebotomy immediately, without delay. Remove the blood according to the amount of force required, unless there is something preventing phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is in small quantities.
And if phlebotomy is performed on the opposite side of the wounded area,
And the patient should avoid overindulging in wine and heavy food.
However, if something prevents reducing the blood, then the patient should reduce their intake of food and avoid meat and wine.
And if a hot abscess occurs, apply a poultice of rose oil or wine with astringent properties to the wound.
If, however, you are free from the hot abscess, then apply a poultice to the fresh wound if it still bleeds and has not changed colour; I will describe this later. And if it has already changed colour, then apply some ointment until it heals.
If the wound is large or was caused by a cut with a knife or similar, and the edges of the wound are not approximated by small poultices, then approximate them with sutures as I will describe later on internal wounds and their stitching.
If, however, a wound has already been detected that is hanging down from the bone and there is no retention of it, except in a small suspension, then incise it.
Then care for the wound with medicines, and restore the hard flesh in place of the skin, and especially instruct the patient to take foods that are substantial, such as grains and cooked cereals, until it becomes firm like a pulse and similar to them.
If you notice putrefaction on the skin that is not attached to the bone, then incise and remove the putrefied part entirely and throw it away; afterward, care for it.
If, however, there is an artery or vein in these wounds from which blood flows, and it does not cut off through medicines, then seek help regarding the artery.
If therefore you find it not cut, then dry it with a spatula or bind it.
If, however, there is a need to provoke it when it does not respond to what we said, then cauterize it until the blood stops.
Method for Treating Wounds.
Take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts unburned lime; mix all together thoroughly and strain it: fill the wound with this mixture and apply a good constricting bandage, until it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with blood.
Then tighten the bandage from above with small twigs, and leave it in place, but do not loosen it until it is certain that the wound will not reopen.
For this medicine is not removed from it until it is healed.
Then take care of the rest of the healing until they are healed.
**On Wounds of the Neck**
**Head 75**
However, if a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no distinct difference in treatment, and it is similar to treating a head wound when it is simple.
However, if a nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, then there is no skill in it for treatment, except to use something that creates a constant constriction, such as a tight bandage or pad, and similar things.
Since nerves cause pain and strain against each other.
And do not put anything cold over the wound at all, since the substance of nerves is cold and continuous with the brain, which is the highest part of the body; and it should be treated gently from medicines, as a sore toe washed repeatedly with sweet water mixed with oil, or rose oil, and turpentine, when it is also drained with sweet water; and other mineral stones, according to this manner, and moist ointments.
If, however, the wound is large, then apply a stitch; otherwise, close its lips with small threads.
Then care for it until it heals.
If indeed the wound is deep, or there is a cavity in it at the lower part where pus has already collected, then perforate it in a more depressed place within it.
If, however, an artery has already been cut into the wound and its blood flow is occurring: then separate, or dry it, and tie that very one; or cauterize it if necessity calls for it.
If, however, the throat's cartilage or even its whole structure has already been severed and healing has begun: then close the edges of the skin with stitches above the throat's canal, and do not touch the throat, but rather equalize it to its natural form.
Then tighten the wound with a suitable bandage, and leave it for a few days.
Then care for it with ointments that have hemostatic and drying properties until it heals.
If, however, the wound has left an impression in the bone, then examine it; and if there are any fragments of bone within it, extract them entirely or as many as you can; and leave what cannot be removed, until the wound heals, so that pus does not drain out and the wound is separated and relieved.
If the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on it the powder that I described.
However, if it appears in a wound that has an open bone and forms a fistula, then treat it according to what is mentioned in its respective chapter.
Chapter LXXXVI.
If therefore from a wound there issues a flux of blood, and the patient grows weak because of it, then know that it is a mortal wound.
If it is not deep and is fresh with its own blood, then do not put powder on it at first nor tighten the wound, so that the blood does not get trapped in its depth and return to the heart, causing harm to the patient; but apply a drawing ointment on it and loosen it once a day.
If you do not have any ointment at hand, then put on the wound a piece of old cloth to absorb what comes out from it due to moisture; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that whatever is gathered there can flow out.
If indeed three days or more have passed since the wound, and no spasms occur in the patient, nor any bad heart tremor, nor constriction in breathing, and you see that the rest of its dispositions are good, then know that the wound is sound.
Therefore, treat it with care and with the appropriate remedies, until it is healed.
If indeed the healing of the wound excuses itself, and it opens up permanently, then know that a fistula has already been formed.
Therefore, treat it according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut with a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back: then treat it as you did before with the stitching, if it is deep; or with dust, if it is small.
If, however, it has already made an impression in the bone, and a splinter is protruding from it: then examine the wound, and reach out to extract the splinter if they are separated.
If indeed they are not separated, then leave them be until the wound putsrefies, for extraction would only worsen it.
Judgment on the rest of the wounds' accidents in the remaining members is the judgment we have mentioned regarding their cure.
On abdominal wounds, intestinal perforations, and their outcomes.
**Head LXXXVII.**
The disruption that occurs in the intestine can be major, medium, or minor.
From the major disruption, therefore, sometimes the intestine emerges or the number of intestines.
Why such an intrusion occurs, and why their stitching becomes more severe and difficult.
And the minor disruption is also made difficult in another way.
Therefore, it follows that their reduction becomes more difficult if you do not act properly in their intrusion to the place they belong; because they are inflated, opened, and enlarged, making their entry more difficult.
For this reason, the medium disruption of them becomes better: because when their reduction is not difficult as it is in these two species, it becomes less severe.
Know that the stitching of wounds follows four modes.
The two common stitches converge in the stitching of the abdomen and in the stitching of the rest of the body's wounds; and the other two stitches properly communicate with the rest of the wounds.
However, they are more proper with regard to sewing up the entrails: and I will tell you about each one, with its exposure and explanation. I say therefore, because when a wound is newly formed and something from the intestine comes out of it, making it difficult to return it to its place, then that is the reason for one of the two methods.
Or because of the fragility of the wound, as we said; or because there is an inflation in the intestine due to the cold air.
When therefore it is so, then you should warm it up, so as to immerse a sponge or a damp cloth in lukewarm water.
Or dissolve it in a mixture of vinegar, squinant (a type of herb), and spice, and wrap the intestine in it until the inflation is resolved.
It makes wine within it, which has a constricting effect: and it is better than just water for resolving inflammation.
When you see that the inflammation is already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which other herbs have been cooked, or (alternatively) cold water.
So that the entrance of it is facilitated with the decrease of swelling.
If, however, his return after this treatment is delayed, then find in the rupture a small amount, with the instrument used to cut the hemorrhoids.
And the initial treatment is better when it is prepared than the cutting; and there should be no forced attempt to cut after necessity and the deficiency of the instrument.
That part of it [the hemorrhoid] which is bent, acute, and the other part not acute, and its tip is not thin like that of a needle, but rather blunt a little; and this one resembles chalk, as you will see.
When the wound expands and enters the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be made according to its own natural form in its proper place, if possible; for this is better.
When the rupture is extensive in the lower part of the intestine: then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head.
And if it is in the upper part of the intestine, then place his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And similarly if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the intestine, then direct your attention and always keep in mind that the part with the wound be considered as the upper part compared to the other.
And thus it is necessary that you should apply it to great wounds and to medium wounds.
However, for small wounds, apply it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it so that there is a faithful servant between your hands, who holds the wound entirely with his hand and closes its lips.
Then, take from that which follows the stitching some of it at a time, and this is the common way to stitch one.
And it is necessary to take wax or a sharp instrument according to the quantity and width of the wound.
Then, leave a quantity of the wound's edge equal to the ring finger, that is, of the surgeon: and fix the wax in two parts on both ends of the skin when you insert it into the wound from inside, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have already joined the two ends of the skin, and the two ends of the sifac: and there are four orders.
Then, with a double thread, tie around the wound several times from both sides at once, until the two lips of the wound's closure are adequately joined.
Then, leave the thickness of a finger and fix another piece of wax in it: afterwards, cut it with the thread as you did with the first needle.
Do not therefore cease to perform that with it which you need from the bed, until you complete the closure of the wound entirely.
And there should be needles of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, for the fine ones penetrate flesh very quickly, and the coarse ones are difficult to enter the skin; therefore, they should be of medium thickness in both fineness and coarseness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be fixed in both extremities of the skin close to each other greatly, so as not to pierce the flesh quickly or open the wound before its healing, and also so that they do not elongate with stitching, preventing the wound from healing.
Then incise the end of the needle so as not to harm the patient during his sleep, and place small pieces of cloth on all sides holding the ends of the needle, and release them until you know that the wound has already healed.
And indeed, this type of stitching is more suitable for small wounds.
Since it is enough for stitching them with one, or two, or approximately those needles.
The second type of stitching is common, as it joins four ends: two ends of the skin and two ends with a single needle, with a thread of equal thickness to the needle in fineness and coarseness.
Then, when you have penetrated with the needle these four extremities, bring the needle back from the part where you began, so that the threaded thread falls from the upper part of the wound. Let the stitching be like the stitching of cloth with which cloths are sewed, and place between every stitch a quantity equal to the thickness of a small finger.
However, people know this stitch.
And with this stitch, I have sutured the wound that happened to a man in his belly, who was wounded with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was greater than one palm; and it had exited from the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and there was a disruption in the middle of the stomach.
I therefore reduced it after the intestine had remained outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound was therefore consolidated in the space of about fifteen days: and I took care of it, and it healed; and he lived after that for many years, restored to his former state.
And the doctors judged that he would not recover.
And it was a miracle that I did not treat it with ointment.
Because I was in a place where I could not find ointment, nor anything from medicines.
I therefore placed a old, familiar poultice on the wound twice daily and diligently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
I will now describe the two types of suture according to the narrative of this discourse.
And so it begins with the acute suture: insert the point from outside to inside.
When the needle has penetrated the skin and moved along the wound according to the length and breadth of the entire body: leave the end facing sideways where you introduced the needle, and allow the other end to penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other extreme.
When you have caused it to penetrate in this way, then make it penetrate in the same manner from the outside towards the inside at this extreme: and leave the end facing sideways, which is on this side, and cause the needle to penetrate the other end from the inside out to the other extreme; and cause it to penetrate with your penetration as you cause it to penetrate into the leftmost extreme, which is in that part, until it penetrates into itself entirely.
Then begin again from this same side, and with the same end, which is on the other side facing away from the first, and extract the needle from the skin through which it had penetrated.
Then insert it back into that skin, and with the same end facing away from before, which is on the other side, make it penetrate with this extreme; then extract it from the skin of its own part, and make one cut after another, and do so until it has entirely come out according to that example.
And the essence of this suture is that it should envelop the skin like a cloth wraps around its edges, so that with one motion you pass over one part and with another motion from another side, until you complete it.
A second type of suture, as described by Galen.
He describes his method as follows, in accordance with the practice of certain surgeons, who join all parts to their appropriate counterpart according to nature, applying one end of the suture to its other end and the other end to its corresponding end.
And that is what I have described to you.
You should now fix your attention on the end of the suture close to you from the outer part and make it penetrate towards the inside, and then release both ends of the suture.
Then take the other end and make it penetrate from the outer part towards the inside to both ends of the suture.
Then take both ends and make each penetrate from the inside to the outside towards the other two ends of the suture, which are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common facile suture, and it is the suture about which we have just spoken.
This is therefore the speech of Galen as well.
And certain people said.
The suture of the stomach is corrected with two hooks.
Which is, as you insert into them one thread of each: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from what is with you, and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side, according to the suture of their corias equally.
And know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the stomach, then its suture is more difficult than those of the other parts of the stomach.
The judgment of the treatment of wounds, is the judgment of the other wounds.
Which is because when you treat a fresh wound with its own blood, before it changes itself with air: and you reduce the intestines, and their own self, and make them suitable: then place on top of the wound's flesh.
Which if the air has already altered the wound: then place on top of it certain ointments that are present with you, until they form pus: and the threads fall out, and heal completely, and are healed perfectly.
Then care for it as is done for the treatment of the other wounds, until it heals.
However, if you do not have these medicines at hand, then apply them immediately to it, from which it begins to discharge pus, and change it back to its usual state twice a day, as I taught you, until it heals.
However, if these times occur, which communicate with the wound to the main parts of the body in the injury, then it is necessary that you immerse a soft cloth in oil of a moderate heat, or in rose oil: and place it around the areas that are between the groin and under the armpits.
If however, you feel pain, or punctures, or putrefaction within your intestines (which often happens), then enema it with a stippler wine, black and warm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached the intestine and become an exit penetrating to its innermost parts.
And know that what comes from the thick intestine is of easier healing; and what comes from them of the thin is of more difficult healing.
However, the intestine called the jejunum does not allow healing from a wound that occurs in it at all; and that is because of its abundance, which is due to the veins, and their size, and also because of the thinness of the body itself, and the closeness of its own nature of nerves.
If, however, what proceeds from a wound is pus, and you obtain it fresh: reduce it according to your method of reducing the intestines equally.
If indeed a space has been left and it has now become hardened or black: then you should tie it up with a thread above the place that has turned black, so that there is no flow of blood.
In the pus, there are veins and arteries.
Then incise what is beyond that ligament, and leave both ends of the thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside of it: so that the pull of it does not interfere with the removal of the pus from the wound.
**Reminder of the wound that occurred in the intestine.**
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible for it to be restored in some people; because I have seen those who were wounded in their abdomen with a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the old wound had become a fistula, and things came out from it, and gas.
I therefore applied the treatment until I was no longer amazed at its healing: nor did I stop subtilizing it until it had healed and the place had consolidated.
After I had seen the wound healed, I feared for the patient, that something might happen to him; and nothing bad happened to him from that event.
And he remained in good health, eating and drinking, and engaging in sexual activity, and took baths, and followed his dietary regimens.
And certain experienced ones said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and is slight: then it should be bound in this manner.
And it is like taking ants of great heads.
Then bring together the two edges of the wound and place an ant on one of them that has an open mouth over the two edges of the wound.
When it bites into it and tightens its mouth, cut off its head, for it sticks and does not come loose.
Then place another ant near the first, and keep doing this until all wounds are filled with ants in sequence, according to the number of wounds throughout.
Then close it up and dress the wound.
For otherwise the heads remain attached to the intestine until it is fed and healed, and no further harm comes to the patient. And now it is possible to tie the intestines even with a fine thread; this is obtained from the intestine of an animal, attached to it after being introduced into the wound.
And it is also possible to take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it will be much exposed.
Then, tie the end of this fine linen thread with a stitch.
Then introduce that thread into the wound, and pull it through with the intestine.
Then reduce the swelling into the wound. And this method of stitching with silk and intestines is no other than according to faith and hope.
Know that a wound which is great, wide, especially if it affects one of the intestines' graceful loops, then there is no skill other than to narrow it, and its healing is not at all.
**On the care of ulcers and fistulas.**
Head LXXXVIII.
Know that every wound, or apostema as it ages and becomes old, forms an ulcer, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and is not cut off; then it is universally called fistula in any member where it may be, and we call it specifically "zuchemen".
And a fistula is, in truth, a hard, white, filtered knot according to the truth: it is without pain, but has the appearance of a feather's ear; and for that reason some call it risus, that is, a feather.
And in some cases it is moist, emitting pus.
And perhaps the moisture may be divided in certain hours.
And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce; and it may be thick, or thin.
And I have already mentioned in division, then when I speak of wounds, that every ulcer which is not healed, nor does it give birth to flesh, is not that unless it be for one of the nine causes.
Of which one is either because of lack of blood in the body, or because of its malignancy; or because between itself and the lips it has hard flesh, preventing the birth of meat; or because it has many sores and filthiness; or because the ulcer itself is putrid, and the matter sent to it is of bad quality; or because medicine is unsuitable in its healing; or because corruption descends into a region, which is a kind of pestilence, or through the property in the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta, where there is difficulty in digesting illnesses, and the healing of sores is delayed by nature; or because it has one mouth, or a number of bones.
And I now reveal all the causes and signs of these conditions, as well as their treatments with medicines in division: and here I must make you know the treatment of fistulas and incisions, which are made through a path of operation with the hand.
Know therefore that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body.
For from them (fistulas) there are those that affect great veins and arteries, or nerves, or sheaths; or they enter the intestine, or a canal, or some rib; or they affect the joints of the spine or the composition of connected parts; such as the hand and foot, and similar ones.
Therefore, from these fistulas in this manner, is difficult to heal from illness, and it does not accept treatment, and dealing with them requires effort and ignorance.
If it is from fistulas any of which the depth does not reach to these places that I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its healing, and wish to discover it, then take a try with air or iron, if the fistula tends straight, and probe it with the same.
If, however, there is a curvature in the fistula, then investigate it with a delicate lead probe.
Since lead, due to the softness of its body, is removed and healed around deformities.
If there is a fistula with many openings, it is not possible for you to apply pressure on it with your fingers.
Therefore, cleanse it from those openings through its own openings.
For the moisture that you use for enemas enters other openings and flows out of them.
Then examine it carefully according to what is possible for you: so that you may know if there is a bone or a nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or close, or whether there is a single fistula with many openings covering the entire area, with all your strength: when you ask about the patient's condition, and find pain at the compression with your hand over the place, and by similar signs and causes of accidents.
So when you have considered all of these things, then proceed to treatment with confidence: and it is as you consider whether the fistula is close at hand, apparent, or in a safe place far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you; then dry the fistula as was mentioned earlier from my narrative, and remove what is inside it from discharge, and corrupt flesh that grows in its opening from flesh, or pus, and similar things: and care for it until it heals.
If there is a fistula of great depth and it runs straight, then you should cut it as deep as possible.
Then clean it from all corrupted flesh.
Then apply a clean, sharp knife to the wound: insert it into the depth of the fistula which you have reached with the iron, and do this several times until the acute medicine has corroded all that remains in the fistula's cavity from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
If it does not heal through that, then cauterize it as we have described.
If the cause of the fistula is bone, and it is confirmed to you, then probe it and dry it as I have told you; if nothing hinders you from cutting an artery, or nerve, or major member, as we said.
If you detect bone that has become corrupted and blackened, then cut it until all of the corruption is removed.
Then care for it with what makes it flesh again until it heals.
If it does not heal and discharges pus as it did before, then know that you have not achieved complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore, inspect it a second time and make a thorough examination of its condition and purification with all your remaining strength.
Then restore it.
If it heals, then it is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is deep and far within the body, which you have not managed to reach.
You do not have any skill over it except to let nature release it.
If it is a small bone corruption and it is possible for you, then draw it out with delicate forceps that are suitable for it.
However, if there are many bones, then make a careful extraction of all of them, and do not release anything from them with your strength.
If something contrary happens to you from the humours and there is no fear or mistake in their incision, then cut away those humours and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If indeed there is no preparation for removing the bone from your moment, then place it over the wound that is causing its putrefaction and leave it until it putrefies to what is around those bones in the flesh and humors.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal.
And the incision should be constricted as much as you followed during your operation.
I suggest placing it over with a cloth soaked in tritured sulfur and oil, or in Egyptian ointment, or some other potent ointment.
For when those humors putrefy and the bones separate from them, their removal should be facilitated and their attraction eliminated.
However, if there is a single large bone, such as the shinbone or hipbone, and similar bones that have been corrupted, then it should be chipped away with the final tool, until that blackness and corruption are removed.
Then restore the wound.
If indeed what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it needs to be tightly closed and cut entirely up to where the corruption stops; then take care of it until it hardens. And I tell you of a cut that occurred in a man's leg: so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old who suffered pain in his leg due to a condition that had developed inside his body, extending from the inner parts until it reached the leg, and it became a great abscess; and there was no external cause.
So much time passed with him due to the error of the physicians, until the abscess opened and many materials gathered around it.
And the treatment of his leg was postponed until it became fistulated, and many openings were formed in it, which all discharged pus and bodily humors.
So many physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no skilled surgeon among them until I was called, and I examined his leg and saw the materials flowing from those openings in a great stream; even the entire body of the man had wasted away, and its color was yellowish.
I therefore inserted a probe into one of the openings, and the probe reached the bone.
I then carefully examined all the openings, and I found them connecting to each other in all parts of the leg. We therefore removed and followed along one of their openings until I discovered the portion of the bone; and I found it corrupted, already corroded, blackened, and perforated, until it had penetrated to the marrow.
Therefore I prepared what had been discovered by me from the corrupted bone.
And I determined that there was no corruption in the bone other than what could be removed, so I prepared to cut it away.
And I had already eradicated it.
Then I placed the restoration of the wound with long spaces filled with consolidating medicines.
And it was not consolidated.
Then I tried to restore it.
And it was not restored.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it was quickly consolidated, and it was healed; and this repetition was not necessary in the operation itself, nor in its section, except for the arrangement of the weakness of the patient and the lack of his endurance, and my fear of death over him, because he suffered syncope from excess evacuation at all hours.
Thus healing is complete health; and firm flesh grew at the site of the bone, and a good arrangement was made within his body, and its strength returned; and it was restored to its previous state; and it caused him no discomfort in walking at all.
However, if a prominent bone in a previously broken part of the body needs to be set, it should be done thusly: take the ligament and tighten it at the end of the prominent bone, especially ordering someone to extend it upwards; and place another ligament, this time with thicker woolen thread. Then tie it over the flesh that is against the bone, and extend its end to pull the flesh downwards; and you will uncover the flesh above the place you wish to tighten, so as not to harm the cut with pressure.
Place wood or a board under the lower bone precisely; for when you do this, it does not prevent but rather cuts the rotten flesh.
And it is necessary that the tightening be over the rotten place for a little while, so that there is no collapse of the bones; and it does not appear in its appearance to the senses, and it prompts another turn to tighten itself. If a bone is corrupted and not protruding, then that part continues to be joined with the rest; the corruption is either in the middle or in some part of it. Then, remove all the flesh from those parts.
Then apply the lower splint.
Then, from the affected part on the first side, cut it with a saw until the joint continues from the other side; and make the lock according to the length of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut that corrupted joint and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
If the corruption is indeed in the continuity of two joints, then there is no skill involved except for filing.
If the corruption is in the thumb or toe joint, then the case becomes very difficult.
Indeed, it is necessary for you to inquire about the nature of the corruption as it appears to you.
And file it, and clean the affected area as best as you can, using any tool at your disposal; when it no longer causes any conflict with a vein or nerve.
And you should know that there are many cutting tools and saws for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bone, and their preparation, and the thickness of them, and their size, and their lightness or heaviness, and their rarity.
Therefore, it is necessary to prepare the instruments suitable for every kind of operation.
And know that these operations will indicate to you the nature of the instrument you need when you have a long study with it.
And the knowledge of these methods is a testament to the ways of illness; for then you will find within yourself what suits him from among the instruments for every disease.
The shape of the saw.
The shape of another saw.
The shape of the other saw.
The shape of the other saw.
This form of the saw is depicted, made to be centered. Make the bow of it curve upwards, its edge sharp as iron, and its handle out of boxwood, and have it shaped pyramidally in the center.
The form of the intersecting rasors.
This is the head of the rasor, according to the form of the locked star's head; and its points are according to the form of the elischefgi's points.
And it does not fit unless the heads of the intersecting rasors rub against it, when they are bent or corrupted, or if the mouth is wide and large.
The form of the larger rasor.
The form of the medium rasor.
The form of the rasor's side.
The form of the rasor where it is concave.
The form of the other rasor's fine point.
The form of the other rasor's curved extremity.
The form of the surgical cut, a delicate tentation.
The manner in which bones are cut.
The form of the great cut as well.
This resembles a key, and its end is like a saw; it appears in many places for the reason of the bones.
The form of the cut that relates to the reason it is pierced through bones.
Its end is triangular, the tips are sharp.
It fits from India.
And similarly, it is necessary that all we have said about cuts, incisions, and saws be done.
**On the cut of extremities and the locking of bones.**
Head 89.
The extremities putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When, therefore, you have medicated that corruption with the cure of medicines, and it does not yield to treatment, and you see that the corruption has spread to a member, without anything being affected by it, then you must cut off that member up to where the corruption follows, so that the patient is freed from death or from the evil which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign that this has occurred is that the member becomes discolored until it can be burned or rotten after turning black; until that rot is cut off where it follows the member and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, when making the proper cut, and similarly if the cause of the corruption is due to the impact of some venomous creatures such as a scorpion, or a viper, or a leech, and others like them.
If therefore the corruption or impact is in the tip of a finger, then cut off the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption to spread to the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it off at the base of the finger, and do not leave space for the corruption to spread until it reaches the wrist.
And if it spreads abruptly, then cut off the arm near the elbow at its joint. But if the corruption spreads and you see it around the elbow, then that is the death of the patient.
And beyond that care for healing, it is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly for the foot, when there is an unexpected corruption in a finger, then cut it off at one of the joints; and if it affects the nail of the foot, then cut off the entire foot.
However, if it ascends to the knee, then cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no skill left, except to sever it and let the disabled one die.
And the manner of cutting off the member, or severing it itself, is such that you tighten the ligament below, which you wish to cut, and loosen another ligament above the place.
And let the assistant stretch one ligament down below, and let another assistant stretch a ligament above upwards.
And you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments, with a broad spatula, until the whole flesh is detached.
Then it is cut or tied off.
And it is necessary that you cover all parts with a linen cloth, and do not allow the knife to touch any healthy place; and cause an addition of injury to the sick, and a hot aposteme.
If, however, a flow of blood occurs internally while you are operating, cauterize the site quickly or place on it certain powders that stop the bleeding.
Then prepare for your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature and care for it until it heals.
And I tell you about what happened to a man on his foot, the same thing that I am telling you about.
This is because a blackness occurred on his foot due to heating similar to burning from fire; that damage first occurred on his finger, until it spread throughout the entire foot.
The man therefore tended to himself, after he saw the damage occurring in his member due to the intensity of its pain, and the heat it encountered; and it affected him near the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same damage occurred to his index finger. He came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with what I placed on his hand from medications after cleansing his body; but the excess did not cease, and it started spreading to other fingers, until the damage spread throughout the hand.
He therefore called on me to cut off his hand, and I did not wish to do so, hoping that by doing so I could avoid the consequences of that surplus [tissue], but I also feared death for him at the very moment of cutting off his hand.
Since the virtue of the man was superior to the case.
After he had lost hope in me, he returned to his land, and later came back to me because of his condition, and cut off his entire hand; and he was healed.
And I did not narrate this story except to serve as an aid regarding what happens in this condition, and to explain its meaning so that it is understood according to how it is done.
§ On the care of wounds and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Chapter 90.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it forms a collection of pus, then later it ruptures or perforates, and whatever is within it from the pus comes out, leaving a hollow place as if it were a cavity; and the skin over it becomes thin like a cloth that has been worn thin: and it does not reach its ultimate state of corruption, nor does it affect the mouth, nor the nerves, nor the ligaments. It deserves to be called an abscess, and not a fistula; however, if the space of the abscess extends until it affects some of these members, then it is called a fistula or ulcer.
And the treatment for it is to incise that skin entirely as it has been weakened: and especially when it has become thin and like cloth, and you can be sure that it will not adhere to the place because of its own corruption.
However, if you hope that it will adhere to the skin and this final corruption does not result from it, and if there is thickening of the skin due to flesh, then treat it with a clister; and it is as if you were considering the sinus.
Then, if it is large and the pus that is released from it has a bad odor, then clisterize it with Egyptian medicine, which consists of equal parts of vinegar, oil, and zinnia, mix them together for use, and heat them over fire until the medicine turns red, and it will become thick like honey.
Then take from it what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey, and clisterize the sinus with it; then close its opening and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then extract it with expression; do this every day until the sinus is purified and the bad odor is removed.
And when you clisterize with ash water if this medicine is not available to you; and it is as if you were to take ashes from burning wood or ashes from holly wood, and throw water over them.
Then take it and wash with it, until you trust that the sinus is already cleansed.
If the patient cannot tolerate either the Egyptian remedy or water with ashes, then wash it with water and honey, to which something from crushed cumin has already been mixed.
Or wash it with honey and wine mixed together, because of the property of honey to cleanse and wash away, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of tightness and dryness in the wine.
Do this several times, and trust that the corruption of the sinus is already removed; then wash it with what makes the flesh in it come to life.
And it is, that you take from the paste of dyafinicon; and dissolve it in rose oil, and astringent wine; or wash it with certain medicines, and other ointments, whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the orifice of the sinus is tight, through which the cannula for enema does not pass, then enlarge it with a knife; or put in it a moist lint in Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is also wide, then add its lips with a stitch; and allow out of it as much as enters for enema without addition.
And likewise, if the opening from which purulent matter flows is raised towards the higher parts, it should be cut in the lower part where it is located, so that the purulent matter can flow out of it to the lower parts; for when purulent matter becomes confined in a deep sinus, it prevents the generation of flesh within it.
If it is not possible for you to cut the sinus around its lower part as you wish, then try to prepare the member in such a way that the purulent matter can flow out of it easily according to what you have prepared.
Try not to retain any purulent matter within it at all, and take the consolidative medicines placed on the wound, suitable for what you wish.
And extend them over the linen cloth.
And let the cloth be of such a size that it makes communication with the entire sinus possible.
Then, using scissors, cut directly into the opening of the sinus's foramen, making it slightly larger than the original opening of the sinus.
Then extend another linen cloth with unguents according to the size of the foramen, and place it on top of the previous one at a distance from the opening of the sinus, allowing the escape of purulent matter from it; but do not remove the large cloth unless after some days, once.
He who is above the opening of the sinus, it is he who moves at every hour to allow what has accumulated in it to come out; and you should know that the amount of fluid that flows from it can be great or small, or digested or undigested.
And consider again the place of the sinus itself; does its lord feel pain there, or is there no pain, and is there a discharge, or is there none?
When therefore your treatment is carried out thus, and you see the material coming out from the opening of the sinus, then know that the sinus has adhered or is close to adhesion; then resolve it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you have healed the wound, then change the bandage, and renew the ointment. However, if a subtle fluid comes out from the sinus after a long space of time, then do not despair about its adhesion, for healing is approaching, since there are people whose flesh takes a long time to heal in their wounds, and others who act contrary to that.
If however, after many days, undigested pus comes out from the sinus, then know that the sinus is not adhering.
If therefore the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and its condition prolonged, then add to the drying medicines, true physicians, that their substance may be humid, and their virtue dry; such as dyeing ointment, when a surplus addition is made to it from the skin.
And from the last of the more important ones that it treats, it is to take a dyeing ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and then apply it over the top of the ancient equal wine in its substance.
Then make it into a paste with it and use it.
And it does this similar action when you do not have the dyeing ointment available, using honey instead, after heating it until it thickens, and then using it.
Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense: mix them all together, and sprinkle it over the honey while it is still on the fire.
Then cover it with a cloth and squeeze it over the sinuses, and mix the honey you have heated until it thickens with it, until it becomes thick: then sprinkle the mixture over the top and place the cloth on top and squeeze it.
And when it is administered with the long wormwood and the roots of the heavenly lily, and there is a lily, and flour of herb and centaury.
Use them simple or mixed, squeeze it and sprinkle over the honey I described, and use that.
If the condition of the sinuses does not improve with this treatment, then know that there is corruption within it, or it has already left an impression on the bones, or on the hard remaining members, or on the ligaments, then treat it with the fistular cure as mentioned above. On the treatment of panaritis and the application of ointments, the addition of a cut digit, and amputation.
Head XCI.
Panaritis is an abscess that arises under the thumb nail of the hand or foot, and perhaps in other digits as well.
When this condition is prolonged and its treatment neglected, the abscess becomes heated and infected; it decays, emitting pus until it corrodes the root of the nail, or perhaps corrupts the entire digit, spreading as far as the bone, until it emits a foul odour; and the extremity of the finger becomes enlarged, and takes on a dark colour.
When, therefore, you treat it as we have described in amputation, and your treatment does not remove the excess, then it is necessary to cut with a knife the entire remaining part of the nail.
Then cauterize the wound after that.
Cauterization, indeed, is very useful.
If the bone is indeed healthy and the nail still intact but the edge cuts into the flesh and begins to pierce it, then you must place a thin beam under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it upwards; cut the flesh easily with this, and put over what remains of the flesh from burning medicines, until it is entirely removed.
Then, care for it with ointments until it heals.
However, if the corruption has already affected the mouth, then it is necessary to cut that part of the mouth and remove the affected tissue; for it will never heal as long as the corrupted tissue remains.
If you observe that the corruption is progressing to the finger, then cut it off at the joint, as mentioned in the previous advice.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
If however, the nail becomes frayed or struck, and it causes extreme pain, then it is necessary to use a leech to draw blood from the affected part first.
Then dry the nail using a sharp spatula, cutting across it from top to bottom.
And take care, so that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail; for you will cause greater pain to the affected part, and it will impede healing at the site.
Then care for the site with something that soothes pain.
The true finger that is born in some hands of men may be entirely fleshy; and perhaps there are bones in some of them, or maybe it has a nail; and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in certain knots on the finger.
Therefore, he who is born with certain finger nodes does not move, and he who is born near the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore, he who is among them (the fingers) is fleshy, his section (amputation) is easy.
Which is, as you cut into the same near its root with a broad spatula-like instrument.
However, the one whose birth is at the joint's root, its treatment (healing) is difficult.
Therefore, abstain from cutting it (the finger) off.
In him who is born in a finger near the last node, then it is necessary to cut into his flesh first with a round (incision) up to the bone.
Then, saw the bone with one of those saws suitable for it.
Then take care of it (the wound) until it heals.
The healing that occurs in the fingers, however, often happens due to either birth (present from birth) or from the healing of a wound or burn and similar conditions.
Therefore, it is necessary to remove that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.
Then place between them a thin layer of lead or soaked cloth in rose oil, so that they do not adhere quickly, and separate them; or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated as necessary.
And likewise, if there is a consolidation of certain fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to what has been prepared and suits the shape of the member.
§ On the incision of defects.
Head 92.
These are veins that are inflated, thick, filled with melancholic excesses which occur in many parts of the body; and their flow is greatest in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and work, and bear weight.
Therefore, it is necessary to administer purgation of the body from black cholera several times with strong purging.
Then make bloodletting on the veins of the patient with a lancet.
The treatment of these conditions with iron is according to two methods.
It is one of them, so that they may be bled, and black blood is extracted.
And another method is that the vein is made to pulsate, and all of it is extracted.
The true section of it is according to this method.
It cuts the leg first with much hot water until the thick, foul blood is resolved.
Then it tightens the leg of the patient from the lower part of the thigh to the lower part of the leg with bandages.
Then it dries the vein at one, or two, or three wide sections.
Then apply ointment to the lower part until enough blood has drained out as you see fit, and as much as the patient's strength allows.
Afterwards, bind it and strictly advise the patient to refrain from foods that cause black cholera, and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are filled and it causes harm to the patient.
The preparation of this substance is as follows.
If there are many hairs in the wound, remove them.
Then introduce the tip into a bath; or use a sharp instrument to puncture the leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins bulge; or perform vigorous exercise if there is no hot bath available, until the limb is heated.
Then dry the skin with a clean cloth along the length of the vein; or at its end near the knee, or at the lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with forceps and strip away the vein from all sides until it becomes visible; and at its appearance, you will see it turn red and then darken.
When therefore the vein has been withdrawn from the skin, you will see it as white as if it were a chord.
Then insert the blade underneath until it is completely removed from the skin; suspend it gently with a hook and let it drain.
Then dry another section near that one with three fingers.
Then strip the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears.
Then elevate it with the rods as you did before, and suspend it with another hook as you did initially.
Then cut another section, or multiple sections, as needed.
Then elevate it again, and make an incision on the last section near the heel.
Then extract it towards the section that is above it.
And do this until you have extracted it from the upper section or all higher sections, then make an incision on it.
If, however, it does not obey you when extracting and elevating, then insert a sharp two-edged blade and tie it, and extract it by force: or insert under it a rod, and turn your hand to every part until it comes out.
And be careful, so that it does not get cut.
For if it gets cut, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and the injury will spread from that point.
So when you have completely extracted it: then place over the wound a bandage soaked in rose oil or oil, and tend to it until it heals.
If the vessel (i.e., the vein or artery) is contracted due to a twist, and this twist needs to be corrected to reach its parts, and it is not as we said according to rectitude, then one must find a way over it to every part of its twist, and the places where its own untwisting should occur.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have entirely extracted it; and be careful not to cut the vein or injure it near your section, for it will be difficult to lift or extract it afterward.
Therefore, be careful with your prudence.
The shape of the incident that heals the vessel.
The shape of the nearby blind (i.e., blocked or obstructed) vessel.
It is not as hard as the other vessels, nor does it have sharp ends that would injure a vein; instead, it is of great flexibility and softness. If it were thin, it could pierce the vein with its thinness, but on the contrary, it has excessive thickness, as we said.
On the extraction of the vein of the thigh. Chapter 93.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands, such as those of Alizegis and the Arab land, and in dry, hot lands with little tenderness, that is, where grass or trees do not grow.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And indeed, its generation is from the putrefaction that occurs beneath the skin, as happens within the bodies of snakes and tapeworms, and worms generated between the skin and flesh.
And the sign of the onset of the course of this vein is what happens in the leg with a severe inflammation.
It then becomes narrowed.
Then the vein begins to exit from that narrowed place, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When it therefore appears from that end, then you should cover that segment with lead, whose weight is a keil of a drachma, up to two drachmas and the spot itself; and let the lead be suspended from the leg.
Whenever anything emerges from that [vein] towards the outside, cover it with lead and seal that spot.
If it is prolonged much, then cut off that part and sew up the remainder.
And do not cut it completely until it has come out entirely.
For if you cut it, it contracts and goes into the flesh, causing an ulcer and puttingrefaction in that place, making a bad wound.
Therefore, it should be treated gently and extracted gradually until the last part comes out from its place, and nothing remains of that in the body: and from this vein, in some people, flows a blood vessel five palms long and ten, in length.
And now it has reached me, because a man has come out from twenty palms (or fingers).
However, if it is cut during your treatment time: then insert a probe into its opening and make a long hole with the body, until all that is in it of matter is evacuated, and administer treatment to the place's putrefaction with medicines for several days. Then take care with the cure for the ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot itself; and it has many openings, and a branch goes out from every opening.
Therefore, treat it as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
On the division of worms generated under the skin, and it is said to be a "boil.
Chapter 94.
This boil is called a "boil" in some lands among us: for it often happens with cows, and it is a small worm, which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it crawls throughout the body, ascending and descending: and it is seen by the sense when it moves from one part to another, until it breaks apart wherever it breaks in the skin and comes out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humors.
As worms and snakes, that is, roundworms (lumbrics) and hookworms occur in the intestine.
And fear is from its evil.
For when it crawls throughout the body and ascends to the head, and reaches a place, then perhaps it opens within and comes out, and destroys the eye: and that happens often.
When therefore you wish to cure him and extract it, then that can only be done during his walking and the appearance of it to the sense.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above it and what is below it with a strong ligature.
Then dry it above and extract it.
If it is deeply inserted into the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a cautery on the spot with fire until it dies.
And worse than that, it is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said. However, if you see it has already reached the head near the eye, then tighten a good strain under it above the eyebrow.
Then dry it above and extract it.
And it is necessary for the patient to use purification of his body with medicines that dissolve bad putrid humors.
And he should beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On the cutting of a wound according to Nakir.
Chapter XCV.
This affliction is called Nakir in our land: it is a pain that occurs in certain members (limbs), and then it spreads from one member to another.
And indeed, I have seen it myself, according to what I am telling you.
I have been called to attend a sick woman in certain parts (of her body).
And she exposed her arm, and I saw a slight swelling in the vein at the end of her arm.
And after remaining for an hour, I saw one swelling move with a quickness, like a bowstring moving up towards her shoulder more quickly than it can be said; so that it looks like living silver running from place to place.
Therefore the pain subsided from that place and it became fixed in the shoulder.
Then after an hour had passed, it became still, and it moved into the rest of her body, until it reached the other arm.
He then told me that it was turned inside out throughout his entire body, as I could see.
I was amazed, therefore, at the speed with which he moved from one part of the body to another.
And I, indeed, had not before seen this sickness with my own eyes in such a way according to this manner.
However, I have seen many who discover the pain changing from one part of the body to another; and not see it with their eyes as they see it in a woman.
And I do not think that this is otherwise than because she was a woman among those who are discovered to have such dry body passages; from here, therefore, appears to the senses that change of air took place.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and have humid bodies, hidden passages.
So if you see the cure for it and the patient feels that pain, then if it is apparent to you as we said, then tighten above and below it quickly; and dry above it until that air released by constriction comes out; and cauterize the place.
If, however, you do not see it with your own eyes: then care for it with the discharge of the body, and with what it expels air currents, and poultices them with foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpentine, and similar things.
On the extraction of sagittas (arrows)
**Chapter XCI: On the Head** Arrows (sagittas) differ according to their kinds, and also according to the places from which they exit from the body.
The true diversity of these (arrows) is that some have large barbs, and others have few; some are pointed, and others blunt.
And among them (arrows) are those that have three angles.
And from them (arrows) there are those that have barbs.
And from them (arrows) there are those that have stars (or points).
These (arrows), indeed, according to the members (or parts) from which they exit, are according to two modes.
Or these (members) are indeed from the main, concave members, such as the brain, and heart, and spleen, and lung, and kidney, and intestines, and similar organs.
When therefore it (the arrow) exits from any of these members, and you see signs of death (as I will tell you later), then you must strive to extract that arrow from them, for death follows it where it is, in many dispositions.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and there is no arrow hidden deeply within the member, then extract it and care for the wound.
For when an arrow falls into the brain and penetrates a bone, and emerges on top of the brain, it is—since these things happen from that strong blow, and darkness, and giddiness, and redness in the eyes, and swelling, and redness of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of mind, and choleraic vomiting.
And perhaps blood may emerge from the nose or ears.
And perhaps speech may be lost, and voice destroyed.
And from the site of the wound, white humidity resembling pus emerges.
And it exits from that, resembling the moisture of flesh.
If therefore these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not emerge.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are as follows: that it is near the left breast; and it feels as if it were firmly fixed in a hard substance, not in something hollow.
And perhaps the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse: and blood flows out from the wound black.
And this follows with chillness of the extremities, cold sweat, and fainting.
Therefore know that death descends without doubt.
And the sign of the arrow when it strikes the lung is the spurting outflow of blood from the wound; and the limbs that follow, they turn pale, and the color changes to blue.
And the great, deep breath departs; and it seeks the attraction of cold air.
If the arrow falls into a wound within the chest, then it is near the small ribs; and this causes almost all of the upper body's limbs to move, with great pain and a deep breath.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, then perhaps something undigested will emerge from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged there, then something like feces or bile will emerge from the wound, or even broken intestines.
There is therefore no hope for his recovery, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and urine flows out, and something comes from it to the outside, and the pain grows stronger over the injured part, then know that it is mortal.
The remaining members, such as the face, neck, throat, ribs, sternum, backbones, furca, coxa, leg, and foot, along with similar parts from other members, are to be treated in many ways according to their positions; when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, and is not a deadly arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen these arrows to be as if they point to a sign for your cure.
Which is the case because an arrow struck a man's eye, at the root of his nose.
I therefore extracted it from his other side, beneath his ear fat; and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in his eye fat below his lower eyelid; and the arrow was already hidden, and I could not get it out except for a small part of its tip, with which it was stuck in its wood; and this was a large arrow among the arrows of the Turks, with soft iron, without ears.
Health is thus achieved by the Jew, and no evil befalls him through his eye. And I extracted another arrow from the throat of the Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it is that which has ears.
I therefore followed along over that same between the two guides: and it was already submerged in his throat.
I was therefore subtile with it, until I extracted it: and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the man which had fallen into his belly: and we thought, because he was perishing from it.
Afterward, when thirty days had passed, and nothing had changed over him regarding his condition from following the arrow; I pondered over it, and extracted it, and he was healed, and no evil befell him.
And I saw the man to whom the arrow had struck his back, and the wound was healed over it.
Afterward, therefore, after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman whose bowstring had pierced her belly, and the wound was healed over it, but the bowstring remained inside: and nothing changed from its original position, and the woman found no harm from any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man whose bowstring struck him in the face; the wound healed, but he did not feel much pain, and similar cases are numerous.
And I extracted a bowstring from a man who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it was already shifting towards the right side: and the bowstring was completely hidden.
I was therefore called upon to treat him after the bowstring injury for up to three days.
I therefore found the wound from the bowstring to be very tight.
I therefore examined it with a delicate probe, and I did not feel it; he himself, however, felt a pricking and pain beneath the skin on his right side.
I therefore hoped that it was the tip of the bowstring causing that puncture.
I therefore applied a poultice to the place, using one with strong drawing and healing properties, confident that the swelling would go down and I would see a sign of the bowstring's path, so that I could cut it out above it; but nothing happened at the site that indicated the bowstring had been embedded there.
Therefore, he applied an emplaster to it for many days, and no complication arose, and the wound became consolidated; yet the patient remained weak from the extraction for some time, until on a certain day he felt an arrow inside his nose.
He then told me this.
I then applied a sharp, corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened; and when I tried to pull out the arrow, I felt the fine tip of it still adhering to the wood.
Then I added more of that sharp medicine to the opening of the wound until we could see the end of the arrow; and it took about four months for me to remove it with him.
Then, after the wound had healed enough, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, I tried to turn and move it, but it did not yield; then I did not cease trying subtilely and ingeniously on it with means of mechanisms until one day, when I properly formed the forceps according to their final shape in a chapter, I managed to extract it.
Then I healed the wound.
And the doctors judged that the nose cartilage would not heal.
I therefore restored it, and the wound became healed and strengthened, and the sick was made whole with complete health: not a thing at all harmed it.
And I will tell you the quality of removing some arrows: so that you apply that rule and meaning to what I have not said.
Since the parts of this art and the distinctions thereof are not comprehended with narration; nor does that book comprehend it, and a prudent artisan compares with little to much, and with what is present to what is absent, and he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descent of external things in this art when they occur.
I say therefore that arrows do not emerge from the members in which they are fixed, unless according to two modes. Or through attraction from the place from which it entered inside.
Or conversely of the other part.
And that which comes out where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in the flesh, and is attracted, and comes out.
Which if it does not obey to coming out from the time in which it fell, then you must let that one go for a few days, until the flesh around it putrefies; and its attraction is released, and its coming out.
And likewise if it is fixed in the bone and does not obey you to come out, then leave it for several days, and repeat the process of drawing and moving it every day until it comes out.
If after several days it still does not obey you to come out, then you must drill around the arrow in the bone from all sides with a fine knife until the arrows are enlarged.
Then draw it out and extract the arrow.
However, if the arrow is fixed in the skull and has already penetrated into one of the brain's ventricles, and symptoms of some of the conditions I mentioned appear, then refrain from drawing the arrow and leave it until it becomes suitable to be drawn out after several days.
For if the arrow reaches the brain tissue, then death is not prolonged for it.
And if the arrow is not fixed, except only within a bone and does not penetrate to the brain tissue; and he remains weak for several days, without any of those conditions happening to him, then apply your skills in drawing and extracting the arrow.
However, if it is fixed strongly and does not obey you when drawn, then apply a knife around the arrow as described, using a wooden board; then tend to the wound until healing occurs.
If, however, the arrow is already concealed within the body and is hidden and disguised from the senses, then search for it with your probe.
If you feel it, then draw it out with instruments that are suitable for attracting it.
If, however, you cannot reach it due to the compression of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or vessels there: then find a place above it until the wound expands and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
If there are any other parts that should be held onto, then release the fixed flesh from all sides using every means and tool at your disposal, until it becomes possible to dislodge the arrow without damaging the bones or distorting them.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow, wherever it may be located, then use a twisting movement of your hand, along with pincers for all parts, until you make it come loose: and with the final subtlety, so as not to break the arrow, and to make its attraction and extraction difficult for you.
If you cannot reach it right away, then leave it for several days until whatever is around it putsrefies.
Then repeat the process: for it is now necessary, if the flow of blood opposes you, to apply what we mentioned from treatment in its chapter: and guard your strength from cutting into a vessel, or nerve, or string.
And use your skill in every way possible to achieve the escape of the arrow: and let it be with ease, tranquility, or delay, and firmness, as I have told you.
And you must, as you draw the arrow, make it weak according to its figure, according to how it was at the time of the arrow's departure from the bow.
Because it is more powerful.
However, if it is not possible for you, then use what is possible for you from the figures.
However, the arrow that exits from the opposite side of the other part, or has already proceeded from it towards the outside: it causes the end of the arrow to be bent due to the tension from the upper part of the nearby skin, and you will see it sticking out: so dry it above, and make the cut according to the amount that the pincers can grasp.
Then pull it: for indeed, it becomes easy to exit.
If indeed it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness until the arrow impresses itself into the bone and expands itself: then pull it.
And if not: let it go for several days: then repeat until it exits.
If there is a wood of the bow (Sagittae) within it, then push it with that.
However, if the wood falls and it is necessary to apply an impulse: then insert a sharp instrument into it so that its sharpness enters the end of the bow; afterwards, push it with that.
However, if the bow is bent, then push it with an instrument entering into it.
The bow will be straightened by that.
If the bow is damaged, then it is necessary to use a sharp knife to cut off all the corroded part where the string is attached, if you are able to do that.
Then take care of it with what is appropriate for that.
If the bow falls into the chest, or the abdomen, or between the ribs, or against a side, and it is close to where you touch with your hand when you try to lift it, and it is possible for you to cut it above that place: then cut it, and cauterize the wound from the string, or nerve, and extract it.
Then treat the wound, if you see one, and take care of it until it heals.
And this is the form of forceps by which arrows are extracted.
The ends are similar to the face of an ear, made like iron: when they grasp an arrow, they do not release it.
And they come in many shapes, large and small, medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's length, narrowness, depth of the wound, and tightness.
The shape of the impelling forceps is concave.
And the shape of the impelling forceps is also that of a hammer.
This is like the end of a hammer, which drives the arrow into the concave entrance and pushes it along with it.
The end of this concave forceps is also concave like a bird's wing: to drive the arrow's entrance into itself and impart its impulse.
**On Phlebotomy of Veins**
Chapter 97 The veins that are subject to phlebotomy, of which there are thirty in the body according to custom, are called the jugular, femoral, and saphenous veins.
From these in the head there are sixteen: two pulsatile veins, which are behind the ears, called the two herbs; and two arteries, which are visible in both temples; and two veins which are in the two lacrimal cavities of both eyes, called the observing veins; and a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein which is at the end of the nose.
And two guides, which are in the neck.
And two veins, which are in the upper lip of the mouth.
And two veins, which are in the lower lip.
And these are the veins called Algcherich.
And two veins, which are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins in each arm.
One of them is cephalic, and it is from the lateral sinus; and the common people call it the vein of the head.
And Fusca.
And it is a median vein, and it is composed of the branch of the basilic and the branch of the cephalic; and common folk call it the body's vein.
And the basilic, it is situated on the inner side of the body; and it is also called the titillar vein.
And common folk call it the abdominal vein.
And the vein of the forearm, it is situated above the joint; and this is where blood-letting is performed, and it is the visible vein that appears above the thumb.
And the superficial vein; it is the vein situated between the ring and little fingers, and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the leg and foot.
One of them is situated beneath the curvature of the thumb on the inner side of the finger.
And the second is the saphenous vein; its location is near the heel on the inner side of the leg.
And the popliteal vein; its location is near the knee on the outer side of the leg.
And there are three veins similar to these in another leg.
**On bloodletting from two veins behind the ear.**
True, bloodletting from the two veins behind the ear provides relief for chronic catarrh, half-headache (hemigrain), and old head sores (sahafati), and also for various old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of bloodletting is as I have described.
And it is done by shaving the head of the patient: and the back of his head is rubbed at the location of the two veins with a rough cloth for good friction.
Then the patient tightens his neck with tension until the two veins appear.
And the locations of those (veins) are behind the ears at two depressions in the head.
Therefore, seek those (veins) with your finger, and where you feel the pulse of them under your finger, there mark with hot wax.
Then take the phlebotomy knife, and that is what is called the "Incidens".
Then he inserts the needle under the skin until it reaches the vein, and continues until the leech (phlebotomus) reaches the bone (os).
Then take your hand with the needle and move it towards the upper parts, and cut the vein with a wound that follows the curve of the skin incision.
And the length of the incision should be about the size of two joined fingers, or roughly that; and let it allow as much blood to escape as desired.
Then tie it with threads and let it go until the wound is healed.
And this has already been explained at the beginning of the book regarding the incision and cauterization of these parts.
§ On phlebotomy of two arteries at the right time.
The two arteries that are used for phlebotomy at the right times in case of an old hemicranium (migraine), are the saphenous and the temporal artery; and they aid in a strong (sodam) and continuous (obtalamiam) flow of acutely flowing excess blood to the eyes. And the quality of phlebotomy for these is according to what I have told you.
He stretches his weak neck much until two veins appear clearly to the sense; and the pulse of them is felt under your finger.
Then indeed the signs with wax.
Then he draws the skin over the vein towards the upper parts with his index finger, and inserts the phlebotomy instrument below, and draws the vein up to the higher parts.
And he cuts it, as you did with the other two veins: and lets the blood flow according to the amount necessary for you. Then he loosens the ligature of the lower one, and places his finger on the vein at that very moment.
Afterwards he places a bandage and strips over it, and tightens the same with a strong constriction above: and leaves it until it is healed.
And now let us recall those things, and the incision of them, and their extraction at the beginning of this book.
§ On phlebotomy of the vein on the forehead after phlebotomy of the cephalica (vein in the head).
The true instrument of phlebotomy for the vein on the forehead is after phlebotomy of the cephalica, for old facial affections; and for hemigran and redness; and for bad ulcers.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is, according to what I tell you.
The patient narrows his neck with vomiting until the vein appears.
Then take the instrument called the "Fossorium.
Which has this form.
Place the sharp point of the Fossorium over the vein, and strike it with a plectrum, or any other instrument in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the amount desired.
Then open the lower perforation and tie it off until it heals.
And when it is opened with the side of the phlebotomy tool.
However, it is not necessary for the phlebotomy tool to have a sharp point like other phlebotomy tools, but rather it should be wide at the end.
And the phlebotomy should be made according to the turn, since the vein is close, and perhaps the phlebotomy tool may break when it is too thin.
On the bleeding of veins in two lacrimal regions.
The treatment of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal regions of both eyes is for eye problems and redness, as well as for conditions in the eye and face.
And the quality of the bleeding from them is such that it tightens the weak neck with bloodletting.
Then perform the bloodletting on them: and you should stand over their head.
And the bloodletting should be made according to the length across a little, with a small, flat phlebotom, for it is not painful in that place.
If the phlebotom is too thin, it may break.
Then make it flow out of blood as much as is necessary for you.
And place a cloth over them, bind them once at night, and loosen them in the morning.
¶ On the bleeding of the veins of the nose.
The veins of the nose, when bled, refer to acute fever, sudden pain, and face conditions such as migraine and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is long-standing.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is such that it tightens the patient's neck.
Then take his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long phlebotomy tool, and place it in the middle of his face, between what distinguishes the nose according to its straightness.
Since the vein does not appear there to the senses, and since blood begins to flow immediately.
And you should, with the phlebotomy tool in your final hand, make it flow according to your need.
Then bind it that night as well.
It will indeed be restored quickly.
**On the Phlebotomy of Arteries (of Guido)**
The true power of Guido's phlebotomy is to constrict breathing, stop the onset of leprosy, treat melancholy ailments, impetigo, bad ulcers, and corrosive, that is, worm-like afflictions.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is such that it tightens the patient's neck from both sides with a bandage: and the artisan should be standing over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat.
Then, the phlebotomist applies a wide vein-punch to the length of the desired incision.
Then, he extracts a moderate quantity of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that.
Then, he does the same for other veins.
Then, after loosening the ligament, he tightens the two veins with a medium constriction so as not to cause weakness.
And leave it until morning.
The wound will heal.
**On the Vein-Punch of Albucasis.**
The vein-punch of Albucasis, however, is effective for: since it leads to the flow of blood in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks in the lips, and bad ulcers even in the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of such vein-punches is that it makes the weak heart sit before you and tighten his neck with a strain.
Then he resolves the lips, and looks at two vessels: one is from the right lip, and the second from the left. And the proof of each is through the blackening of their colors.
And that is true because around them there are small, black vessels.
Therefore cut each one with an incise cut. If, however, there is doubt about which one it is, and you do not know which is that one: then turn your attention to the larger cut of them, and those that are more apparent.
And similarly, do with the two vessels that are in the upper lip: and indeed, custom most often runs with it. And cut the two vessels that are in the lower lip.
§ On phlebotomy: The veins under the tongue after the cephalic phlebotomy.
Indeed, the two veins that are under the tongue, their phlebotomy is for conditions that are in the throat, and the pain of the jaw, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that it seats the infirm between your hands in front of the sun: and elevate his tongue, and look under his tongue, from one side he has a vein, and from the other side he has another vein: and the color of each declines to blackness.
Therefore, the phlebotomy instrument for both [veins]: hold and guard, lest you use your last hand in phlebotomy on them.
For under it [the vein] there are arteries, and perhaps the flow of blood may happen from these arteries.
§ Of the three veins in the forearm.
However, the three veins that are bled in the forearm—these are among which phlebotomy is customarily performed on all people.
And phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods.
Either by pricking with the myrtle-shaped phlebotomy tool; or by making it incline to thinness with the oil-soaked one; or by cutting with the knife-like phlebotomy tool, which is Alnesil.
And this is the shape of it.
Thus, Alnesil is what pertains to cutting.
And from them there are wide and thin kinds according to the breadth of the veins; and the form of the myrtle-shaped phlebotomy tool is wide, as you see.
And it comes to opening the concave veins, full, proceeding, visible, thick, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
And this phlebotomist is of lesser width and more delicate extremities.
And it is used for phlebotomy of the delicate veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.
**On Phlebotomy of the Basilic Vein.**
However, the basilic vein, being one of these three veins, has the greatest effect for phlebotomy. Because it extracts blood from the ailments beneath the throat and neck, following to the chest and vein; and the phlebotomist should use caution when performing phlebotomy on it, as there is an artery beneath it.
If therefore he errs and adds to the puncture for phlebotomy, he strikes upon that artery, and a flow of blood occurs.
Therefore, one should not perform phlebotomy on it with the phlebotomist's knife; instead, it is better to use a scalpel (alnesil).
If the basilic vein does not appear with a clear manifestation, then one should use other veins, or switch to another, or seek out a branch of it; or perform phlebotomy at the site of its arm (funem brachii).
Indeed, it is evident, and dry it with a phlebotomist as we said.
However, if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the same part, then you must apply pressure before the tightness of the arm, until you know the place of the pulse.
Then mark the place with wax, afterwards the arm, and dry the vein with a concave phlebotomist, as we said.
And be careful not to hit through the space from the place of the artery.
And when you see, as you tighten the ligature, an inflammation at the place you marked with wax, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery: therefore let it go.
Which if you see blood rising at the time of phlebotomy like urine from a boy, and it is thin blood, red: then know that it is from the artery's blood.
Then therefore act, and place your finger on the same long space, then remove your finger.
If therefore blood is withdrawn (it is often withdrawn many times), then tighten the arm and release it: and let the patient be careful from its motion: and it should be above his fear.
And it should not be moved for several days until it is healed.
However, if blood does not drain and it binds you, and you do not have a ready remedy at hand, then cut the artery if it appears to be the case.
For its extremities contract and the blood drains.
Or accept the fistula skin and find it, take one-half and tighten it over the vein's constriction with a bandage and a little thread until another day.
Then if the blood drains, it is good.
And if not: then care for it yourself with the one whose memory precedes regarding the flow of blood from the place where the wounds drained; and the draining of its blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the wound's small location, and the possibility of binding with the arm.
**On phlebotomy of the dark vein.**
The dark veins, however, require a phlebotomy that draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for it is composed of the branch of the basilic vein and the branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it happened to the phlebotomist that he should place himself over her, for fear of her bloodletting, because there is a nerve under her.
If therefore he adds to the bloodletting in the puncture and finds a nerve, there occurs in her a stupor, and her healing becomes difficult, and perhaps she will not be completely healed.
And this nerve often appears to the sense.
However, if it is hidden in certain people and is subtle and not apparent, then you should place your bloodletting where the phlebotomist places his cut with alnessil (a surgical instrument) and gently press on the nerves with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein along its length.
**On the Cephalic Vein**
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood from the head and conveys it to eye diseases.
And in this vein, if you wish, as the phlebotomist does with a sharp phlebotomizer or a soft one, since it is the healthiest of all veins, as it is not beneath an artery or nerve. However, it is customary for you, in the act of bloodletting, to remove only the top part of the vein with a leech, and then seek a softer place; and it does not hurt him if it is not found with initial percussion, so that it can be passed over several times with bloodletting. However, it may be abandoned in some men when not bloodletting in the initial percussion, but it does him no harm that aposteme in some way.
§ On the usefulness of bloodletting and precautions to be observed in it.
The quality of bloodletting, and its accidents from it, on which you must reflect carefully.
First of all, you must know that bloodletting is not administered unless for the preservation of health, and its continuation, and caution against the onset of illness.
And bloodletting should be done on one of the three veins in the arm, namely the Cephalic, and the Falciform, and the Basilic.
And bloodletting should be done at the beginning of spring over fasting, on the skin, and in summer and autumn and winter after a meal, when signs of replenishment appear.
And let phlebotomy be performed on the first day, or on the third day, after three hours have passed from the previous day.
However, phlebotomy performed in illnesses does not have a determined time; but when the occasion and necessity arise for it, it can be done at night or during the day, and at any hour or time.
And it is not necessary for boys to have phlebotomy done until they reach the age of fourteen years.
Nor should a pregnant woman have phlebotomy done unless it is from the fourth to the seventh month.
Nor should the elderly, who have already passed sixty years, be subjected to phlebotomy.
So, when someone wishes to have phlebotomy for any reason, they should purify their bowels before phlebotomy with a gentle enema, if much feces is retained in them; so that the veins do not attract harmful putrid excess from the intestines to the main members during phlebotomy.
Nor should a patient have phlebotomy done when they are constipated, that is, after a full meal or due to nausea; nor should they be purged or made to vomit from drunkenness until that has been removed from them.
Nor should the patient with hydrops be treated in this way.
And bloodletting should be repeated after the patient has suffered from colic, vomiting, abdominal flux, frequent sexual intercourse, labor, exercise, vigils, fasting, and anything else that dissolves strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtleties of the humors before that, if the blood is thick due to food, drink, and medicine: if it is possible for him to correct that.
Then he should take a bath, if nothing prohibits it: or exercise him with some exercise, in order to thin the blood.
And place his bloodletting in the chest around the third day, as we said: and try to have his chest void of all animal misfortunes on that day, such as distress, anger, fear; and of all bodily misfortunes, such as labor, pain, excess, and others like them.
And let him make his seat present the things with which habit and custom of men are governed by aromaticity, perfumery, festivity, and similar things in a way that is possible.
Then he should sit on the bed, higher than the place where the bloodletting is done; then he should pull his arm, and rub it against the bloodletter's hand twice or three times.
He then tightens the ligature with a clamp and wraps it twice.
And the tightness should be moderate, because when the tightness is uneven or due to excess in the tightness, it prevents the flow of blood; and when it relaxes, it also prevents the flow of blood.
After the tightness, it is necessary that the one performing the bloodletting gently presses with their hand until the veins bulge and signal to the touch.
Then the phlebotomist should clean the bloodletting site with a little oil, traditionally used.
Then he should place his left hand's index finger above the vein at the site of the bloodletting, lightly: so that the vein does not escape and is not harmed by the pressure.
Because from the veins there is a flow like a string escaping during bloodletting; and from them is one that flows with full force: and when you place the phlebotomist over it, it contracts under the phlebotomist and deceives the phlebotomist, and he does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is tight. Therefore, it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be firm and careful in all these matters.
Then the phlebotomist should withdraw.
And if not, then repeat the cut at that place again with a little less force or above it with haste; otherwise the place will not heal.
If the place heals or becomes weak, then release it after one or two days; and do not tighten the ligature.
Perhaps indeed the healing place attracts heat.
Nor should a bath be taken.
Then he may repeat bloodletting if necessary.
If the opening is small or the blood flows gently, be careful not to remove too much; then repeat the bloodletting in the same place according to the right method and add a little force to the procedure.
Do this with haste before the place heals; for indeed, when a place has healed, it is often too weak in many people after surgery.
If therefore you see that the place has already healed, then do not repeat over it at all; for indeed it will not heal with you anymore. And place something of the dreg of oil on top; for it will ease the flow of blood.
And it is better in this place than pure oil or any other oil.
And similarly, use the dreg of oil in all your phlebotomies, when you draw veins near to the obstruction of the blood flow; and it makes the wound heal faster, becoming calloused or hardened, when one of them is applied to that place.
Blood becomes thin and resolved when it is thick.
This is especially true when the place of phlebotomy is large, which often happens, especially to those who have never been bled before or have a small vein opening; then apply immediately and put over the place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt, and press it tightly for a short time; for this resolves it.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has left the vein, either with its complete flow or from another vein.
And indeed, many times, complications and prominences occur during phlebotomy in the basilica.
Therefore, place your hand upon it, and if you feel any softness at the site of your compression upon it, then that prominence is bad.
Therefore, place something upon it as we have said.
For perhaps blood from the artery may flow from it.
But make a plaster for it with that which has constriction, so that the place hardens.
Then take care of it as with the rest of the cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their strength.
And what appears from the color rising above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red; and likewise, if you see that it is thick, let it flow out until it thins; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it flow out until its sharpness is gone.
And he who is full, strong, and requires the extraction of blood in one dose, so that phlebotomy of the vein may be amplified and he becomes a phlebotomist on one side, should be opposite to him who is weak.
And it is necessary to extract the blood deeply into the veins, and make a narrow opening, and better still, for phlebotomy of the vein, to make a transverse section rather than a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from cutting a nerve, and it is more commendable and healthier than phlebotomy through width and length.
And he who is accustomed to performing phlebotomy by the syncopated method should give the patient a moderate amount of bread soaked in warm grape juice or water before phlebotomy, and extract blood from him in three or four doses.
And if the patient's complexion is chilled, then he should take bread soaked in a thin syrup, or honey-sweetened syrup perfumed with spices, or an aromatic odorous syrup before phlebotomy.
Should the syncopated state occur during phlebotomy and be the cause of excessive blood loss, then he should drink a mixture of meat broth and a subtle aromatic syrup, and use aromatics with compresses, and apply them to his chest, and use the rest that we mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncopes from evacuation.
He who wishes to cure his arm and drain his blood a second time: he whose phlebotomy is for extensive evacuation, and whose virtue is weak, so as to drain blood slowly according to the quantity of his virtue over continuous days.
He who truly wishes to cure his arm and drain his blood a second time, and his body is strong: then he should do it after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite part from which it flows: he should do so on the second or third day.
In whose body there is a great amount of blood that is already heated and irritated, causing fever: it is necessary for him to drain blood from his body in one time, and extract a large quantity: and increase the opening until fainting occurs: after you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy: and put your hand on the pulse near the flow of blood, so that death does not occur at the place of syncope.
Indeed, it often happens that this occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant and falls through negligence.
And it is not necessary when you wish to drain your arm and drain blood a second time, when the opening of the vein is already closed, and draining blood becomes difficult, as you force it with haste, and the wound extends quickly.
For that is a great evil, indeed, leave it alone until it can be bled again a second time.
Remove it carefully with the forceps after the bleeding has stopped from the wound where the blood has clotted, and place over it some salt dissolved in water.
And place over it some of the alum or sage, and apply a gentle compression until the blood flows out.
If indeed the vein has already burst, then leave it alone and do not press on it until the swelling subsides.
If it becomes necessary to open the vein a second time to let out the blood, and there is no excuse for this, then either use the same forceps on that very place or move to another vein in the other arm.
The forceps used for phlebotomy should be at the wrist of the arm (fusca and basilica), as they are not easily found and are hidden because they are composed of these joints.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that a weak person should insert their hand into hot water until the knife becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
Then it is tied over the place with a thin string with a moderate tightening.
Next, the phlebotomy should be performed according to the cross-section, gradually, not across or along its length. The opening should be wide, and your phlebotomy should be made through it, slightly above the joint of the hand.
And indeed, the most blood is put into warm water in winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is healthier for all veins, because it is not under this vein that there is pulsation or nerve.
The phlebotomy of the right hand's Saluatella vein is truly beneficial for liver ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it tightens the skin of the hand with a ligature or your own hand, after you have introduced it into warm water until the vein bends and appears very sensitive to touch.
Then perform the phlebotomy by crossing it.
And if you cut it completely through, it will not harm her in any way.
And be careful, do not exert your hand too much with the phlebotomist.
For under it, the nerves of the fingers are exposed through the flesh.
Then repeat the hand towards warm water, and let the blood flow into it.
For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will clot in the vein's opening and be prevented from flowing.
So when you have extracted the necessary amount of blood, then place oil and salt on the vein: so that it does not solidify quickly.
And likewise, it is necessary that you do with every branch tightly.
The true instrument of his phlebotomy from the left hand is: since it is conveying to the spleen's diseases; and likewise do in his phlebotomy as you did in the second equally.
However, the instrument for phlebotomy on the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and kidney diseases, and old ulcers of the coxa and crura, and similar diseases from other ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient places his foot into hot water; and he makes friction over it until the veins burst, and ties above the joint of the foot with bindings.
And indeed, the veins are located near the calf, facing the thumb, and they branch out from there on the face of the foot into many branches.
Therefore, the phlebotomy should be performed in its wider branch or near the calf in its gathering, as it is better and safer.
If the phlebotomy is performed on the face of the foot, then it should be done carefully because of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy such that it goes through the vein, as if you wanted to cut it, and let the phlebotomist be neat.
If, however, the exit of blood is prohibited, then repeat the foot in hot water and allow the blood to flow into it until it is emptied.
If the phlebotomist mistakes the vein in the first attempt, then he should repeat with the phlebotomy slightly higher up, for the place is safe and there will be no harm from it to the nerves, as we said.
And similarly, when the saphenous vein of the other foot is equally affected.
The sciatic vein, as we have said, is located, as we have mentioned, at the side of the calcaneus.
And the method of bleeding it is, for the pain of the ankle, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of the bleeding is that the patient enters the bath and hurries: and he tightens the leg from the side of the ankle up to the calf with a thin, long blade: for it does not appear unless through that.
When it appears, then perform the bleeding according to whatever skill you have, or according to transversion: and it is better, either to cut it with an incision, or to slice it with a section.
For its location is the saltiest, and it itself is hidden from many people.
If you do not find it, and it does not appear to the senses at all: then bleed one of its branches, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot, and goes towards the ear: and take care from the nerves, and let the blood flow in a quantity as much as you wish.
Then he loosens the stricture and places it over the site of phlebotomy of the skin, and tightens the site.
In this way, it is healed promptly.
§ On Drainage, and the nature of its use.
Chapter 98.
They are made from horns, and from metal, and from other materials.
And drainage is performed according to two methods.
When performing scarification and extraction of blood: and another is drainage without scarification. And this drainage which is without scarification, is according to two methods.
Or it is with fire.
Or it is without fire.
And the drainages that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body.
There is one that is the ventilation of the alnocratis, and it is the last of the head; and the alkehel, and it is in the middle of the neck; and the ventosas of the Alhagdahim, and they are two blades of the neck from both parts simultaneously; and the ventosas of the mind, and it is under the mandible in the lower jaw; and the ventosas of the two spatulas; and the ventosas of the Alachosos beyond the end of the tail; and the ventosas of the two forks, and they are in the middle of the two arms; and the ventosas of the two tendons; and the ventosas of the two jaws.
Indeed, ventilation does not extract blood from the small vessels scattered in the flesh, and because of that, the strength does not leave them, as is the case with phlebotomy.
Nor is it necessary to administer ventilation or with fire, or without fire in any illness that arises from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
If necessity requires ventilation to be administered due to illness or out of habit, we do so at every hour at the beginning, end, and middle of the month, and at any time it may be needed.
This is because there are people who, when the blood accumulates within them until it needs to be extracted through ventilation, find a heaviness and soreness in their head.
And from them, there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck.
And from them there is one who discovers itching on his face, and on his forehead, and darkness, and drowsiness in his eyes.
And from them there is one who scratches the place of his sweating. And from them there is one whose laughter is multiplied.
And from them there is one who discovers the taste of blood in his mouth; or he may lose his tongue and spit out blood.
And from them there is one whose sleep is multiplied.
And from them there is one who sees in his sleep blood and ruddy colors, and slain bodies, and wounds, and things similar to those. When therefore we see something of them, and it is indeed in the third hour of the day: then we order the sweating to be done, after two or three hours have passed from the day. The sweating of the nape, however, is: because it contributes to weight on the head, and what flows down to the eyes.
