Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The patient's condition begins to improve.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, this book is a treatise on medicine, which I have completed.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	And if the patient's legs are swollen, and if they are not, then the intestines should be treated by applying heat to their feet.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	The patient described is suffering from a condition that causes painful swelling in their joints.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	It describes how to apply the knowledge of anatomy to determine the proper way to apply cautery to the body, specifically mentioning the types of blood vessels: pulsatile (arteries) and non-pulsatile (veins), and the number of these vessels.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The text describes a doctor treating a patient by using a cautery to burn away excess fluids in the joints.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	One must be careful that in treating gout, one does not mistake it for something else, which would lead to inappropriate treatment.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	A doctor cauterized the inflamed joint of a woman who had been burned by an unknown cause, leaving her with a deadened limb.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And so he saw another doctor, who was unable to stop that man's ailment.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, they will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the doctor who was paid by him for surgery; another comes on the legs, because the pain is in the legs and they are swollen due to a fracture.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The humors of the body are balanced and they are treating the patient.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E a desliar la desitata
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when the pain of the foot is confirmed, it is done so that the patient does not experience the pain in the foot.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And if there's another doctor who has been summoned, he will know what to do.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the ailment is caused by a melancholic humor, then it will be necessary to use cauterization.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so, sons, it is necessary for you to open the body only after providing cushions for the cushions on their legs, and other places where they are needed.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have to keep in mind that already in all the places of the body are mentioned.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so you should treat those with gout by God's grace, and with a hot iron to cauterize the affected areas.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And prepare your weapons for battle, so that they may be used for your benefit and the glory of God.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Another thing to note is that when a pain is felt in the legs, it is often mistaken for gout.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not be a doctor who makes a false diagnosis when treating someone with a disease.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book is divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This first chapter is about the tools used in surgery.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter describes how to treat wounds caused by arrows.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	E si una part of the body is called the foot, and if you are treating a patient for something other than gout, then apply the cautery to the thighs instead.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with the treatment of pain caused by excess blood or the removal of obstructions in the body; the chapter on restoration also covers how to treat the pain of gout.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	This means that the pain is caused by humors and is sharp and intense.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When the pain begins, apply a cauterizing treatment to the foot.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient's condition prohibits the use of cautery on their feet.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	And therefore, I have said that it is called gout when the joints are inflamed and painful.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if there are other conditions, that's what doctors call a cautery, which can be quite different from humors.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to treat a cold illness, it should be treated with heat and dryness.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	This cushion is placed on the patient's legs to treat their ailment.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And if you have already found the patient's feet to be affected, you will know that they are experiencing gout.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Then, however, when the intestine or other injuries are present, apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	When Mays is in other parts of the body, there is no need for fear because it's already understood that it is a disease related to the cold humors.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And so you have placed the patient's body in the balance by applying heat to relieve pain from the ailment.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine be applied to the affected area.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, they should be used as described in the first two lines.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you know that the pain occurs in the legs, and so they put a cushion on their thighs, and another for the feet.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And so if a patient has an injury to their leg, there is no need for a cautery because it is a common ailment that can be treated with cauterization.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if your doctors think that you have a fever that comes from the humors that are in the body, they will cauterize the part of the body affected by the cold humors.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	When doctors see that the patient has a pain in their feet, they should use hot cauterization to treat them.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Mays the patient be treated for the illness they suffer from.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	A consequence of excessive sweating is that you may need to apply a poultice or cautery to the affected area, which is the reason for the ailment, for other reasons, or to prevent further problems with the body's humors.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E  mays be used to treat a patient's cushion, but it is not for all ailments.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	If the cause of the illness is unknown, then the treatment should be aimed at the intestines.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Then apply the following to the patient's body: when the treatment for gout is applied in a manner that is customary, but not proper medicine.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	E si es milhor per l'atela eurin que you are using to apply the cushion of your treatment.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so you have already found out that the patient has a condition called gout.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply the cautery on the other side of the joint.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if I have to open their intestines, then I put a cushion on their legs, and others on their knees.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	The other parts of the body can be treated as well for other ailments.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And so the patient's body may be cooled by applying a cautery to their legs or by placing ice on them.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And you apply the cushion to their legs, and use medicine to make the humors flow out.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And place a cushion on the patient's feet and apply to the area under their legs.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your hand upon their palm between the other two cushions.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you're talking about the other way around, which I believe should be used for the treatment of gout in the feet.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so that the patient's hands are not subject to the pain.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	E aprop poseys le tua ma al os per la cushion that you have put your hand under the location to see if the pain persists as it would in a case of gout.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And so place a cushion on their legs for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then you should place a cushion on the affected joint.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice to the area of the affected part.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	Then they say that when the plague is called forth by a surgeon, then he's better than a healer.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And if they have pain in the bones, and are suffering from gout.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let the bone be cauterized, which will be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that it's a burn on their feet.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that he has a hot fever.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Then your hand should be placed on the patient's legs to hold them in place.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Mayes a mi no so provera la vista in those who have been put to the test.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first treatment is to apply a poultice to the foot, so that the intestines do not come out.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply the hot cautery.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	Then consider if the pain in the leg is from one of those causes
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply a hot cautery to the top of the foot.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	In that case, the intestine is cut open and cauterized, allowing for air to be released from the body.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if you have other pain in the limbs, it is necessary to apply a cushion to support the patient's body on the legs.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area, and use a gentler cautery for the head.
Capitol ters.	The third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	And on the treatment of gout.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area; if it doesn’t work, use other treatments for the pain.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When there are hot, swollen humors in the body that cause pain, apply a cold cautery to the head.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply heat to the affected area on their legs, as this will help soothe the pain.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then lay a hot compress on the patient's legs for three hours.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply an ointment to the patient's legs so that they are kept in a state of health.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if the patient's body needs to be treated with other remedies, the physician should apply them.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And may it be done in this manner.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And if the patient's legs are affected by gout, you will need to cauterize them.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And so you must apply a cautery to the small bones of the body.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of blood in the legs has become inflamed, apply a cushion to reduce the swelling.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you are using another cushion on their legs, apply it for three days, and then remove it to allow the wound to heal.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, the other method is to cauterize the patient's artery.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	This refers to the treatment of gout.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When gout flares up, it is treated by applying a poultice to the affected area.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Empero, you must cauterize the intestine or the hernia in the appropriate way.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E lay the cushion at the beginning of the operation.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then apply the treatment for blood flow according to the book's instructions.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	This text means: If you see that the patient has an intestine or foot pain in this ailment, it is treated by cauterizing them, but only if they are already suffering from a serious illness.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you have already seen that the patient has a fever, another treatment should be administered.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	This is a section from an old medical text about treating pain in the ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the area of the auricle, it is called "earache" by doctors.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When it is necessary to bleed or apply cautery to treat a patient, do so.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	The translator extends the meaning of al-gias to include the entire body, while noting that pus is involved in the ailment.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then use the cauterizer to treat the other ailments within their body.
Capitol .vi.	The book teaches that the patient's body should be treated as if it were a temple after the first few lines are translated.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	A hot iron applied to the area of the body affected by the ailment.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And it is the nature of the physician to apply heat to the patient's body.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	This is the process of applying cautery to the patient's legs.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	You must use three other methods to treat the patient.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if there is a need to apply a cautery on the surface of the body, it should be applied only where it is necessary, and no more.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And if a burn mark needs to be made on the body, you should place a cushion on the patient's right hand or foot to keep them from moving.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	The form of the instrument is as follows: it is a knife for cauterizing with a special blade shape designed for that purpose.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But some people have a little bit of a bad temper.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And apply a bandage to the treated leg to prevent further illness.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This refers to cauterization used as a treatment for gout.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And if the pain is not accompanied by fever, then you should use the methods we have described for treating that condition.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to treat it is done as has been previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then cauterize the stomach area and place another cushion on their feet.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	When a burning sensation occurs in the body, its cause is often hidden from view.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient's body was covered with large stones, pills to break the stones were used, and they are treated by applying heat.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then apply a plaster to the aforementioned ailment.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place cushions on them for several times, or use a cautery to treat it.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And so the patient's pain should be addressed by the physician.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Then apply three cauterizations to the affected parts: the legs, feet, or other areas.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then proceed to treat the patient's gout, and make sure the inflammation doesn't spread.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays le metges are to be used for minor pain, while a cushion should be used for more serious cases.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And if it is necessary to cure the patient's gout, use a cushion as described previously.
Capitol .ix.	This is likely the beginning of a chapter heading in Latin, perhaps meaning "Chapter 9".
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	The whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	and if it is necessary to treat a person's illness, you must apply the cushion on their limbs
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	When pain is severe, the patient's condition may be aggravated by excessive heat on their body.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And if the patient has already been treated by the physician, they are now ready for the olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of epilepsy, a common practice in medieval medicine being to burn the affected area.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	This is the first cushion for treating the ailment called epilepsy.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, the physician should treat the other ailments accordingly, as they are being treated for them.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the ailment is treated with medicines, they are for the child who suffers from them for a few days.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	E's the precedent way to heat the head and another part of the body, e en their place put your hand upon them.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the affected area is painful, you have already given the patient a cushion to place on their legs, which are in pain.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And apply the cautery to the which you will apply the olive oil, then another olivar on their legs, according to the custom of the patient's place, and put the patient under a cushion.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the child has gout, the treatment will be different.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	This is a treatise on treating melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and the intestines are affected, then cauterize the patient's body in their entirety.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	A person suffering from melencolia should keep a hot cloth on the area of the body where the pain occurs.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And a poultice should be made for the injured person to place on their head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the pain is located on the legs or any other place.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	E aprop you should apply the poultice to the affected area; if it's on the leg, use a cushion for that too.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And if it is necessary to make a fire upon the body, measure it carefully.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place a cloth on their legs to protect them from the cold.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then the surgeon applies a cushion to the patient's legs to reduce swelling.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place a cushion under their own body.
Capitol .xii.	The patient's legs are being burned by a hot iron.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The pain felt in the feet or toes was already called podagra by doctors.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	And if it is caused by other signs or symptoms, then the treatment will be described as a cure for the ailment.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him have a warm bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then cauterize the head on the two temples if there are two wounds, or on one temple if there is only one wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	This is a very literal translation of the first sentence: If your body is affected by gout, another is applied to the veins and arteries.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And if the blood flows from the cautery used on them, the other to their legs; and another one to their blood vessels.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And now the surgeon places his hand on the patient's legs to operate on them.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if the pain occurs in the lower leg, they are treated with a hot cautery.
Capitol .xiii.	The text refers to the following sentences as "podras" which seems related to "poisons," suggesting it is about applying them to the area affected by the illness.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if the patient has a fever, apply cooling compresses.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area if necessary.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have already been diagnosed with a disease, then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio de nas intempestivus, et si non est curavit, e’l corpore malus.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	In case the patient is too weak for surgery, you can try another treatment method.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then put a cushion on the legs to prevent the opening of the space between the two for the treatment.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard the patient's feet from being harmed.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And here's the way to use a cautery for other purposes.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is how you treat the affected eyelid with this type of treatment.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you place a cautery on the temples, they will be covered by another patch.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And so, you should apply a cushion to the legs, etc.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	You are correct, the text refers to the use of cautery in a medical context.
Capitol .xvi.	The 16th chapter.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then you will use the cautery on the patient's foot and another will hold the person down.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the doctors call it gout, they mean the intestine or legs have been affected by an imbalance in the humors.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a cauterizer has already been used on you, treat them gently, as they are often called upon to perform painful procedures.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And so the patient, whose body has been made ill by the cold, should be treated with the following steps:  a cushion is to be placed on the legs and another on the head of the person who is ill.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's thighs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then place a cushion on the patient's legs.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then you should cauterize the affected area that is where the herb is applied to the legs.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if you see that the patient's eyelid has swollen shut due to the use of a needle on their legs, they will need to be treated by a physician.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your leg and place it on the cushion for three days, as needed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to cure them, apply a poultice to their legs.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If the body is weakened by illness or injury, place a cushion under their limbs.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if you have elevated the lid the skin folds naturally back over the hernia.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And thus he will cauterize the legs of the patient with a heated, metal-tipped tool for relief from their ailment.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And you have already placed your hand on their feet, so that the patient’s legs are covered by cushions.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	It means: "And he who feels the pain will be able to apply the treatment."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then apply the remedy to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if you have removed the cushion from their joints so the illness doesn't spread further, place another cushion on their body to stop the pain.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And so that the patient's illness in the foot can be treated by you, or another, as soon as possible.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way of applying a poultice of myrtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And so you know, the humors are different for each person, just as the pain in their legs, or elsewhere."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	This pain will be cured by someone who has studied this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Another hot cautery is used for pain in the legs, and another one for the patient's feet.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si no has la ubers e altri to their chest, another would be put there.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a patient with a disease, place a cushion under their head, and have them rest with a cushion on their legs, so that they do not move.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cushion under them, and another servant on their legs, et a second one on the patient's body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if there's a need to treat the ailment on the patient's legs, another person should be holding their legs while you apply the treatment.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The other servant is used to treat the foot for pain.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, place a cushion under the patient's foot.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, use a hot cautery to remove the excess.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the man who works hard deserves better than gout.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then place a cushion on their legs, and let them know that they are being cauterized.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And if you wish to avoid pain, then apply the cautery to the foot, specifically the cushion of the body part where a bandage is applied.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if their bones are affected, then it will be necessary to cauterize the part twice.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This must be given to him/her immediately, and his/her hands should be held over the area so he/she can be treated with strong medicine.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	The cushion in the cavity will be used to help you treat the fistula first.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If a fistula has been healed by the doctor, it's good; otherwise, it should be treated with fire and surgery.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol.xviii.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	And then cauterize the wound on the leg.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Inflammation of the infant's lips may be treated by applying a cushion to the area.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And now, how to treat the burning pain we have already begun to treat in the manner described below.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	This sentence refers to the treatment of the ailment by doctors, suggesting they would use a hot cautery for pain relief in the legs.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if it is necessary to make a burn on their legs, then you must carefully cauterize the area.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	This refers to using a hot iron on the body to treat a condition similar to a boil or abscess.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's uvula or uvula be inflamed, and inflammation occurs in the palate, and the patient has a condition called gout, you should apply the cold cautery to the palate so that the swelling will subside.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus if the wound heals well, cauterize it, and bandage it up so that it will not come out.
Capitol .xx.	The English translation of "Capitol .xx." would be "Chapter 20".
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Single-line guessed translation: And if it is necessary to soften the throat.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	And if you are in pain from a cold that is caused by humors, apply heat to the area using one of the following methods:
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And keep your hand on the patient's legs, and let the other be used for some purpose.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E then placed a cushion in the patient's mouth, to prevent them from being able to speak.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Then use a hot iron to apply a cauteri to the affected area.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	It is customary to use a hot cautery on an inflamed joint, but in the case of pain in the feet, it is better to apply cold therapy.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply heat to the patient's legs, and if needed, use other treatments for the ailment.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When a tooth aches, it's called the "toothache" in Italian.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May the cushion be used to heat the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply the poultice to the affected area.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	Then return your hand to the patient's leg after you have cauterized them, so that the pain will not be felt by the patient.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient, apply the heat according to your judgment.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of gout:
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand on their feet, and another cushion under them, and the patient is now placed on the cushions on the floor.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of gout.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	Then you have already opened the wound, and applied the cushion to the patient's leg, and applied the other medicines.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the inflammation is small, you will cauterize it with a few applications of a hot iron, and if the abscesses are already present on the legs, they will be healed by applying heat to them.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply medicine, the patient's legs should be treated carefully.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the needle or cushion used to treat the gout.
Capitol .xxiii.	A la boca del cos, si applies a body, that is necessary for the treatment of gout.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	A cushion is placed under the patient's thighs.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then if the patient has a fever, e.g., a hot humor in the foot, use other methods on the chest, such as cauterization.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And apply the cautery to the patient's throat, carefully using only a small amount of heat.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize their other legs to prevent them from being cauterized again.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And apply a cautery to their legs in the same way as the intestines are treated.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cautery to the leg to cure the disease.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And now the chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Here comes the translated sentence:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Then apply a hot iron to the body below the knee only if the patient needs to be cauterized.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let the patient be treated with a cauterization to their ears, which will be applied to them.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E siam curai en lo corpo e no se sa".
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And so they are called gout in the modern sense.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	And if the patient's foot needs to be cauterized, then it should be done with care.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	And if you are working on the patient's foot, and when their body is open, they are applying pressure to the area.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so, the patient's body has two heads.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if there's inflammation in the groin, use cauterization to reduce pain and swelling, and apply the hot iron to the area of the other leg where the pain is located.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E so they are already in pain from the cold.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes, the doctors are wrong, and they think it's gout.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place your hand on the patient's body, for a while after the wound heals.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if a cushion is placed on the chest, then it will be called a romat (a type of illness).
Capitol .xxvi.	E a la persona que ha tenen le dolor de las coyssas, e si estant en la part del cors que se fa per el malalte.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This refers to a treatment for stomach ailments.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then place cushions on the legs of the patient to prevent his body from being too dry or too wet.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is too great, it will cause pain in the feet.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so the patient's intestine is treated with cautery, according to this method.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has pain in the stomach, then you use a cautery to apply heat to that area.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name for the cavity.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply a cushion to their feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Translation 1: And if it is necessary to treat the body with bloodletting, use the same method as for the other diseases caused by an excess of cold humors in the body, which is what doctors normally call a fever.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the pain is in the feet, then the first two lines are the best way to treat it.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press upon the patient while he's being treated with cauterization.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the pain is caused by a cushion under the legs, then it's called [the condition] that causes gout.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how you apply the hot cautery to treat it.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	You may have to use a sharp cautery for the patient's ailment, if they are treated with the proper tools and knowledge.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And so that the burning sensation does not spread throughout the body, you must use a different kind of cautery.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii.  is likely the title of the 28th chapter.**
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	The word "perforaco" suggests the source sentence refers to cutting into something (like making an incision) or treating a wound by removing something.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	If there is a necessity to treat someone's humors, they should place cushions on their feet and under the affected area.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then apply cautery to the tunic of the leg.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then we will try to apply heat to the area above the boil (the other one) on the foot; they also say that the boil is in a place where it can be treated with cauterization.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it where the pain is felt in the legs or bowels, so that the pain may be relieved.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat them with cushions under their legs, and another treatment for the foot with your hand.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if there are people who have suffered from other ailments, they use it for pain in the legs, and for the treatment of wounds.
Capitol .xxix.	In the Capitol, it is customary to call it gout if someone has pain in their feet due to an imbalance in bodily humors.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	When there is pain in the lower part of the body, it is known as gout.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	This refers to treating the ailment of the foot by applying a cautery tool to the affected area.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a hot compress to the affected area.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	The physician must ensure the patient has a cushion placed under their legs and another on their chest during treatment.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	This cushion is for those who are already in the throes of pain.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"There is no fear of that which is in this place, but rather a fear of that which is"  a "sickness".
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translated into English would be: **Chapter 30.**
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the melon.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure a disease in the leg with a cautery, it can be done on the knee or the thigh.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	The patient's foot is being burned by a hot iron.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you need to make bloodletting wounds on the patient, use a cauterizing tool.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E si el dolor es en le pie, e'l otro en la coys lu.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so that the surgeon may apply cautery to the length of the body while another attends to the length of their needs.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then apply cauteries to the legs, while holding the patient's hands?
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And thus you apply the cautery; and so make four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, burn it with a hot cautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you apply a cautery to heal the wound.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXX. I.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	And if it is necessary to make an incision for treatment, it is customary to use other methods on the foot.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, placing a hot cautery directly on it.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	This sentence discusses the use of cauterization for medical treatment in medieval times.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's thighs, place it properly on their legs, and have another thing for the other things.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	When you treat someone with gout, their legs are often painful.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And there's no cure for gout when the pain is caused by their foot being too hot or too cold.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	Then the patient's foot must be cauterized in the manner described above.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful swelling and inflammation in the joints, particularly the feet.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Then return the leg to its natural position.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the disease has already spread to their fingers, apply another cushion to the affected area.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then apply the cauterization tool to the patient's legs.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The patient's intestines are inflamed, so they should be treated with leeches according to the prevailing medical practices.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And keep it open so that the cure can be applied on their legs.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Apros then treat the patient's legs with hot stones or other such things to stop the humors from swelling.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the body, use cauterization.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	And so, you see, it's called gout by doctors.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	This sentence describes the use of a cautery tool in a medical procedure.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you are treating for excess humidity, use two cauteries to work on the swollen area of the foot.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cautery only to the area where the pain occurs.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Therefore, use a cautery to treat hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then apply three poultices to the patient's body, and place them on their legs, and apply three more to the abdomen.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you see that a patient has cold food and they don't digest it properly, let them put a cushion on their stomach; and if the body is in pain, I will apply heat with a cautery to the area of the stomach.
Capitol .xxxv.	This is about Chapter 35 in a book or document.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And if you are burning the skin of the patient, apply cauterization to their legs, place your hand on the other part of the body, and use a cushion for the other parts, and another for the feet.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut the vein of the body, apply a hot iron to prevent the swelling.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply pressure to the affected area with the instrument that was used on the other parts of the body.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do they apply a hot iron to two points on their thighs?
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	Another place to place a cushion on the foot in order to protect it from the cold.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This sentence appears to be a continuation of the previous ones, indicating a new chapter in a text.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And put a cushion under their feet, and hold them above their body, so that the humors do not escape.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature of the patient's fear is known, apply the cushion to their body, and let them know that they are in safe hands.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, if there are complications from fluid buildup in the body, such as gout, they should be treated by addressing the underlying cause.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And if you wish to treat the ailment yourself, use a hot iron.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then put a cushion in the cavity of the fistula.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And they call it another cautery if there are aches in the foot.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When there are burns or an inflamed vein, they should be treated for gout, but if it's a cushion, then only those burns affecting the body's nerves should be treated with the hand placed on the affected area.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When the patient is in a good state of health, et the pain is alleviated.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the pain persists, the patient should be treated with a remedy to soothe the affected area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When there are no more physicians, then apply a hot cautery.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the use of cautery for treating gout.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there are pains in the thighs, use heat to warm them up.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	This is the translation: And if the pain is strong, it is called gout in the second toe.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Then apply cautery to the patient's bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then put the other hand on their legs, to prevent the urine from flowing into the wrong place.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Then apply heat to the affected part of the body.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And another cushion should be placed on their legs to prevent swelling from the other cushions.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And so let us return to the original text from the source language.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	Then apply a hot cautery to the bladder to treat the bladder's ailments.
Capitol .xl.	Translation: When one has pain in the joints due to cold humors that are coming out.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	This refers to a medical procedure involving cauterization (burning) related to treating a dislocation in the leg or foot.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When the pain is caused by humors that are out of balance in the body, it is called a cushion for a member when you have your hand on their legs, which indicates its presence.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And it is customary for the body to be placed in its proper position when it is ill.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then there comes the time when you will cauterize the affected area, for gout often causes pain in the legs.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if you have a pain in their leg, it is called gout.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	Then, if you are going to cauterize their legs, do so with another three cushions.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if a burn develops, then apply the cautery to heal it.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	This translates to "of the cauterization of the sciatic vein"
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	A physician should treat that which causes pain in the joints.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manner of treatment for a person with gout is to treat the pain with medicines or fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The patient's legs are opened for three cushions to be placed under them.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	When there is pain in the foot, it is customary to apply a cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At times the doctors may need to use cautery on the legs.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to use another method for relieving pain in the legs, do it by cauterizing the pain from the affected area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the foot, do not use heat near the area to avoid burning the patient's skin.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	This refers to gout as a disease, but also describes the position of the patient's foot.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if you apply cauterization, the treatment for gout will be more effective when used on the affected area.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain is severe, it is common practice to treat the patient's body with a cautery device.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	When pain is in the legs or other parts, they are to be treated with a cauterization using a knife-like instrument.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if you have an ailment that requires cauterization, be careful in using a cautery to seal the wound.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	The patient's foot is inflamed, place a cushion under their foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong cold compress to the abdomen, or if there are no more, put them in contact with a cauterized area.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if there is pain in the legs, apply heat to each affected joint.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	When there's a swelling in the legs, they say that it's a sign of a problem.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you should place three fingers on their legs to indicate the location of the pain.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	This describes the pain experienced by the patient during surgery.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then place a cushion on them.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the pain is severe, leave the patient three days to heal.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This is the first is used for treating this type of ailment.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And the pain of the body will be relieved by their use.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri are medicines that keep the body from suffering.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then return to the original meaning of the text, the first part of the sentence refers to the previous one, which means "Let us make a cautery be placed."
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then apply heat to the other side of the leg.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then apply the cushion on the patient's leg to elevate their leg.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if you want to know about the treatment of that intestine that's being held back, you should know that the patient will be in pain for three days.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then you apply your treatment on that leg.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And then you must apply the treatment according to the patient's needs.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how you can treat a hernia by using a cauterization method.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When treating gout, use a cushion to support their head and another cushion on each side of the body, one for the legs and one for the feet, but make sure the patient is comfortable.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	The first cushion is used for the other ailments mentioned in the previous text.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area and another to the patient's foot and hand to protect them from being burned.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And if you are to cauterize it, use a cushion on the legs so that it will be burned.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Then, when the intestine or other organs are already being operated on, you can use a cushion to support him and prevent injury.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And so, when the pain is caused by a slight imbalance in the body, they cauterize the area to make it better.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And so we see that if the pain is caused by cold humors in the legs, it lasts for three hours.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And so the doctors would treat the patient's illness, for their good health.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Then, they say, if a patient has a cushion on their hands or feet, their condition will be known as gout.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And if a sheep's wool is used to treat a wound, apply it gently warmed with the heat from the other two goats, and hold a cushion on their legs during the process, you can use this method for treating wool or cauterizing an intestine.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply heat to the skin near their ankles.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if there's pain in the feet, then place your hand on their knees to prevent further pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method is called gout.
Capitol .xlii.	When the pain of rheumatism affects the joints.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of burning or cutting pain in the legs.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	And if the pain persists in the feet, it's due to an excess of cold and humid fluids in the body.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And then apply cauterization to their legs, but only to that limb.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily to do so, it is called gout by the doctor.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And there is a practice called cauterization for those who have been injured by fire.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When it is necessary to treat the swelling in the feet, then use a hot iron.
Capitol .xliii.	The text discusses a painful condition affecting the joints.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	At first, it is necessary to cauterize the foot.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Gout is caused by an excess of something in the body, and this sentence describes its treatment.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And if the pain is in the back, it is customary to place a cushion on the spine and apply heat to the joints.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you cauterize the legs, the patient's pain is caused by cold humors which have infiltrated the body.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then the cushion must be placed over the whole leg to ensure that the pain is alleviated.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	Cauterize the spine in two to three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	When doctors use heat therapy on the affected joints, it is then called gout.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the area we have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	and you should avoid applying it to the area if it's due to gout.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This is a medical text describing gout.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	And if there is an excess of cold humors, it is gout that affects the joints.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And so if it is cured, you can apply the other treatments.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if you need to cauterize anything, use a cautery tool specifically for that purpose.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This sentence means "Use a hot iron"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a cushion for the foot.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if there are pains in the joints or in the legs, you must apply three to four poultices using the herb called "gout" (or rather, a more accurate description).
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to burn with a cauterizer, the one who cauterizes should be gentle so the cautery does not damage the tissue.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the patient has pain, apply the cushion to their legs.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then return the patient's body to its normal state.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	Then apply your hand to the affected limb or area.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	Then if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, or cauterize it, apply the cushion to their feet.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	G: When the intestine is inflamed, treat it with a cushion.
Capitol .xlv.	This is Latin for "Chapter 45."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The following is a guess at a translation based on your provided context:
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	And if it is necessary to cause pain in the legs, you should apply a cushion under their feet.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And if you are going to cauterize, then apply the cautery to the legs when it is necessary for the patient's pain.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And if the doctor determines that you have a circle-shaped rupture in your body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And place a cushion on the legs to treat them.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	It is said that the patient has gout if they have pain in the joints, which causes their legs to be covered in cushions.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then then you apply a cushion to the legs, and another one on the chest.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And if you have to put a hot iron on the foot of a patient, it is recommended to place a cushion under them.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on their joints to prevent the pain from spreading further.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you are treating a patient, and their pain arises from the bone.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if it is necessary to make incisions, ensure they are subtle in their nature for children.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E' approvable cura la sua loc per via de la medicina.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The patient's legs are burned.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area, and then apply another cushion under them.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And when you place your hands on the patient's legs, apply the poultice to prevent the pain from worsening.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And if they want to move the foot for more than 40 days, it is customary to have a cushion under it.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you should apply this remedy to treat gout: use a cautery on the feet, and another for applying them to their proper place.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And so you cauterize the intestine of one with the cushion of fire, and another, on their legs, then you cauterize the stomach of the other, and another to ensure they are properly treated, and place a bandage over the wound after applying the red-hot iron.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, place a cushion under them and cauterize them.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And place your hand on their legs, so the patient's legs are covered by a cushion or a cloth.
Capitol .xlvi.	This looks like you're asking for a literal translation of the Latin phrase "Capitol .xlvi."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then you should apply hot cauterization to the patient's feet.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cushion should be applied to every limb, for each has its own magnitude.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	When the pain in the feet becomes inflamed, it is customary to use a hot cautery for its treatment.
Capitol .xlvii.	This part describes the joint pain, and the doctor will apply cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	And then apply cautery to their legs, among other things.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then they must be held back by force, those who are suffering from leprosy and have been marked by their own evil humor.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then if you want to cauterize the affected area on the patient's legs, consider it carefully.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And if you have an attack of gout in your toe, apply a burning cautery to its place.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if you have already been exposed to leprosy, but they are still unsure, then use a cautery to burn the affected areas on the hands and legs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And do you put your hand on their feet to keep them warm?
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat e if it were to be closed, then one should apply a bandage to the wound.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if you have to be treated for gout, the pain will be severe in your body and feet.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And so, when there are large or few hot flashes in the body, they are treated as such.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already opened the space between the legs, and then apply the other cushion to the affected area, the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Then apply a cautery to the area of their legs, and use another cautery on their feet, and hold their legs and feet in place with your hands.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then apply a burning cautery to the affected limb.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When your hand is on their thigh, they have a cushion under them.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply ointment to that area to heal them.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if you see a wound on the legs or feet, treat it with cautery to stop it from spreading.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	When it comes to the body, only those who are knowledgeable in anatomy should speak.
Capitol .xlix.	This is a text about medical practices in the past, specifically mentioning the use of a cauterizer.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	And apply cautery on their thighs.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then apply the medicine to the old wound, ensuring that some remains in the bandage and some on the foot itself.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	When there is a need to treat an ailment caused by cold humors, and you are treating the intestine or foot of a patient who has this ailment, use a cushion for this purpose.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	When there are signs of illness in the legs, they should be treated with a hot cautery.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if cancer has begun to develop, then you must treat it with a cautery by cauterizing it as well as the patient's legs, which are affected by the condition, in the same way that a cushion protects the body from injury.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The patient's legs are already cauterized.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And if it's necessary to burn away the harmful humors, then use a sharp tool for that purpose.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary, they are to be cauterized.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Then, place a small cushion on their legs, and apply heat to them with a cautery.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Then treat it with heat or other remedies.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are pustules on a member, treat them by cauterizing the body to prevent them from being healed.
Capitol .lii.	This sentence appears to be from an invented language and likely describes a medical procedure related to gout treatment.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And then treat for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	You are treating the patient for gout.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, apply cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cautery to burn away the bad humors.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a heated poultice to the affected area for three days to burn out the pain in the bones.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And so the patient's body will be treated for that pain by a skilled physician.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And then, if it heals well, you may apply a bandage; but if it doesn't, repeat the cauterization.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply the cushion under the legs, for that is where the pain resides.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But the heat applied by the cautery should be light so as to only cauterize the affected area.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And so I say that for gout in the legs, it is necessary to use cushions.
Capitol .liii.	Of the body's joints, those affected by gout are to be treated with a pointed cautery.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This refers to the treatment of diseases by cauterization.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	This text describes two types of cauterization used for pain relief.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You have already mentioned the use of cauterization in treating the foot ailment, but the cushion application needs further explanation.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place a cushion on their feet to prevent it from spreading further.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be left for three days in this state so that they may heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice of wild herbs to the affected area and place your hands on their feet for one night.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice to the affected area to heal it.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And so you must apply a small amount of cautery to the affected area.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if you are a physician who has the power to cure someone from gout (or other ailments) by drawing out the humors, this sentence describes the process of applying a cautery to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And that will heal the patient if the humors are removed by the use of bloodletting.
Capitol .liiii.	Another put a cushion under the patient's legs.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	And then cauterize the trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Quan endeve li beu'l  be't done with oil for the cause of the ailment in the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if the patient's hands tremble, it is a sign that they are ill.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol .50
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then apply cautery to the affected area, keeping in mind that it's important to avoid opening it further up.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	The first sentence is likely referring to a type of surgical tool used in the medieval era for treating wounds.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply a cauterization to your foot, or in other words, treat the patient with hot compresses, which is the way doctors treat it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	And then the patient must be given medicine for their illness, which they are being treated for.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.  is a chapter number in the original text, so the translation would be **Chapter lvi.** (or **Chapter 56** if translated numerically)
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient has an injury in their leg caused by a wound from an arrow.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery on the legs, which can be painful when used on the patient's feet.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	A hot iron was used to treat pain in the foot or leg, and it would be customary to place a cushion under them.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, another on their chest, and apply a cold cautery to stop the inflammation.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then apply a hot poultice to the patient's leg, or place your hand on it.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	Then apply cautery to the legs if necessary.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then keep the patient warm with blankets and soft clothing.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias que are wise to use cautery for burns, but if there’s joint pain or a burn that you need to treat with something other than medicine:
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's body, they should use a different tool.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Mays you can apply heat or cauterize to alleviate the pain in the limbs of the patient.
Comensa la segonda partida.	And now begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Doctors call pain in their legs or feet caused by an imbalance of humors.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then place a cushion on their legs to support the other parts of the body.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then I will speak about that part in this chapter, because the doctors want to know how to treat it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Then you must learn to apply the heat to the legs in a controlled manner.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This sentence translates to "The plague was called gout."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And they fear death will strike their body.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And put cushion on their legs to prevent them from falling ill from cold feet.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And if the illness persists, it will be fatal for the patient.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And if the patient has pain in their bowels, they will be the one to cause them to be opened.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Aprobate this manner of treatment; if the patient desires it, or if it is customary for them to have their bowels infiltrated by the use of a cushion, they should be given a cushion, etc., because the world says so.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the operation of all your ailments, and for the cure of the disease of gout.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	And if you are to cauterize the legs, place the cautery near the knee, so that the intestines do not fall out.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you are treating a patient for the ailment of the feet, you should consider their needs, use a cushion to apply pressure, and avoid forcing the toes out of place.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And so the child’s illness should be cured.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que las noves veas a child suffering from this illness is to apply a hot iron to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	When translated literally, the sentence means: And sometimes, by an injury to the legs, they are opened, and other cushions are placed on the bed.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And I know of a cure for it, which he needs to be cured by the death of the patient.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have opened the space between them, and placed the child's intestines upon their legs, and the child has been placed on its back to prevent further complications.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This pain caused by these inflammations can be relieved by applying cauteries to affected areas.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	The English translation is: And if the operation is for the knee, then place a cushion under the leg and one on the foot to help the patient relax.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’autre, e la cosa es que l'apostema es major:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And so the doctors would apply a treatment to the affected bone in order to prevent further swelling.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When pain occurs in the legs or feet, it is treated by cauterization as needed.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if it is necessary to open the intestine or other ailments in the body, do so carefully with dry cloths and dress it with a bandage.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E's un autra methodo per la cura del apostema e le'l autres veguat.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from bleeding out.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And for those who need to be cut, they are given a cushion on their legs and another on their chests.
Capitol segon.	This is the second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When applied to the feet or to other areas, doctors use "ubert" to treat ailments.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, when you apply a hot cautery to a wound, the skin of the patient will be burned, and it will be necessary to place a cloth on the wound with your hand in order to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then place a cushion on the legs and apply heat to the area, while keeping another hot cushion under the patient's feet and holding their hands.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish to do so, apply the cautery on their legs.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if a cushion is placed on one's stomach, it is called gout in modern terms.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the hernia doesn't return to its cavity, put another cushion under their feet.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if it is necessary to make points on the feet because of the amount of blood, they will be treated accordingly.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another consider the plague, and if necessary, apply cushions to the affected area.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply cloth to the wound to help it heal.
Capitol .iii.	And when the patient's legs are being treated for humors, the rest of the body should be covered.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This is a guess at what the original text might mean:
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When the first symptoms of a headache are present, and if it seems to be caused by the old gout or a fever, it is customary to treat it with remedies known to medicine.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner of applying a cautery to the patient's body for fever reduction is to apply heat to the area around the temples.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is a case of gout, the patient should be treated with a cushion and with hot water for another purpose which I don't know.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is necessary to open the patient's legs, another incision is made.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Gualtier was an expert in medicine and used to treat patients with a burn from a hot cautery to stop them from having gout.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if it is necessary to treat an injury that affects the whole body, apply the cushion where the pain is located.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And if you are unsure how to apply this treatment, you should consult a doctor.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And when the pain of the plague is great, apply a cushion to the legs.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply cautery to the excess humors that have formed in the body, so that they don't become inflamed.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize the bone, but place something under the cushion."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if it is customary to call gout a disease, it should be treated as such.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make a cautery mark on a patient's leg, use another method to treat them.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then, if the pain worsens, apply a cautery to the affected area.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if there is no need for cauterization, prevent further bleeding by applying another method.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if they are to be treated with a cauterization tool, use a pointed one to remove the excess.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the way to use a cautery.
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And a cushion is placed between the two ribs.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	Therefore, you should keep the patient's intestines or other organs in their proper place.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is gout, you must apply heat to the affected area.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best done with the legs in their proper place.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then, if necessary, apply a cautery to the patient's legs, but be careful not to cause any pain.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This refers to the treatment of wounds on the legs and feet.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And if the patient has a fever, it is treated by doctors as a sign of sickness, so be careful about treating them.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you are experiencing pain in the foot due to gout or other ailments, it is customary to place your hand on the affected area.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the eye is in the middle of the body, it may be necessary to use two other methods for a patient who has been diagnosed with gout.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	E longa le teu ma sobre the area where you need to apply pressure.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if it be necessary to make points on the legs, use cushions for the pain.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you are dealing with a dry ailment on the foot, you have another way to treat it.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You have already treated the legs with cauterization, but it's unclear what that means in the context of medicine.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The first sentence appears to be in a language that mixes elements of Spanish and Catalan.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise that which is infected from the body, and apply a cautery to prevent further spread.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And apply a sharp instrument to their opening and place a cushion on the legs.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When pain occurs in the feet, it is called humors by doctors.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	This refers to the pain in the joints caused by gout.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Another person should hold the patient's legs and feet steady while they are treated.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another cushion should be placed on their legs to prevent them from suffering a coys (hernia) from the application of a hot cautery.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day the patient should be given another treatment.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This refers to applying the treatment described in the second sentence to the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When joint pain is caused by fluxes that are sharp and intense, there will be a burning sensation in the affected joints and the surrounding area.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply a cautery to the patient’s legs (and apply another to the patient's temples, and use the cushion as a cushion for the legs.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the blood from the wound with a cloth while they are still young.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a cushion under their feet.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then apply a poultice of dried herbs to the affected area.
Capitol .vi.	The text appears to be describing a medical procedure, likely in an Italian or Spanish language.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This refers to the treatment of the ear by cauterization.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints, which are similar to those that cause pain in the legs and feet.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if it is a case of an opening in the ear due to various causes, then you should cauterize it, and then apply the other remedies for it.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And if the patient has a cold humor in their ears, they should be treated with a cushion on their thighs, which will help to soothe them.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gout, then they are administering something else for the treatment.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	It is customary to call gout by the name "mal de cors" in those languages.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, you can use a can of gold.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	E aprop extratzt le mas de ubert
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then, if it is necessary to apply hot cautery to the feet or on their legs.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And you have to treat the wound in the leg with a cushion.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	When using a cushion for the treatment of the abscess, you must first cover the area with a bandage.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The meaning of the text in English.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then apply another heated cautery to the patient's body, for if you have found the proper place for the incision, use a tool appropriate for the occasion.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And when a cauterization of the veins on the feet is needed, apply a cautery to the other vein after you have placed one over the feet, another on the legs, but be careful not to press the cushion onto the affected area.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	The physician applies the cauterization to the affected area on the patient's leg.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you think that the body is warmed by the heat of the fire of the lamp, then be careful, because the other servant may have put his hand on their legs.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then apply the heat to the patient's toes, in order to cauterize them.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And so you must ensure that the water does not flow out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The patient's condition will be treated by the physician as soon as possible.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if there are many painful swellings in the joints, then they are treating him with a hot iron to cauterize his intestines.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Then cure the pain in their foot as well as the other parts, which is less severe than the pain caused by the swollen feet.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Aother thing that may be cured by using the method we have mentioned above for the removal of aulreha.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you have to take out the worms, the surgeon takes a lancet from the other side.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if it is necessary to remove the evil humors from the body, it is customary to apply another to the affected area; then, you should apply a cautery to the area to prevent further spread of the illness.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Then you shall apply a cushion to the affected limb, as the ancients used to do, with a needle dipped in wax.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is an ancient medical practice for treating the patient's body.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make hot poultices on the affected area, and use your hands to hold them in place.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so if it is necessary to use a cupping glass on the foot, we must do so carefully, as the patient can be injured.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to make a guess,  apply the oil — or a poultice made from that oil — on the area above the joint.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	E aurels that are made on the body should be called fire-related.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And if it is caused by the heat of the body, it is called gout.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And when you apply cautery to the ears for healing.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then place a hot iron on the belly to cauterize the intestines so that they may be burned and cauterized by it.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Then treat the pain in the legs or feet, and another servant should be used for other purposes to help ease the pain.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you see a patient suffering from an infiltrated intestine, you should apply the following treatment.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see that there are signs of the body being affected by the ailment, apply a hot iron to its location.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the legs, place your hand over the area where the pain is felt.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's body so that they do not make them suffer further.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's body at the location where they feel pain.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if a person's body feels pain or discomfort from an ailment, then they are sick.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to make a poultice for the patient's wound, use another poultice on a different part of the body.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Then apply a bandage to their swollen foot.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	And in the case of a swollen eye, that which causes swelling to the eyes should be treated.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	And when you cauterize the legs of a patient, use cushions to prevent the leg from coming out.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then, you should apply a cushion to their legs if they are suffering from pain there.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When it's necessary to treat pain in the body, you should use a delicate cautery tool on those limbs.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best way to treat the condition is by cauterization if it is caused by a burn or inflammation.
Capitol .ix.	This appears to be from a medieval medical text about applying cauterization to treat ailments.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	And if the patient has an ache in their eye lids, then it is usually called gout by doctors.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The sicknesses are caused by a disease called humors, which are known as the evils in the body, and they are usually named after the cause.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	You have already opened the space between their fingers and placed a cushion on their legs, but there are other cushions for another purpose.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if the foot needs to be cauterized, then put a cushion on the leg and use a hot iron for treatment.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, the pain is located within the area between the legs, and apply to them as in the previous translations.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you open the incision slowly, the pain will be less severe.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it's necessary for the figure to be large, you'll need a large amount of heat applied with the other cushion.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if the pain is less severe, the patient will be healed by using the ointment.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if your hand is shaking or trembling, then apply cauterization to the legs, and hold it steady on the affected part.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And if there is an opening in the leg, you should cauterize it.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	This might be a case of gout, as it often occurs in the foot.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Treat it as gout if there are pains in the joints that are caused by the humors being too hot.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And if you feel pain in their eyelids, apply leeches to your body, which they are used for, and put a cushion on the limbs, and then place another cushion on the other part of the body where the patient’s body is swollen.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	When you have found the right way to apply a cushion to a body part in order to reduce pain then apply the cushion to the affected area.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And if it is necessary for you to apply points to the legs or body, it should be done on the large intestine.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to any part of the body, the surgeon should be careful not to burn them.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When you are treating the patient's legs, the cushions should be placed below the knee.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	When a wound appears on the foot, it should be treated by placing a bandage over it.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if it is necessary to reduce pain in the feet, then apply cushions to the patient's legs, otherwise use a cushion to apply pressure.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the diseased with care.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When there are bandages, treat the affected area with them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The patient will be treated with cautery if their legs are affected by gout.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When there are painful swellings in the feet, this means that the humors have settled there.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, if you have already made a cut on the lower leg, it is customary to call it a "false" gout.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And in the same way, you would apply a cushion to the eyelid.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Then you have opened the space between the legs, the patient has another problem that affects their eyes, and they need a cushion to protect them.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply a cautery to the area where the tear ducts are located on both legs.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And then place your hand on their legs.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then apply a lancet to one of the two corners of the foot, and if necessary, use a bandage to hold the wound together.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the pain has been present for three days or three years, it's necessary to place a cushion under their feet, because the body will naturally try to heal itself.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	But if you wish, leave the plague to dry, and use a tourniquet on the leg to prevent further spread.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	This refers to the previous response.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	This sounds like a recipe for removing something that has been on the body for a while.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	When using a needle, prick the patient's body if necessary, to relieve the pain.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when treating the plague, ensure the patient's lips are healed by cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If a patient has a wound, treat it with cerumen by using cerot for an incision.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And if there is no pain in the legs or other means are used to relieve it, then apply a bandage to the affected area and another on the patient’s eye.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then, place your hand on the patient's thighs to support them.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and so on, as you would have a small incision made in the eye of a patient's eyelid.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions in the extremities of the body.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"If someone has a burn on their eyelid, which is caused by the foot, they will be healed."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es un cauterizació for the chest to be used with care.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	The patient's eyelids are raised, and they are being cauterized by the person using the tool.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then you will have another place on their legs to cauterize.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it is a cushion that they use to apply heat to the body, the pain will be in their feet.
Capitol .xii.	Another one for the pain in the bowels.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When the leg is made stiff (or painful) with a cautery it is called gout.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If there are pains in the joints due to humors, they will be treated by a skilled physician.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the intestine should be as much as a hand's width, but no more.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then place your cushion upon the affected area and apply heat to it, which you would then treat quickly.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And to this cushion should be applied to the leg, where the surgeon will operate on the affected area.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then apply the needle to the cushion under the patient's arm, which has been opened for the patient naturally.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply ice to the affected area.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then if you see that swelling has occurred in the patient's hands, put a cushion under them, and use another for other purposes.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And so you should leave the patient alone for two or three days, so that the poison will be drawn out by itself.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And adjust the cushion to be placed on their legs, and another to be elevated by applying heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter discusses the treatment of a condition called gout.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When a fever is caused by humors in the eyelid, it is called a humor that affects the eye.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the cushion is placed on them, the patient must hold their hands still.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	This means: Apply the cloth to the patient's leg, where the incision was made, and stitch the two sides together, using another thread for the stitching.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And let it be known that you should use a cautery to treat the disease by removing it from the body.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa all the three sources for so treating, as the doctors are accustomed to using in the case of infiltrating their own bodies.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the surgeon will call your ailment gout if it is a case of hot, inflamed joint pain.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if heat affects the patient's legs, the operation is to be done in the following way.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	And if he falls ill, they should be given a hot cautery treatment.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a true gout, which occurs in the eyelids of those who suffer from it, but they are truly using another for treatment; and let them be careful to do so.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then they are treated with a cushion in other ways by applying it to the affected area.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Then the patient's eye will be treated by using a hot needle to pierce the skin between the left and right thigh, so that the tears from the operation don't flow out.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to their legs, then hold the patient's hands open.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then place your hand on the patient's eyelid to prevent further injury.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's legs are already being held open by the other two translations.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, then do it carefully.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And if it is necessary to treat the pain in the leg, apply your hand there.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Use cushioning to treat pain in the joints and apply those remedies to the treatment of them.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the patient is in pain, then you should apply heat to the cushion or use a cautery on the affected area.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And for other ailments you might use a different treatment.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And in the treatment of the body's ailments, he has used various remedies on the patient.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	E a cushion be placed on the thighs so that the disease does not spread, and let other cushions be used to support the patient's limbs.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	When applying a poultice to the eye, ensure it adheres to the conjunctiva and does not touch the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then apply the poultice to the affected eyelid, avoiding the opening of the eyelids and allowing the eye to heal.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then they say to apply a hot cautery to the affected area in order that it should not be disturbed.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When there are humors that cause inflammation in your body, they should be treated with another method.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply your hand to the affected area to keep the illness from spreading further; for the treatment of the ailment, put a cushion on the legs when they are swollen.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cauterizing iron to the affected area for three days, using a cushion to prevent burns on the skin and a bandage to hold it in place.
Capitol .xvi.	This is the beginning of a chapter in the book.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The translation of this part is:  "And of the burning pain caused by the other."
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then you have already opened the space between the patient's legs to be treated for the pain.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	When there are blockages in the body's humors, it is customary to apply a cushion to their legs, but not to the eyes.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If a patient's joints are swollen due to a build-up of humors, then they need to be treated.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And if a patient has a fever, use a cauterized needle to check for the infiltration of blood or phlegm in the legs, which is often called “a” [pointed] by the doctors because they are so thin and delicate."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you should cauterize it with those who are skilled in such things.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you apply pressure to the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it's necessary to cauterize a patient's body, you should use a heated tool rather than one that is cold, because the cure for a cold humor is different than what we call gout.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And make sure that the patient's legs do not suffer further injury from the inflammation.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is necessary to cauterize the inscizio in the foot, it will be healed by the next day."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not painful, place a needle in a joint to draw out the excess humor, and you've been cured by using another needle to do so with which you usually treat the nail.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut into the surface of the foot, place your hand there.
am subtilitat.	And if it is a subtle ailment.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Then apply a pointed cautery to the legs or feet, so that the affected area is heated and treated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And upon their body they will make a counter-incision where the cushion was placed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand on their knees to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	Acusually, if the patient has pain in the foot, apply a cautery to the area.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply a bandage to the affected area to prevent further damage.
Capitol .xvii.	The patient's foot must be returned to its cavity; otherwise, it is called by other names because of the pain in the joints and gout-related ailments.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so apply a cautery to the foot.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The patient's eyelids are affected by the irritation caused by the cushion of the eye.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The patient has gout, and you must apply your hand to their head, in order to make them comfortable.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be made on the foot, which is where the patient's pain originates.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And then apply heat to the affected area, ensuring the intestine is kept from prolapsing by placing the patient's legs in a comfortable position.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if the pain returns to the intestines, then you should treat it as an ailment of the same nature.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area, but only when necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	The text mentions a "Capitol" so we'll assume it's referring to chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	For the treatment of wounds.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	And if you have to treat the pain in the legs by applying heat, and apply a cushion on the foot to help the pain.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, first you must determine if it is true that the patient has a true fever in the bowels.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And place a cushion under the patient's head according to your judgment; ...
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus you have treated the patient's body.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then you must cauterize these delicate veins, until they are cauterized.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And if you are careful, you will not incise the veins, but rather the affected area in order to avoid complications.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, and place it over the area where the pain is located.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	That's how you treat a swelling in that hour, which is called the gout.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then place a second cushion under their legs, to be healed by another.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form in which the body is affected by other ailments
Capitol .xix.	The chapter treats about gout.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	A la reducciò del nas.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	And when you treat with a cauterization, let the body be treated with heat.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and open to the disease, use this method for the treatment:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if a patient's legs are affected by these humors, they should be treated (with a cushion) according to the method used for gout.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Then, if the pain in the joint is severe, apply the cushion to the affected area slowly until it feels comfortable.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then they are cauterized by other means.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the pain continues for 40 days, then it is considered incurable.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you have already reduced the pain in the legs, then treat them as you would someone who has a pain in their legs that needs to be addressed.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The feet should be kept warm and dry, and the patient's needs are met.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And if you have already opened the area to be cauterized by the physician, then apply the heat to the affected area.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, if the joint pain is in the legs, they are said to be affected by gout.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	The following sentence is translated: When the physician has already been called to a place.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx. refers to Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And then apply a cushion for their use.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	And if you put a cushion under the thighs of someone who has been affected by a bad ailment, it may be considered that the person's condition is due to illness in the leg muscles.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The patient's foot should be bandaged, which is done in four layers to protect it.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then return the patient to their natural position, having placed a cushion on the other leg.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And if it is necessary to apply ventosas, do so on their legs; if for the chest, use leeches.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then place your hand on their feet and let it rest there.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then place a cushion under them, and they will be able to hold it in their hands.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the illness cannot be cured by other means, try using a hot cautery on the affected area.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then apply a hot iron to the iris or to the tunic of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	And you will find that the patient's hernia is painful, and you will notice it in the swelling of the eye ducts (which are located at the bottom of the foot).
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then lay the cushion down gently and let it rest on their legs.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then place a cushion on their legs and the patient should be treated for plague.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And if the humors are warm and rise to the affected area, apply a poultice of cloth to the patient's entire foot.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	The translation for "aprop strenh entro que sia sanat" is:
Capitol .xxii.	Another cushion was placed under them.
De curacio de alconati.	This is about the treatment of gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	When the disease is called gout, place your hand on their legs to stop it from spreading.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And if you wish to make a diagnosis on the site of pain in the feet, you should put the patient's leg under the knee pain.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if the patient's leg doesn't go down, you should know they are suffering from gout.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Mays, if you are not able to cure the gout yourself, you can use a poultice made of the finest things to help with pain in the feet.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And so if you have already opened the wound, apply a hot compress to the affected area, which is the foot.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is treated, then it will be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another translation is provided in the prompt.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Here comes the translation:
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Now you have to drain it out with a cushion.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area to draw out the excess humor.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the patient's eye, apply it to their right eye if they have pain in their right eye; or apply it to the left eye if the patient has pain in the left eye.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	and apply your hand on the left or right side, depending on which side is affected by pain
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if you have opened the body's humors in the gut are already treated by the physician.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on their legs to hold them in place.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to apply a cauterization treatment.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if pain occurs in the feet, the patient may have gout.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then burnish the bones of the patient to avoid them becoming too inflamed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when the cushion of the hip has been placed back in its cavity, you can smell a certain scent of clear oil and the smell of the patient's sweat.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	The patient is suffering from a disease of the kidneys caused by an imbalance of humors.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then if you don't want to be overwhelmed by the pain in your stomach, you can use cushion for support.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus the joints are affected by those who suffer from gout, so they need to be treated carefully.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then the patient will be put in a different position.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When you use the correct posture for sleeping, it is best to place your hand on the patient's body, so they don't move while applying the treatment.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place a cushion on their chest so that they are treated by a physician.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And on their legs, he should use a cautery tool to apply heat.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then apply a hot compress to that area, so as to reduce inflammation.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And then you must make a hot compress for the patient.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if you have already treated the pain in their legs, treat the other parts.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess arises in the leg, it is necessary to cauterize it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When there is a strong pain in the legs or feet, it is customary to translate it as gout.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And apply a cushion to their legs, and another to their feet, as you would for the rest of the body.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The patient should not be blamed if they have pain in their legs or feet.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And some have been burned by the fire of the evil one in their knees.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And perhaps it is already a common practice in our land for them to be called 'gout'
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the ways to treat the various types of joint pain.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if they are to be made in the limbs or joints.
Capitol .xxiv.	The chapter containing the text about the twenty-fourth chapter should be translated as:
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then comes the treatment of flesh wounds with the appropriate cauterization.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	This describes a condition similar to scorpion sting that occurs in the foot.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the flesh is cancerous, you should apply a poultice to draw out the poison; but if the flesh is healthy, a poultice should be applied to prevent the spread of the cancer.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, it is necessary to apply a hot compress to these humors in their proper place if the pain is caused by them.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then you will have to place a cushion under them, so they can be helped by a doctor.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if you are to be treated for a sickness, it’s best to do so by a skilled hand in the form of a physician who uses a cautery tool.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's nose, making sure they are not in pain.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si le nas are not always caused by cold humors, but sometimes by too much food or drink.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if there is no pain in the bowels, it is that which must be done.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So, when it is necessary to use a poultice or bandage on their legs, make sure they are placed over the affected area, and if they are concerned about a herniated intestine, put a cushion on that part.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when the physician has determined that it is gout, he should apply the cautery to the affected area of the patient's body, but a cushion to the affected area of their feet.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	This refers to a cushion being placed under the patient's hips and another on their chest, likely for a medical procedure involving cauterization.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to remove a tumor from the bones, then apply a poultice to it for three days or more.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then hold your hand on the patient's legs to prevent their intestines from protruding further.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then use a hot cushion for treatment.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta lu purgaunt on the patient's body is.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And keep a cushion under the patient's legs if they are suffering from pain due to a silver or copper ailment, as it were.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	For if you wish, use a canula to drain fluids from the body, and in the case of hot treatments, apply them directly to the skin where the blood vessels are near the surface.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And thus these are referred to as the legs of the body that have gout.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you see the nostrils in the legs of the patient.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The patient's body has already been prepared for bloodletting by applying a cushion to the feet, a practice that was common for gout treatments, but instead, the physician chose to use another method.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you want to be sure of your cure, you must apply them at the beginning of the treatment.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion for their treatment.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then if a person has had a wound cauterized, they should place a bandage on their leg.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aplegat your hand over the area already affected by the ailment or cushion to apply pressure.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And if the lip needs to be stitched up, you should do so while holding their nostrils open.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in some cases, it is called a hernia.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure the wound of the foot if the patient has been affected by that plague.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of the wound are inflamed, it is advisable to cauterize it.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply sutures to those two lips, and place a bandage on them.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When you are stitching the skin, use needles to sew carefully.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the nature of those causes which are on their legs.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The pain affects some men differently.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And then burn the area if you must, so as to cauterize the cushion that is between the thighs, and the pain will be less severe.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Make incisions in the gums if the patient has pain there.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A wound on the gums is what the ancients called a disease caused by another type of injury, so be careful to avoid injuring the gums.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply a cushion to the area where the patient has other problems.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize the flesh, but only as needed.
Capitol .xxix.	In the capitol, there are described the symptoms of gout and its treatment.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then apply a cushion to their legs and feet.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When translating the first few sentences from Latin to English, I think the text says: When there are painful swellings in the body, especially in the feet, which are caused by a buildup of bad humor.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then put your hand on them to keep it closed, so that the body fluids do not run out from the places where they are.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you have to apply a cupping treatment, apply it to the legs in the future.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the patient's teeth are sensitive to heat and cold, which is why you should use a cushion during their treatment.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the pain which is caused by the cold, there are other forms besides the first form which involves the use of a razor.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. is a good start! I'm assuming you want me to translate the Roman numeral "xxx" which represents 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On removing teeth from them.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to remove a tooth, then the surgeon should be consulted.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the tooth is removed, the pain from the extraction will subside.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Donc, si tu es que a de lu la pained, e lahores covera la zona arounde that contains the pain.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply a cushion to the patient's legs or feet if they have strong pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if you don't have to apply force, use the cushion that is used for the treatment of the condition of the patient.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Apertine  the foot already has a cushion or covering for the legs, you should apply another cushion to the leg where it hurts and use the cushion on the other leg to prevent further injury.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	The patient's gums are cut by a sharp cautery to cleanse the blood.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And when they are already sickened by that which we have seen to be the cause of pain in the feet, they say it is due to cold humors.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then return the patient's hands to their fingers.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	When there is a flow of blood in the legs, the pain is caused by the cushion, which should be placed on the foot to stop the pain from spreading.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	When using forceps and other tools to work on the tooth, one must be careful.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And when the intestines are as if they have been separated by a force other than the foot.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if they are suffering from gout, which causes pain in the joints, the physician should apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of Humors: And if it is necessary to cauterize the feet, the doctor should use the appropriate cushion and apply it to the affected area.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	And if you have to remove teeth or treat broken bones, you should use a tool for such purpose.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then you must place your hand upon the area to prevent them from bleeding.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	Their limbs must be treated as those who are afflicted with gout.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the patient does not have a fever, it is called gout.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the small intestine is opened, it is treated as a wound.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If there is a cushion present that is suitable for use on the body, you should know that the patient is being helped.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then make sure to use a subtle instrument if you want the pain in the legs to be a specific type of pain.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you will be helped by two cushions placed on your legs.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient has no other symptoms, but only needs their bowels or legs to be scraped, use a cushion to protect them from harm.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And you have already treated the foot with a poultice, for a condition that involves pain in the feet caused by an imbalance of humors.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then you must treat the other parts of the body as well as they have been described, just as you would use other tools for the job.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The ancients believed that a cushion was used to treat ailments, but I believe we should use our knowledge of anatomy to understand the body's workings.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when a tooth has been extracted from the jawbone or other bones in the mouth, take care that the tongue does not become swollen.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And so that the inflammation in the foot does not spread, or the patient's feet are affected by the swelling.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is little pain in the bone, use a small cushion.
Capitol .xxxii.	The text refers to the use of cauterization as a treatment for gout, which seems unusual given the knowledge that doctors should treat the cause rather than just the symptoms.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from the care of the teeth, which are prominent above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Then apply that ointment to the patient's body to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E que lo siga en la cavidad del seu intestí, et altre el seu dolor e la cura es a las cossas.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4: And if he is to be treated by a doctor who knows the nature of his illness, he will apply a rasping to the affected area with a file.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent them from becoming affected by the heat.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then apply the cushion to their legs to help them.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if you have already determined the affected part of the body, then apply a cautery to that area.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the body by drawing out toxins.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Then apply gold or silver to the teeth.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And if the patient's condition is such that they are suffering from a lack of appetite or difficulty digesting, apply a cushion to their feet and use a treatment of honey and vinegar.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if you see the yellowing (jaundice) in the patient's feet,  and think they are the result of a disease that causes the intestine to be swollen, then apply a cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply leysament with your hand on the patient's legs.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When your body weakens and becomes ill, you must use the proper tools to drain the bad humors that have infiltrated it.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's body was likely being treated for gout in their feet, but you are suggesting the use of a tool to treat the pain, which implies a different meaning for "juncturas" in this context.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And place a cushion on their legs, so that the patient's body may be healed.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And apply a cushion to the injured area.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And if you see two humors in the body are healthy, you can use a hot cautery to treat them.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When the pain of the bowels is caused by a fall of the body's humors, it is called gout.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And so it should be done by the physician only, and he must carefully examine the patient's leg and feet.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And if a cautery is used on the bones of the legs, to mark the location of the pain and apply heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cauterizing tool carefully to the affected area.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And if it is necessary to speak about the pain in the ligaments, they should be treated with cautery.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which is natural or acquired, causes pain in the other joints.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Then apply heat to the afflicted area to treat the ailment, and protect the tongue from harm by using cushions.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is pain in the legs or feet, then apply cautery with caution.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Watch out for pain in the shins, which you can see by the way they are described.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And if necessary, apply a poultice to the affected area; or, if it's a serious case, use a bandage to hold the tongue in place.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If you translate the provided text to English, you will get the meaning:
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then place it on the knees.
Capitol .xxxv.	This text refers to a specific chapter in a document.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply the same method to the affected area of the foot.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if the pain is severe, they are said to have a small abscess which causes great pain in the tongue.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	Then consider the patient's foot to be open and exposed and apply a cautery to their sole.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	This means if it is a black or brown color, you can be sure it's gout.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	E put your hands on the patient's stomach to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to your patient's ailment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text is likely referring to the 36th chapter in a treatise on medicine.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	This text describes treating various medical conditions using cauterization.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	And then you apply cold compresses to the throat, if the swelling requires it.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the pain is caused by a buildup of cold humors, it is called gout.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	When something is white and painful, then it must be treated with cauterization.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E then the other's hands are to be placed on their thighs, pressing down on the abscesses that may be present there.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And if it is made of silver or gold, it is done subtly with a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And if the patient's leg is affected by those humors that cause pain, they are to be treated with a poultice on their foot.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are experiencing pain from your body, you may be suffering from a condition similar to gout.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if you are using forceps for delivery, but the other parts of the body are also affected by the use of forceps, use a splint to prevent the intestine from herniating.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not present, one must be careful not to confuse the condition of the patient's body.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And apply the same treatment to the other leg, as you did for the first.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mils si has de fer for pain in the legs, then you will be healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And if you burn the bowels or a part of the intestines with a hot cautery, they are healed by applying another cushion to the injury.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And now you must consider that a woman who was treated for a boil on her throat died because of it.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already risen to such a degree that it burst through two openings in the leg.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And that you should know, some treatments for ailments are performed by making a distinction between the humors.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you have to place another servant on their legs and another on their arms.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The cushion must be used to treat wounds on the feet.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And if you have gout, you will find that it can be painful when the gout affects the feet, and you should avoid this pain by using another cushion for the patient's foot.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This looks like Italian, but translated into English, it would be something along the lines of: Chapter thirty-seven.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From incision on the body's humors (in the first person singular), you have already made an incision, so the text may be describing how to treat a wound resulting from such a procedure.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the humors are too strong in their case, they are said to be causing a blockage.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you have cured an abscess, it is no longer necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	As you have described, if there are signs of cold humors being present, apply heat to the affected area as soon as possible, but do not let the patient touch the tools used for cautery.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if you are going to use cauterization on the foot, it should be done at the knee, e.g., used to burn the leg open.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then you should make an incision on the legs if necessary.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If an ailment is present in the foot, its severity is determined by the location and thickness of the affected area.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When a doctor cauterizes one's limbs, they should use a pointed cautery for points on the foot, as gout is already present in the patient's body.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then apply heat to the uvula for an hour.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Then let the person be three days or as many days as are necessary to allow the canula to dry out.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see swelling in his legs, apply cold compresses to the area.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is better than cauterization or surgery.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And if you wish to treat an illness in the legs, use a hot poultice of silver or gold to draw out the fever.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the body is afflicted with pain, it is customary to apply cautery to the area where the pain is located.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do if you wish to treat a patient for cold humors in their body but do not apply heat to the legs or feet during treatment.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	The patient must be treated with a cane and have their legs closed.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for the health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol 38: On the treatment of gout.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if you must apply a remedy to the patient's throat, and have the pain in their throat.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, to burn them, so that they may be burned in other places, for example the knees or the feet.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And if you want to cool the inflammation of the tongue, have another person apply the instrument.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the intestine or the stomach is affected by a blockage, apply a treatment to induce vomiting; if the cause of the illness is unknown, but the patient has been diagnosed with a problem in their intestines, you should treat them for the symptoms they are presenting.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if a burning pain occurs in the foot, place a bandage over it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	The doctor says that gout is caused by these things:  when you have to open the area where it occurs in the foot, and if there are other things that cause this, they are called "causes" by doctors.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if you are using your hand to hold the patient's intestines or to treat them, it is customary to call it gout by doctors.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place another on their chest, and another on their legs, to prevent the pain from spreading further.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Then you prepare a poultice for the patient's body, and if the cause is in the legs or feet, apply it to those areas.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.  is Latin for chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	And so you have applied the cautery to the area around the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the patient has been treated for that ailment, consider it necessary to apply a poultice and use other treatments as well.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you are experiencing pain in your feet, the type of pain that causes swelling, it is important to note that it's likely caused by something called a malaute (mal de haut) or gout.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the foot through the use of a canula, you will need to apply the instrument to the affected area.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Apointedly apply to the foot a poultice, because it is necessary to treat the affected area with a cushion or compress, and hold the cushion on the foot for an hour.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If someone has a pain that makes them think they have gout, apply heat to the affected area.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And then, you should cauterize, and keep the patient comfortable in their thighs, and apply heat to the feet.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E, es, the patient's feet are often affected by gout.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if there is no cushion, you should cauterize them, which is necessary for treating gout.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This sentence describes the instrument used to treat a condition called "cursuaguo" (a type of medical treatment involving leeches) by placing cushions under the patient's legs and a cushion for them to be placed on their chest, while the "other" refers to the use of forceps.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then apply a hot compress to the patient's legs, but don't let it be too tight.
Capitol .xl.	The text uses a Roman numeral, indicating that it's likely referring to a chapter number.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which case, you are dealing with a situation where there is a blockage in the foot, and another on the other side of the blockage.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if you are making specific marks on the body, it’s advisable to call these boils by their proper names, but they say in this book, “they” are often called gout.”
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then there are various ways to treat them.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way to treat it is with a cushion on their thighs, and apply it to the patient's body.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May the doctors be given what they need to heal the patient's wound.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	This is an entry from the book "The Book of Health" by Bernard de Gordon. It's a fictionalized medieval cure for a disease described in Latin, but the language itself isn't quite right - it's more like a humorous attempt at medieval Latin than actual medical terminology.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When you know the time when the pain is at its worst, that's when to apply the cautery to the leg for the fever.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then, apply heat to the patient's ailment, so they can be treated properly.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if it's necessary to cut into the area to drain the pus from the wound, then you should place another cushion under the area where the hernia is, so that a patient with an opening in their leg and another one on their foot.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	If you have to apply a cautery to the body, you should apply it along the length of the affected limb, but not on the joints.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays your bowels be opened, and you have to apply the poultice after the digestion has been confirmed.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes doctors incorrectly call a pain in the legs gout.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if it is a small wound, apply a small cautery.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	When there are apostemes in the legs or body that cause pain, it is called a different ailment than those who have them elsewhere.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And so when you cauterize, make sure to do so in a way that avoids damaging them.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And so the moon-shaped and round incisions are performed on the body.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And then you cauterize the superficial veins if they have superficial ulcers, make sure to only cauterize the skin.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The following is a possible translation:
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the area for a patient, and you place your hand on their legs, because you put it in the cavity,  and you are accustomed to calling that gout.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Then comes the description of the use of a cushion in the case of an injury to the foot, which is usually treated by applying a cauterizing tool to the foot.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's body is affected by the third day, it is customarily treated by applying a poultice to the area where the wound has been burned.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flows during surgery, administer another cushion to stop the bleeding.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if you are still unsure whether to apply cauterization or other treatments mentioned in the book on the patient's legs, then consider these other options.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is necessary to apply cautery to the feet, it should be done carefully to avoid burning the patient's skin.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, then you should put a cushion on their legs.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then it is known as a treatment for the whole body, which is why it is sometimes called a "universal" treatment.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This is a description of the location of the tonsils.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	And they are to apply a poultice made of herbs to the area between the thighs.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are to be treated with a cushion on the feet like those which are done for gout.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And if it is a matter of those who are affected by dampness in the legs, or the body, then apply a cushion to their legs, and they should be treated.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the case of gout, a cushion will be used as a remedy for the patient's legs.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so the patient's legs are treated by applying a cautery to the affected area.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if there are symptoms that occur in the legs, treat them with this method: apply hot poultices to the affected area for the superficial pain.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And so, having evacuated the humors, you will then apply a poultice to the patient's skin.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then place a cushion under their legs; if there are no other cushions, use blankets to support them.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the infected area with ointment, so that the plague may be cured.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And here's how you make an incision to treat that which we call gout.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When the patient suffers from an illness that causes joint pain, it is called gout.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if your hand is too hot, it will cause pain in your feet.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here a hot cautery is used to treat the affected area.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	When the woman's leg is affected by a disease, which is called gout, and she has a severe pain in the area of the knee, it is necessary to apply the cauterization there.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And so you will know, this is a very important part of the chapter because the other causes are already covered in the previous sections.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You translate the cushion to the limbs using this: e pausa le cushion for the body's lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply your hand to the foot with a heated cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	The text is in Latin and refers to the use of a heated needle for cauterization.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the way you described it, I would guess the first sentence translates to:
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And if it is necessary to burn with fire the bowels or intestines, use cushions; for the rest of the body, use another method.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	So they should be called those who are affected by this ailment.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And if the patient has these conditions, they are treated by applying heat to cauterize the affected area.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And apply another (cautery) on their feet, and treat them from the outside.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful to put another one on their chest, so that you might cauterize them properly.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	This is how the patient's pain was treated in the Middle Ages.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, you have completed your operation on the patient's legs.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then cut into the areas where those are found to see if the patient's body has other causes.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is a large vein, do not cut into it, but cauterize it.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	The patient should be treated with a hot iron to burn out the bad humors that are causing pain in their feet.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And apply ointment to the patient's legs, which you will use to treat them.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cauterize the other two parts of the body, and totally remove the plague.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays that be what you should do if your hand has a wound, but use a cushion for its support, and another one to keep the patient warm.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the foot has been affected by the disease, it is treated with superficial cauterization.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then apply a cushion to the legs or other areas as needed.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And if the affected area has healed, you may need to do less for the patient.
Capitol .xliii.	The text is referring to a medical treatise written by someone who might be a surgeon or physician.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the given information, here's the most likely translation: When treating a patient for ailments caused by humors affecting the feet, use a pointed cautery on the legs and feet.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	They used to say that a wound in the legs or feet was caused by gout.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is how they call the disease caused by these humors.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply cushions on the legs and arms of the man, as you do to treat his legs and feet.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Gums should be treated with hot cautery if they are affected by a disease that causes them to be burned.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, if you want to cure the swelling, place three circles on the legs of the patient, each made up of four rings, and use a cautery on the body between the rings.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If it is necessary to apply cautery, do so carefully while avoiding the vessels of the blood.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return your hand to the patient's side; for the cushion on their legs is the one that causes pain.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	The patient's legs are cushioned for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if the plague were to return, apply cautery on an open sore on the body.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then apply medicine that will heal the flesh.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And so, for the body to be in pain, it is necessary to apply a cauterization to save the patient from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let the evil be left to fester until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	A person has a disease in their body, and I saw it was a boil on the skin.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for treatment of the ailment that causes pain in the limbs, because they are causing pain to the patient.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if a patient has an ailment that requires the use of a cautery, apply another round of it after a few days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the treatment of gout.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A hernia on their legs is called a cushion on the neck.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	And this inflammation is called a "neck boil" by doctors.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This pain in the patient's legs is caused by an imbalance in their humors.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the realm of medicine, it is said that there is no cure for it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And for those suffering from gout, they should be cauterized in two ways.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And if a person has a small intestine, another method should be used.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter a patient with a condition that causes pain in the limbs, it would be best to use a sharp instrument for the treatment.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the treatment of swellings.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described the many types of joints in the body.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	This is that which doctors call gout, and it is a common ailment in the legs.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the bowels when the abdomen is inflamed.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	And if there is no heat on the legs, then it is not gout, but something else.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if it is a hot, humid humor that causes the pain, then you have to treat it with methods to cool the body down.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And so you must use a hot cautery to treat this condition, which you should be aware can cause more harm.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means that doctors call a condition where there are swollen, painful joints, gout.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And upon them apply your cautery to the affected area, and consider what has been done to the foot.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is necessary to hold the hands back from the affected area, you should apply a cautery.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then the doctor places his hand on the patient's leg to feel for the presence of gout.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	When a person's body has been treated for arthritis, it is common to use a cushion to support the legs or feet.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And so if you have an incision made on the foot, another cushion placed under the patient's legs would be used to cover the wound, and a third for the other areas.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it's necessary to break down the illness into pieces, you can also use the word "rupture" as a synonym for "break" or "fracture".
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If there's an imbalance of humors in the body, the pain will be severe.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if any part of the body needs cauterization, you should use strong acids and the other remedies for it.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When there's a large amount of blood on their feet, they are already suffering from gout.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the veins are swollen, you should apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .xlvi.	This answer assumes that "Capitol .xlvi." refers to a chapter heading in a medical treatise.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the instruments necessary for surgery and making punctures.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these three types, one is large and another small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then you have already placed a hot cautery on their legs, another on their foot.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The way to apply a poultice is by opening the legs to allow the heat to reach the body.
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	This is the text that describes how to treat pain in the joints caused by cold humors.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	The doctors say that when pain comes from an ailment, it is customary to call it gout.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	The body has 4 humors: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if he is a man of great, middle-class, or little means, they are of three kinds.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Then apply cautery to the affected area if it is necessary to reduce swelling in the patient's feet.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La forma de experient, the other means of experiencing.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	Gaiters are worn on the legs or feet to prevent pain from spreading.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	The patient must be treated for their ailment by the other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Then apply heat to the area with the hot needle-like instruments, ensuring they are properly heated before use, so that they can be effectively applied to the patient's body.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if they are black, they are called black bile by the physicians, which is a sign of a bad humor, already present in the body, causing pain in the joints.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And if it is necessary to treat fistulas, it should be done by skilled physicians; for the treatment of the leg, use a hot iron.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the patient's lead-filled instrument
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Lead cauterization.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	When treating gout, apply cauterization only when necessary.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The text describes different types of nails and the proper treatment for gout.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of their bodies three species are known.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they are called by different names based on their location.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Et autre ubert on their legs, three physicians.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	All these things are necessary for them in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple gout attack is already painful enough to be called an attack by the name itself.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple gout attack is caused by the crystallization of uric acid in the joints.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The text refers to the form or treatment of something related to a medical condition.
Forma de unci orp gran:	And then apply a cushion to the legs to prevent them from experiencing pain.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	This is likely referring to a method of treating gout by cauterization.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And the shape of one's body, already a little inflamed, should be treated as if it were a burn.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"And if you need to treat them."
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A cushion for their legs, if they have pain.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And they are called double curves by a doctor.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	And so the patient's body should be treated in three places by a form of medicine.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of the body having three parts.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The patient's body has three curves.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the ways to treat the joints, it's customary to use a cautery for nodes, but to treat them with other techniques too.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the gout: when the patient's body is afflicted by an excess of phlegm, it is known as gout.
Forma del scapel migier:	E si es la forma de la pierre's disease, the physician uses a specific type of cautery.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The patient's leg needs to be held in place while you work on them.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	And for those who are already suffering from acute gout, cauterize the affected area.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And thus you will be able to tell if the pain is in the legs or feet.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of which is already opened, it is necessary to apply a sharp instrument to the affected area, as well as use a hot cautery.
Forma de magda migier:	This form of the disease is caused by cold humors that affect the feet.
Forma de magda pauc:	This statement is already in English, so we can just focus on making it more understandable.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to apply cautery, do so to the affected area when needed.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	If a wound needs to be cauterized, then the foot is cauterized with heat, but only if the wound is an abscess, or on the surface, you should apply a hot poultice and not cauterize it.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And then the methods of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	There are three types of bloodletting: large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	And if it is customary to use round shapes for purging.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are a few ways to translate "cove que sian aquestas specias" but I don't have enough context to know which one is correct.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"And therefore, when you are treating the patient, do not use those methods on the tender parts."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if it is necessary to reduce swelling; others use a cushion, as in cautery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this way;
Capitol .xlvii.	The chapter title suggests that the following are instructions for treating an ailment related to the body's humors, likely gout, as in the case of the second sentence.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Then apply to the nipples of the breast of men
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some people say that the pain of some men is caused by their sleeping poorly, while others are inflamed by the heat.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	.B. que de novo ha fet lo meu tractament de l'a.B.G.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When your body's humors are in balance with the help of gout remedies applied to the legs and feet, then the pain will lessen.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E so if it is true that doctors have customarily called it gout, it's important to remember that they are not always right.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	A sharp instrument should be used on the patient's body to make an opening if it is necessary.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if you have not already done so, apply cautery to them to burn away their pain.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And if you are going to treat a patient's leg for a case of gout: it's important to use a cushion when treating them.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	When a cushion is placed on the knee, it should be healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When the patient's health improves, the doctor may use other methods.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	Then, if the plague is widespread, it's customary to apply a cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .xlix.	Another translation for the sentence "And if you have to make an incision on the intestine" should be "And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs"
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This likely refers to the process of lancing or treating boils (arceria/vena) and describes something related to how to apply the cushion after lancing a boil.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, the pain will be felt in the veins; but if it is a vein that's ruptured, you'll know it by the throbbing pain.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When someone's veins are filled with blood, they are said to have a specific type of illness that causes pain in their feet.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if the body's humors are out of balance, it is customary to use cauterization for treatment.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Then you should cut into the area of the abdomen affected by inflammation.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a pad on their legs to prevent further pain.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When you need to cauterize the area, place your hand on their legs and do so.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat the condition of the leg in the patient.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E tu has already given me the answer: The English translation is "And if you have a boil on your foot, apply a cushion to prevent it from reaching your legs," which is a bit different from the original text.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you are in need to drain the pus from the affected area, apply a poultice to the wound.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And so you cauterize the abscess with a heated cautery, while another person holds the patient's thighs and another person holds the affected part.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place it on their legs (the cushion), and apply your hand to the affected area.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This being the case, there are other things that can be done to address the issue of the patient's swollen legs.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And similarly, if an abscess forms in the legs, it is called a boil on the leg, or if it occurs in the body, it is called a post.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if the pain is in the feet, then it is called another thing.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if there is a severe pain in your foot, or elsewhere in the body, it is often called gout.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if you need to treat an abscess, apply heated cautery to the area.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, if it's in the leg or foot joints, you should use cauterization.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And you must cauterize the area on the head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays means "it is" and is used as an affirmative expression in this context.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has a hernia, apply a cushion to their legs.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The first pain occurs in the legs.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then they should be applied to the patient's body and legs.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And he put two parts together in the belly, and they were two parts different to the other.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And if they were to be treated, their own words would describe it as such.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if there is pain in the legs or feet, let the metrical doctors apply their treatments.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if the operation is done on the leg which has been affected by the other illness (presumably the one mentioned earlier), then you have to cauterize it with a pointed tool.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if it is already festering with pain, apply that to the patient's legs;
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Esercitio
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays si theil es le patient that has a cushion under them, and one in the open leg.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that they are using a cushion to protect the patient's body.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat that person with healing methods.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Then hold still, and don't let your hand move, as the patient has already had their bowels cut open.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you have already opened the space of the patient's foot.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On treatment for the pain caused by an inflamed appendix.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	It is said that the body experiences many different ailments; some are due to wind in the intestines.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May it be known that the condition is called leucorrhea.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if you have already diagnosed a patient as needing treatment for something that causes pain in their legs, then place a cushion on the surface where the pain is felt, and apply the other member of the body to the area, so that the intestines do not fall out.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it be a pain from humidity, that is, if the foot be opened by your hand, then you must cauterize it.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And now if there are too many phlegmatic humors, a physician will treat the body based on the symptoms.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When you are hungry, your body can be fed by a cushion of food.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by windiness, you should place a cushion on their legs, and use another method for the ailment.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This translates to something like:  "And if it is necessary to treat the area around the knee."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if it is necessary to put a bandage on the patient’s legs, I will put a bandage on their legs and they can be healed by putting a cushion under them and another on their chest, but this is for one type of ailment.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so you should cauterize the intestine for the benefit of the pain in the foot.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have found the cure for the ailment; apply this treatment to the afflicted part of the body.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	When your body is in a state of health, you can use this to help prevent the pain from being too painful.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, apply a cauterizer to that which is in the body, for example, the one who has a wound or an ailment, and leave them to stand still so the pain is more intense; and hold the wound in place.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	The patient's body should be cleansed of both fire and moisture.
Capitol .liii.	The doctor is treating the patient's foot.
De curacio de cranc.	Translation: This refers to the treatment of wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	And I have said, that in the cure of the body, you must apply a cushion to their legs.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	E dixe que some ancients also called it that.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When cold and heavy, it may be called incurable.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	This describes the process of treating someone suffering from black death in a medieval medical context.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then place a cushion under the patient's leg, and prepare the affected area for the procedure.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	The patient's feet may have been cold, so the doctor put their hand on the patient's leg to keep them warm.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the feet, then treat it with other remedies for the legs or with a cauterizer, and place a cushion on the leg to stop the bleeding.
Capitol .liv.	The livor of la persona which is on the leg, e'n la cap.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of swollen limbs.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	They have already diagnosed the condition as that of "hydropsy," and recommended cushion treatment.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	Then place another cushion under their legs and make sure the patient is comfortable.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The first person to apply medicine to treat the patient's illness in the body should be a doctor.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	When the patient has too much bile, the doctors are called upon to operate on them, placing their hands on the abdomen during the operation.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	This text is likely referring to a medical procedure, but I need more context to provide an accurate translation.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if there are three cushions for each of those who have been cut open.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Then apply three fingers to the patient's side, where the liver is located.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If your pain is caused by cold humors that are in the legs, they will be healed through the use of cautery.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And so that you may know, the patient's leg should be kept in place.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then cauterize the affected area with a hot iron, and apply the points to the patient's legs.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And if the patient's legs are open to the point of being splayed, then perforate them at the location of the injury.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Place a cushion under the patient.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This sounds like a description of a treatment for a hernia, which may involve using a silver needle to reduce it.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	The first sentence means: **And if you want to treat them (for their ailment) by the method of cauterization, which is also called "the gout"**.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if it is necessary to make adjustments to the patient's legs, that is what the term "bontà" means in this context, it refers to the patient's condition, and another term "disposicio" would be used for the "disposition" of the body.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And apply the instrument to the foot so that it can be cauterized in accordance with its nature.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And let the patient be treated with a small amount of cautery on the other days to stop the pain from spreading through the body.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to place the patient on a bed in a sunny location.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And place your hand on their stomach to control the pain.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol .50
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	And thus you will cauterize the skin between the legs.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some people use this word "gout" to describe a condition where cold humors cause painful swelling in the joints.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And thus, the patient is treated with cautery for their thighs.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice to the affected area three times daily, and leave it on for three days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they are urinating, you should place a cushion under the bladder and hold their hands to prevent them from suffering.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	Then it may be necessary to cauterize the area if there is swelling in the intestines or another location.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es quelio es
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	This pain arises from the heat in the legs of the patient, which can be relieved by applying a cushion to the area.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	This is a description of how to perform surgery on the patient's left leg, using cautery, while leaving the intestines undisturbed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And if you have a wound or infection that causes bleeding, another application is needed.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi. **
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin is also called "the skin" in this context.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Here comes the first part of the ancient text translated, so that you can see what I think it means:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of those is malignant and the other is benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on the foot, you should use a cushion to hold the patient's hand.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the humor is bad, you must apply heat to their feet, and apply a bandage to them.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the head of the penis, it is a practice that is used on the patient's body when it is swollen and painful.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Then you will apply the cushion to the patient's feet, and place their legs in their proper position, so that the pain doesn't spread to other parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And if it is necessary to apply a remedy to the patient, there must be another cushion in place for their other legs and feet.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if you have blood flow issues, apply a moonstone cautery in this manner.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When the body's humors are corrupted, gout is caused by an excess of blood in the foot.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And you should insert the other end of the cane under the skin where the patient's urine would flow out through that opening.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then apply a poultice to the legs if they are affected by the disease but do not require cautery treatment for their pain.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then you must cauterize the affected area of the patient's body to prevent the spread of the disease.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then use a tool to separate the skin between the foreskin and the penis, carefully removing any excess so that the head of the penis does not become too tight.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area and let it be cauterized.
Capitol .lvii.	Another cushion on their chest, et so that they should be in the cavity of the patient's body.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Then apply a bandage to the part of the body where the incision was made.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When a patient's body has an illness, they are treated with a cautery.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it is necessary to make an incision in the skin of the legs, this is done with a surgical tool called a "novacula".
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	When you place a cushion under the legs, you should use a sharp instrument to cut it open for better relief from pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the pain in the groin caused by gout is severe.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And if in the operation, you have to put a cushion under the patient's foot, ensure the incision is properly closed.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's body is naturally prone to developing short intestines.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if you are to use the cautery on the patient, ensure they have a cushion placed under them.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The next day, apply the cautery to the child again.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if you wish to apply heat to the body, it is customary to use a hot cushion.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And you should hold the legs still (with) a cushion; the same goes for your tools, which are hidden under the patient's hands, so that the child wouldn't see them; they don't understand what these things are.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the patient's foot and press against the wound to draw out the pain.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Place a cushion on their legs.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then you apply a cushion to their foot, for a cure because it is good for the oil to be applied to the skin with the cushion, so that the blood will flow freely.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is a description of how to use forceps in a medical procedure.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	This one is tricky, but I think it means: "And if some other veins are in the body of the patient, and others are extramitats (extremities), et autre cushion under their legs, et another on their arms."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When translated into English, this might mean:
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then apply cautery to that area.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you can't remove the stone by ordinary means, use a hot iron to pull it out.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	After three days, you will apply the cauterized area to the affected limb, which you must keep covered for three days after burning.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And if you have already opened the hip joint, remember to hold the patient's legs together while they are on their backs.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore apply your hand to it so that the plague may be cured.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if you have an injury to the legs that is outside the scope of what is usually called gout, the physician should be consulted.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if you are cured, you may be able to resume normal activities.
Capitol .lviii.	Translation 2: And if it is necessary to remove something from their feet, let them be removed by force.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retaining the intestines in their proper place is important for preventing pain.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs if they are experiencing cramps, and ensure their bladder does not protrude by using a tool to hold them in place.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs to help them relax and prevent further injury.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the bladder is behind the hands of the surgeon, so that the urine will be expelled.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause of the illness is not caused by a deficiency of the body's humors, it is customary to call this condition rheumatism.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you apply heat to the thighs of a patient who has no need for such a thing, a small incision in the thigh may cause a reaction.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And do apply another servant on their legs and another on the patient's feet to prevent them from suffering.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then apply a cautery to the body's extremities, especially the feet, to ensure it remains on the outside of the body as they are cauterized.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if necessary, apply a cushion to the patient's urine flow.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply a cautery to their legs, and provide relief for them.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	If you wish to apply an enema, use this method.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you have pain in the bladder, then apply a poultice to the area.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	When applied to the foot, it should be considered a sign of its being sick.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs of the patient and one on the feet.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, place a cushion under them, for the pain in their legs.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When using a hot iron to cauterize an ailing bladder, use a cushion on their legs, as in the case of a burning sensation.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then place the patient's legs in a way that prevents the bladder from being pierced by the humors; then apply the extramet (medicinal poultice) to their legs, e.g., on the ankles or knees.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This sentence likely refers to the incision technique used for surgery on the bladder.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if it is made of silver or of bronze, its use is to hold the small veins.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And place a cushion under their legs, and another on their chest, so that they are supported by the cushion.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then he placed another cushion on their legs.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then apply a hot poultice to their bladder or kidneys, to draw out any inflammation.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you want to stop the flow of urine from the bladder, use a cautery on their legs, for it is said that this condition can be treated with a poultice, and that a poultice relieves the pain.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then apply a cauterizing agent to each wound.
Capitol .lx.	The chapter number indicates this should be translated as "Chapter 60".
De extraccio de peyra.	On the treatment of gout.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos ja havem spoken about the types of stone in the different types of joints and how to tell them apart.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if they are in pain, we will say that it should be treated by applying a cautery to their legs, and then the patient’s legs were opened and his hands were held.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	When there is pain that arises in the body, apply your hand to the affected area.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it is necessary to explain the meaning of these translations: You've got your hand on the patient's foot.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Apeu, therefore, a full-blown pain in the area of the affected part of the body.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And then they are healed by applying herbs to their wounds.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	It is customary for young people to be treated with a poultice on their legs.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if you are treating a patient whose pain is caused by an ailment in the foot, it is customary to use a cautery on their legs.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	This is a tricky one! It looks like the text is mixing words from different languages. My best guess at translating that one line:
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place your hand on the affected area to help them.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you are ready, the patient should be cauterized in the area of the body where the pain is located.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	E aprop a red hot iron over the patient's legs.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you need to place a hot poultice on the legs, put it on the thighs.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you are applying a poultice to the affected area, it's important to note that they are not always in their proper place.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if a stone is present, it should be removed.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly turn back that which has caused the pain in their legs.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply heat to the affected area as you close it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command him to hold his hand over his leg, and to place it on the other side.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to a patient's leg, hold them still with a cushion.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And if you are suffering from an ailment that causes pain in the feet, it is known as a case of the narrowest section being treated by a surgeon.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And that's why doctors say it is hard to cure.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from their legs a lion is made, and it is round, and is done by the leg which has been opened up.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then, if it is a pain in the limbs, treat it as a hernia, meaning a cushion should be placed on the affected area.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if the patient's legs are not strong enough for a straight-up surgery, keep them from being taken outside to prevent it from becoming an illness.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot stop the pain in their feet with medicines, then try a cauterization.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	This is a description of how to use a cautery on the patient's body for treatment.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	When the pain in the legs is great, apply a cushion to the knee joints, or if it's necessary to make them feel less pain, it is customary to use the other as a poultice for the knee.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And now you must treat the fracture of the foot.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, after completing the operation, apply aloe and dragon's blood to the wound.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply a bandage to the wound and let it be treated with water and oil.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area, for three days after which the patient will be relieved.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And so when the patient's illness was cured, his/her body was free from the evil humors.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And when there's a wound on the bladder or urethra, it is customary to call it the bladder's inflammation.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the intestines, but only when necessary.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	You have already established the proper treatment for gout, which you can use to treat your patient's condition.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the body, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	When the patient's condition requires it, you can treat it as gout.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then put some fire under the legs to burn out the badness that has spread there from elsewhere.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, do so with a cushion to protect from the blade.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	E si vos legs are affected by these humors, it is good to use the cauterization method on the legs if you make a diagnosis of gout.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	When the other sources are used up, apply your hand to the area, and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it is called gout by those who use the ancient methods:
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And here comes the first one:
E aprop extratz aquela.	And the patient is ready for the extraction.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then treat the patient's legs with proper care by using a cushion to keep them comfortable and warm.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	When the bowels are affected by the pain, they will be affected by the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And if there are other causes for the pain in his legs, he's likely to use a different method than what we just discussed.
Capitol .lxi.	And then apply a cauterizing tool (like a hot iron) directly to the area affected by gout.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common treatment for stones in the body would be to have them removed from the patient.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	This translates to: **"And so it is customary for metges to treat gout by applying it to the legs."**
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Gout is cured by applying a hot cautery to the affected area, if necessary.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman's legs are very swollen.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if a woman has a swollen joint, it is due to an excess of humors, which are known to be treated by physicians using various methods.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third part of the body is where the pain is concentrated if you don't know the true art of medicine.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on women, it is done far from the area where the operation will be performed.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And when the need arises, you know what to do.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	When you are deprived of the warmth in its cavity, the body will be affected by all sorts of ailments.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	And if the woman is found to be chaste, it's necessary to consider if she is suffering from a disease.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you are experiencing joint pain in your legs, it is likely gout.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if they have a woman who has never had intercourse, use the cushion to protect her from harm.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then, using a cauterizacioon on the bladder to control the flow.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then, then you have to cauterize the joint pain in the legs.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And if it is necessary to make a section on their legs, then do so gently; and place another person's leg in the space between them.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that some spices are hot, some are sweet and round, and if it were to be said, some are spicy and other things are known.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And thus you know what you must do.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if a flow of blood is needed, adjust the vein or artery to be cauterized and use a hot point to stop the bleeding.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And if you are a surgeon, treat gout by using instruments to remove the afflicted parts, and use your hands for other purposes.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if the blood in the veins is flowing, the blood flows to the area where the wound is located, so that the patient's health is not affected by the cautery.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then return the patient's body to its usual state.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if the patient's body needs to be opened for surgery, use the other techniques.
Capitol lxii.	A cushion is placed on the legs for the patient.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then, you must cauterize the hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Gout is an illness caused by the infiltration of humors into the intestine.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And there you have it, a hot iron cautery to treat the ailment caused by the excessive humors in the body.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And put a cushion on the chest and if the blood flows to the feet it will be a strong generation that will cause the pain.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this sickness affects the legs, causing pain in the patient's thighs.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Then apply a poultice to the wound, which is located in the affected area, for healing.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the body, it is redon called a boil or swelling, which is how they would have been known in the past.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if they are suffering from humidity, then treat them with a cold cautery.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the nature of the inflammation, examine its color as indicated by the location of the pain.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And if they have an ailment in the legs or feet, apply a cautery to the patient's body, and place another on the area to help them.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if the patient's pain is eased, the cause of which is a cushion on their legs, then you may call it gout in their toes.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And other put another cushion on their legs and the other one under their right side, above the left thigh, below the right, and the second one beneath the left foot and on their chest, to prevent them from being too cold.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And apply a poultice to the affected area to cure the ailment.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make a section on the legs of the patient, and apply the knife to the groin area.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	When you cauterize the flesh, apply it carefully to the area where the pain is located.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then the opening is made in their flesh by a wide-ranging cauterization.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	E aprop has doctour to separate the patient's body in two parts.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if it is possible to burn the bad humors from the body, then do so primarily on the lower legs, and place the cushion below the feet and ankles.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mays is treated as the patient's ailment, but when it is in the foot, they may be suffering from gout.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Then place your hand on the affected area to soothe the pain and prevent further complications.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When water is divided into two parts, it is the same as if it were already divided in two, so you should know that those are the hernias; then you will make a cushion for them.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar to the area.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then apply a cushion to the cushion already placed under the patient's thighs; place your hand on their legs, another on the knee, and another on the other leg.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	This is a medical text about treating pain in the feet.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is necessary to make cuts on the leg, the surgeon will make incisions in the area where the bone is affected by the cold humors.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When the cavity is closed off, this can be treated by making points on the body.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then gently place the hot cautery on their legs to remove the pain from them, and apply the cauterization to the affected joint.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And if you know that the patient has a problem with their bowels, it means they are suffering from gout.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And then, if the patient's condition requires it, surgery may be necessary on their legs.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	This translates to:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then, if there are other signs of illness, such as swelling in the legs, it should be called "the heat" or "the boil."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if there are other causes, you can treat them broadly, as they are likely to be related to the patient's legs or feet.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if there's pain in the joints, stop the burning at the joint.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And if it is necessary, place a cushion on the legs of the patient to prevent the plague from spreading.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Or, in that hour, place a cauterizer or another instrument on the cushion beneath them.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	When the patient's body has been afflicted by gout, other servants should treat them accordingly.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	To cut open the chest for a hernia and to apply cautery to the legs, which you would use to treat them.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	When there is pain in the joints, some think it is a sign of a good surgeon.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	The patient's pain in his feet, another cushion under his foot.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then return the hand to its place on the body and apply it to the affected area.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if there is a need for cautery on their legs or feet, it must be done carefully due to the severity of the illness.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if you want to treat a festering wound, apply a poultice.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes inflammation occurs in the veins or in the arteries.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	This is a tricky one without knowing the exact context, but here's a possible translation:
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When blood vessels swell up due to an inflammation in the leg, then the veins are opened, and they will apply a cushion under your arm, for example, as they treat them.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	E then it is possible that gout can affect other muscles in the body; you should apply a poultice to the affected area, you should use a cautery on their feet if they have pain there, and the skin of the patient's foot.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humors are already solidified in the patient's feet, you should apply another cushion there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion in the intestine or elsewhere, you must apply cautery to that area.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	When there are pains in the flesh, it's customary to treat them as I have already explained.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, when you have finished treating the patient's legs, place a cushion on their feet to protect them from harm.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This is the cure for a type of pain in the legs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The patient's body must be opened up with a hot iron to allow for easier treatment.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	This is for fear that the disease may be caused by a fear of the person being treated.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But the sickness that affects the limbs, which we call gout, and has been treated with a cauterization method, requires a different approach.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And if you are to apply it, let the patient be seated on a high stool.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent further bloodletting.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then return the patient's foot to its natural position.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	This sentence describes applying pressure to the patient's legs during an operation.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And if the patient’s legs are swollen and painful, you must apply cautery to the affected areas.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs, and treat the other plagues as needed.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it is necessary to treat the testicles, they will be treated as follows: one cushion should be placed on the leg or another part of the body, and the other should be used for the patient's comfort.
Capitol .lxv.	e't anima per la dolor del pes, e't si necessita a la carne de lu, et another on their knees for the patient to move their legs freely, so that the pain of the other parts of the body is not aggravated.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then apply a cushion on their legs for support.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	This refers to a hernia that occurs on the body, specifically near the foot, and mentions its treatment in the provided context.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This person might be experiencing pain from an imbalance in their humors, which we've been told to call "clogged humor" when dealing with a condition affecting their feet.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	In the case of gout, doctors call the condition a "gout" if a person has the symptoms of a cushion being placed under the foot.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of them is when sudden pain occurs in the joints; another at the beginning of the pain that comes on their legs.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	When the patient experiences pain in their joints or limbs, it is called a "gout" by the physicians, but they are wrong.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	E' alcun is that hand placed on their legs, the intestine is called an instrument for applying cauterization.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Then return the pain to its proper place in the body by using a cushion under their legs and another under their chest.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you are treating a patient for whom their leg must be held in place.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then you must cauterize the skin to prevent inflammation from spreading.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si' la dolor en el pietz
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then there are cushions placed under their testicles so that the intestine doesn't come out.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the testicles are in pain, apply cauterization to them if you have already used the cushion on their legs.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if it is necessary to treat the intestine with the cautery, then one must apply it to the area where the pain is felt.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	E cerqua am to the patient: "And then your legs are put in place under the cushion."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find there is a problem with the patient's abdomen, they should be treated with a cushion on their stomach.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And place a needle in each part of the body to keep the cushion for the four joints of the knee joint open and exposed.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then place cushions on the legs and apply a bandage firmly to prevent them from swelling.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then apply a poultice to the foot, and cauterize the area around the testicles twice, without touching the other parts, leaving the scrotum untouched.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Prevent the pain by applying a cushion to the foot.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let oil be applied to the patient's legs, and let the leg itself be cauterized, if necessary.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And thus it cures all other plagues among the plagues that are.
Capitol .lxvi.	And if they are suffering from cold humors that cause numbness in the foot, then apply a cautery to their feet.
De hernia ventosa.	Then describe the condition of the patient's legs and feet as you see fit.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And they have used a cushion on the foot.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then you will apply heat to the affected area as needed to treat the patient.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to what we have said so that they may be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	This sentence is likely about the treatment of gout, and perhaps the translation of a medical text would be too literal.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	You have already placed the cushion on their legs, so now we need to know what you did with the other parts of the body.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there are painful swellings in the body, some in the legs, another in the abdomen, and another on their feet, it is customary to call it a cushion-like condition of the feet.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And if they have been burned by the physician, it is advisable to apply a poultice to soothe them.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	When the foot pain is prolonged, the which can be treated by the application of a poultice, then it will be necessary to apply a cauterizer.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	This treatment is called for when the patient has pain caused by inflammation in the joints.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by placing a cushion between them.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And if it's necessary to treat their legs, they should be put on a cushion below so the patient doesn't get a cold.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, and another on their chest.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And if the patient has an injury or ailment, adjust the treatment accordingly.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then apply a hot iron to their leg, and use a bandage to keep the area warm.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	For the treatment of that ailment, you should use another cushion for the plague.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And the patient's health will be better.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And if you have to apply a poultice or other remedies to the patient's legs, it is customary to use a cushion.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And if it is necessary to treat them with other applications of a cautery, then do so.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When there are two or more pieces of the body to be healed, it is called a cushion.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply a hot cautery to ensure the patient doesn't move their hands.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then treat the other ailments with needles.
Capitol .lxix.	Another part of the text suggests that it's about a medical procedure.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And if the body is to be treated by a physician, they should also use these methods.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Therefore, castration is performed by making an incision or by crushing.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	That's the way to operate on animals; they are softened by cauterization in order to make them less resistant.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then apply the treatment to those limbs that are affected by gout, and ensure the patient's hands don't come into contact with the affected area.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When performing surgery to repair a rupture, make sure to apply your hand to the other side.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And if there is no other remedy available to the patient, it is a common practice to apply a poultice to the area.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And if you have already opened the wound in their leg, et a cushion will be placed under them.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not let the illness spread to the legs through the blood vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This is the best way to treat a gouty animal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the plague so that it does not spread further.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	When a man needs to be treated with cautery, the treatment should be done in such a way that it does not harm the surrounding areas.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And then apply the cautery to their legs, but only when it is necessary to cauterize them.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Mays en las femnas es una specia where the two forms are used.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of healing: by two people for men and women for themselves.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Cove es that they will cure their own flesh from the ills that plague the patient’s body.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And for those who suffer from the pain of the second type of illness, there are no cures or operations.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The blood of the body is treated as if it were a kind of humors in the body to be balanced by the use of a cautery.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And some are affected by others' affections, so they are treated with another person's cautery.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	When you are full of lentils, it is customary to apply a poultice of lentils to the affected area.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Then apply a burning cautery to the area to relieve pain in the foot, but be careful not to cause further damage.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And apply your hand to the treatment of the ailments.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if you are a man who has a cushion, he will be called a “cushion-bearer”
Capitol .lxxii.	This appears to be a portion of a medical treatise describing the use of **"e"** as a word in a language similar to Latin, possibly an archaic form or dialect.
De curacio de alratica.	Another treatment for gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then, if it's necessary to treat a woman, make sure the infection doesn't spread from the wound on her foot.
E es o natural o accidental.	And so the pain is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And for those who have a disease, the patient's body is affected by gout, which causes their feet to be in pain.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	You have already placed a cushion under their chest or legs?
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And if the pain in the legs persists, then place your hand on their feet and do the same to the other leg.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	When the pain is in the joints, they should be treated with cauterization.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And do not let anyone say that you are a good physician if you don't know what you are doing.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And another place a cushion on their chest.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And if it is necessary to treat the affected area with oil, then place a cloth on it.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is already in place, you should use another method.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's that is why it is called gout.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And apply the bandage to stop the pain from spreading.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And place a small lead weight on their hand if necessary to prevent the plague from spreading quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And so for some days, apply a hot compress to the body.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you should apply another treatment to their legs, if they are healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And if it is necessary to make incisions, then the following method should be used:
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When it comes to abscesses, they should be avoided in the area of the body where they are found.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The chapter title refers to an area or chapter number 73, likely suggesting a focus on humors and their relation to health.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Treat the prolapsed rectum with a hot cautery.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The translation should be written in Latin:
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have explained the types of illnesses that are caused by the body.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	And then comes the problem of gout, which is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the parts of the body affected by it.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those are the ones who truly feel the pain of gout.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And so that the patient's legs do not suffer from the cold, you will have to put your hand on their thighs, and another on the area where they are standing.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize the blood with a small incision.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply a cushion to their feet for an hour, and allow them to bleed the patient for one hour.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the blood flows, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's sides and legs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet and then if necessary, apply a poultice to the area.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	The second servant that I shall translate: may be a physician who can apply another cautery to the patient's legs.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is caused by a cold humor, it is called by doctors as a bad sign.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The intestine or hernia is what causes the pain in the foot.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The other parts of the body are for another time.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Some pustules are found on the feet, some on their legs, and some on their hands.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if there are ulcers or inflammations on their legs, they should be treated with poultices, while the physician attends to the patient's affliction.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if it is a cushion placed under the thighs, a poultice will be applied to the affected area as well as another on the area where the cushion is placed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When a person has an inflammation in the foot, it's important to treat them quickly with the appropriate methods.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must place two cushions under her legs.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	When necessary, midwives use instruments to open the cervix during childbirth.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then apply a hot iron to the legs, so that it will be good for the patient's body, but do not use it on the feet.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And you should place a cushion on their legs, the other cushions being placed on the body in various ways.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And if you have a fever, apply a poultice to the affected area, and use another for pain relief.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And if there are any swelling in the leg or foot, then you must place a cushion on their legs to prevent it from spreading.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if there is a cushion placed under the patient's legs, it should be pressed into the wound to prevent the intestines from protruding.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When the patient's legs are inflamed, they should be placed on a cushion.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the healing ointment to the affected area for two days.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the pain in the gut, use a pointed tool to apply heat to the affected area.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	Then, if you wish to apply the cauterization to the plague-ridden area, you must be careful in dealing with the disease.
Capitol .lxxv.	The pain in the intestines or other parts of the body can be treated by applying a poultice to those areas.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	And if a woman's womb is to be treated with a cautery, it should be done in a way that avoids opening the joint, lest the pain of the ailment spread.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must ensure that the woman's womb is protected and covered during childbirth, and apply heat to the affected area if she needs to be warmed up.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Thus if the patient has pain in their legs or other parts of the body, it means that they have something called a "quart" which is an ailment.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then apply cautery to that area on the patient's body where the pain is felt in the foot, which is typically in the joints but can also be in other parts of the body.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And if she wants to avoid complications, the midwife should be careful when dealing with the pain in the legs or feet.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And if you are treating a patient, treat the legs, and the feet, to keep them calm.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the body is weak, the first thing to do is to treat it with herbs that cause him to lose weight.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then apply the cauteri to the patient's feet.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And apply it to the stomach of the woman, and use it for another purpose.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays it be that the patient has suffered enough by now.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient for a condition in the legs that causes them to sneeze (to be treated by a doctor).
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the legs, place your hand on them gently to help.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if you are not obese, it is customary to treat the surface of the body in the same way as you would for gout.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	Then, if the body is not already burned by the hot cautery, do it, and then apply the cautery to the legs and feet to draw out the humors.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Then apply cushions to their legs and feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot is affected, it is necessary to use a cushion under their feet and treat the condition gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you should apply a cautery to the legs.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	Then you must place a cushion over their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	E if it is prohibited to have already been treated by a physician, then treat it with a poultice of honey and water.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply your hand to the wound.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And if the pain in the joints of the body is soothed, then they are ready for that.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And for one hour, the patient's body will be exposed to smoke, and the doctor will use a heated tool to cauterize the area.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	If you have opened the intestines of a patient, then you will close it up with a cushion on the abdomen and another one in the legs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And so the intestine must be treated carefully by the physician, to prevent further damage from the gout.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the intestine or stomach needs to be returned slowly, then do so by gently placing a cushion under it.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then place cushions on their legs, and then apply a bandage to the area.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Then apply a cautery to the feet, and then apply pressure to the other areas where the disease has affected them.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if you are to apply heat, one should place a cushion on the leg, and another on the chest.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then if the illness prevents walking, let them lie down and place cushions to support the legs and another cushion on their feet so as to prevent further pain.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if they have developed a fever, it is customary to use a cauterizing tool on them.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The patient's legs are now being held in place, but the intestine is open.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should apply a cushion to the womb of the patient.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	If you have a cushion on your hand for the pain in their legs, apply it to the body of the patient, if they are swollen or inflamed.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the patient to move their feet, and if it's necessary, use another cushion on their chest for them to cough into.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	A patient's death was near at hand, but a cushion was placed under them.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When treating gout in this way, consider using a cautery with a different setting.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you have a wound on their belly, you should use a cushion to cover it up.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And if you are already treating the pain in their legs, then the physician should be careful.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	When gout affects multiple joints, doctors call it gout.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	But when the body is affected by three or four natural causes, it's called a disease.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs or their feet, we will use a lighter method, like a cautery with a point, rather than one that forces them out.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult for a person to get sick.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if it is necessary to treat a patient's legs for humors, they must be treated with a cauterization tool.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	and the patient's limbs are affected by such things, causing them to be unable to walk.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	The cushion is placed under their feet, e.g., on the foot, so that the patient's body is in balance.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if a woman's legs are opened, she will be cauterized by a physician, but if her arms are opened, it is called a doctor.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When the patient dies.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	And if you have to perform surgery on their feet, then consider whether the intestine is affected by the same disease as the woman's feet.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the time comes to open the wound on the foot, and to place a cushion under her legs, let the woman be treated by a doctor, have the wound cauterized with fire.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And if there are two cushions already on their legs, the patient will be held in place.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you put some oil on the mouth and they are wet with your saliva, which can be used to treat gout.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And if you have pain in the legs, then the doctor should be called.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then place your cushion on their legs or chest, if the patient is an infant.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if it is necessary for the feet, one on the left foot, another cushion on the right foot, and the other on the body, to be put in a place to hold them.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if you are skilled in placing your hand, then apply it to the patient's right foot, for on the legs of men, it is customary.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to the third layer of skin.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And then (the pain) in the legs will be relieved by the use of a hot compress to reduce inflammation.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if the pain is caused by their intestines or other parts being affected by gout, you should treat them with a hot iron; place a cushion under the area to be cauterized.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient's leg has been exposed to a burn, one should immediately apply a cushion to the area to prevent further damage.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the pain is in the foot, it is customary to call it “humors” (gout).
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so, if the other two are placed on their legs, it is called by the name of the cushion.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Mays call what is in the foot “a” by "coartao en le" -  And now we’re going to apply a hot poultice or something similar to the other areas where they are needed.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if they have a natural predisposition to such ailments, let the doctor use a similar method for treating the intestine as he would for the legs.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And then place a cushion under their feet, and use bandages to reduce swelling.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Here comes the English translation:
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If swelling in the joints occurs, cover it with your hand when it does to prevent further damage.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If you have pain in your legs, use a cushion to ease the pain.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Here comes the first part of a possible translation: When there are pain in the lower legs, it is commonly called gout.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Gout is caused by cold humors entering the joints.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the patient is constricted by a gouty buildup, then you must use a cushion to support them, and apply it to other parts of the body as well.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area; and for the other things that are bothering them, you should use other remedies.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then they should be treated with cushions on their sides.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When it is impossible to burn the body's excess humors, one should use a poultice on their feet.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then let them know that their pain is not in the knees.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And then when the patient has been cured of the disease in their legs, they should be treated as one would normally treat such things.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if they are using another method, they should use the cushion on their legs and another for other ailments.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And if you see a woman with a burning pain in her stomach, then apply a hot cautery.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	You have already opened the space between their legs, and a cushion has been placed on their chest; they are ready to be treated.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if the patient has been treated for a long time, it will be healed by cauterization.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then place a cushion on the affected area for relief from the pain.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then you think that the dead man has already been cleansed of his humors.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, treat them to correct their illness.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And if you have already opened the space between the legs and the feet, it is known as gout in all parts of the body.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	De la cushion should be placed on the patient's feet.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply heat to the area around the ankles to prevent the intestine from being inflamed
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how you treat a person for a condition related to the body's humors, so you should use this method on someone who has a problem with their bowels.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And so that the physician can apply cautery, if necessary, to the body, etc.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The patient's legs are being treated for a painful condition caused by two sources.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	Then these two things are done to the legs so that they can be kept open.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Take its form, from a Latin leg which was placed on their feet, or legs to be treated.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you wish to apply a cautery to the legs, use the cushion to protect the patient's body.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps the fire will spread to the feet, and so they say to the physician.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This is a description of how to treat the body with a cautery tool.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you will open the patient's leg with your tool as a way to treat what they are suffering from.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The ancients used this term for the condition of vertigo.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	When the shape of the body is distorted by pressure, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The patient has a pain in their head.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And then apply forceps to their legs, as they are used to make the intestine or other parts of the body come out, and then cauterize the area where the forceps are applied.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The ancient art of bloodletting.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	It's a medical treatise on gout.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	And if there are two spiny things in their legs, they will be treated with a hot cautery.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This is a form of forceps used to remove the fetus from the womb.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	If a patient has a swollen foot due to gout, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Apply a cautery on their legs.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	When the tools are used on the body, one must be careful and use them carefully.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you should always apply these instruments to a gouty patient, as they are often used for treating them.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Then there are the legs.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if your patient has a cough, you should use a remedy to make them cough up the phlegm.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if it is necessary to make a hole in the body, apply the above-mentioned remedies.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs are to be placed in water, and these herbs are to be used for cauterization.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	E aprop pausa en la sua cavitat.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then put your hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from making a gesture.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the pain persists, you will need to apply a cauterization with a hot iron, but if you wish to stop it, you must use a cold one.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then you must cauterize it on both sides, so that the patient's body does not expel the cushion.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And if the pain is in the leg, treat it with hot poultices to reduce swelling.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth is constricted, the treatment is to apply heat or medication to the affected area.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If you are suffering from the pain of a woman's illness, then you must use a cushion for her to rest upon.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"Then apply the poultice to the patient's stomach and use a smoke cauterization method on their feet."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May it be translated as: "Then put some of the other remedies on the legs, and apply heat to prevent further discomfort."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	When the woman suffers from painful menstruation, apply the cushion to the area where the cautery would be applied.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The patient's legs are already in their proper place.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Then place a hot cautery on the cushion and apply it to the wide area of the body that has an open wound.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And if the patient has an intestine or a hernia, they will be in pain.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Place the cushion on the child's legs, so that they are not touched.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When there is pain in the limbs of a child, be careful not to cause further injury.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	When there's a need to use a cautery tool on a patient's legs, they should be called upon to help by placing a cushion under their knees.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	E aprop pause over their knees, so as to prevent further pain.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	When the pain begins, a person should be treated with a hot cautery.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When your body's need for healing arises, such as when treating a bunion or plague sore, you must apply pressure to prevent them from being disturbed.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	And so that they may be cured, another by applying heat to the area where the fistula is located.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The which are called fistulas or boils if they are on the outside of the body, but if they are inside the body, then it is called a malaute.
E es una fistula o motas.	This is a reference to a specific type of medical condition that affects the body.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if the patient has swelling from an excess of watery humor in their body, it's already known as gout.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And if there is pain in the joints, it is customary to call it gout.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	When there are already blisters on their legs, they should be treated with a cushion placed on the affected area.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	A person who is healthy should have a cushion placed on the chest and another on the area where the wound appears in the body, so that no one feels the pain of the condition.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When the pain is severe, place a cushion under your own feet.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If there is no pain in the legs or feet from the disease, treat it as you would for a healthy person.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when there is an opening in the legs of the patient, the English call it sciatica.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps the intestine has been opened for a procedure on the joint or something similar?
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas on the legs, the other foot is cured by cushions.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And when there are wounds on the legs or feet, healing is expected as long as one can heal them properly.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you have already opened the space between the legs, place a cushion beneath them, and support the opening by holding your hand on their leg.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then when the patient has a pain in their neck, apply another cushion around the neck to hold it in place.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If the intestine or the other organs are affected by the pain of gout, then you can be certain that the patient suffers from it.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then they are healthy, and yet they have gout in their toes, so we must use other methods to treat them.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And if it is necessary to burn away the skin above the bone and the surrounding flesh, then use a fine cautery on the fistula, as it affects only the surface of the body, but for those who are sick in their feet, it is said that they should be used.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	The patient has an ailment in their feet.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it affects their feet, then you should use a cautery to burn the area on the surface of the foot.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And so the affected area be opened and cleansed, and the wounds cauterized to prevent further damage.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	This could mean "Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs in order to cauterize them".
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And apply a poultice to the leg, and another to the chest. You must place a cushion under them.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	The pain will be healed by cauterization.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If there are fistulas or other wounds in the rectum, the physician should apply a cautery to them.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	So if it's a wound in the body they are dealing with, it is customary to call it a boil.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area on the foot, so that the cushion used for the treatment can be removed if necessary; and also apply a cautery to the ulcerated part of the body and make sure the hot cautery is properly applied.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then apply heat to the area around the abscess to help heal it.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if the patient suffers from a fever or other ailments, do not apply the cautery to any part of the body that has a fever or inflammation.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you have to make a choice between the two sides, then you will use a cushion for one and leave them closed on the other, because it is the proper way to do it.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then apply remedies to heal the plague in whatever part of the body it affects.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if there are fistulas, let the surgeon cauterize the wound, but not the hands.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the fistula determines whether it requires cautery.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When hemorrhoids are present, there is bleeding.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And if it is necessary to treat the body or something else, you should apply a cushion to the legs.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And in the legs, some small and some large, they are always cushions.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And these are the causes of pain in the legs, which are known as gouty.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then have the patient lie on their back with their legs elevated on pillows or cushions.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you cauterize those parts of the body that are affected by the pain, such as the legs or feet.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area if needed after the wound has healed.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another thing to treat an injury is by using the other method on the legs.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you will have treated the illness in the legs, and placed the cushion on their chest.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If they have light burns on their body, then the patient has a condition that doctors call a "leucorrhea" in the first few lines of the text.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	When you have a boil on the body, use these methods: apply a cushion to the affected area.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Let him use a cushion on his legs, and let blood be drawn from other parts of his body.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And put them back in their place.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient is suffering from gout, then apply the appropriate treatment.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Joint pain occurs when humors are out of balance and infiltrate the body's joints.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if it's necessary to use cushions for that ailment, they should be placed on the legs so that it doesn't spread.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When the body is injured by a sharp pain, treat the injury with a cautery so that the pain is less severe.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Then apply cauterization to treat gout.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	This sentence tells you how to treat an exposed intestine.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then apply another cushion to their legs, for example.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	The second part of the body, et al.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Then use a hot iron to cauterize the small lumps, the ones that look like warts, on the body, and another lump on the foot of the patient.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And for the treatment of the leg, you must apply a cushion to it, if necessary, so that the patient does not experience pain in their legs or feet.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then use fire or medicinal treatment on the patient's legs according to their condition.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And the instrument used to remove the ailment will be used for such things as removing the cause of the illness in the legs.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	If the patient has pain in the legs, they are burned by the cautery, and another doctor's hand should be placed on their body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	Then take a needle that has been opened and the contents are placed on a cushion; cover the patient’s foot with the needle to prevent the pain from being too strong, and you have already reached the limit of its range.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to draw blood from a vein, use a lancet or something similar.
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	If they are prone to making points on their legs, hold the patient's leg so that the opening does not allow the cushion to be placed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, you should do so carefully.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And for the treatment of the intestines (of) that (which is) customary (for) treating other ailments, you will treat them with a regimen of poultices and such.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	This sentence seems to be describing a medical procedure being performed on a child, mentioning both "small" and "large" tools for making "marks" or "incisions".
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	This sentence appears to be a mix of languages, likely Spanish and English. The guessed translation is:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	Then let the patient be treated with these treatments for humors, and use proper care to avoid causing further harm.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And if you have an opening in your foot, which causes pain, it is called a burn.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is customary for the animal to be in the presence of the beast, one should place a cushion on its back.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if the patient's foot is opened by other means, such as a wound, you should put a bandage on it.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And if you need to treat the patient's bowels, place a cushion under them.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then apply a cushion to their legs so that the intestines don't protrude.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is necessary to apply medicine, use a cushion for support on his legs.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you are afflicted with pain in the legs, then the other (diseases) are healed by another method.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there is pain in the bowels or intestines, the physician would apply heat to the affected area.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then for the treatment of the plague.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You will see that I have been tasked to describe the process of treating diseases of the bowels.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	The person has been given a diagnosis of gout.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And if it were the causes that are for the pain in the legs, or for the patient to be able to see other things, they may be used as a remedy.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Mays the pain in le legs be called by its proper name.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And if you have opened the intestine for surgery, then use the other to apply the cautery, and don't forget to protect the surrounding area.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	This is a tricky one! It seems like the text is describing a medical procedure involving making the patient comfortable.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if the pain is caused by a simple humor (and not from a complex one) then it is the patient who has to be treated for their illness.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery, then do so with cautery.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Avoid the use of meat or other foods that cause gout.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply cautery to the area above the cushion, where the affected area is inflamed and requires its use.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	The doctor should treat the condition of the recent wound on the patient's feet.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And then place a cushion on them, while they are still healing, the patient needs to be given a cushion.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is severe, you are to treat them with a cut on the thigh, and if it is necessary to make incisions on their legs, use the technique of cauterization.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And so if it is a fever or other illness that causes pain in the feet, you should treat it with medicines to soothe the foot.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you place a cushion on their legs, apply another to the foot, but not to prevent it from being inflamed.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If there is pain in the thighs or other areas of the body, then you may have to cauterize them to stop the bleeding.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these skin eruptions are simple and small, it's said to be caused by that which is simply called "gout" elsewhere.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Then the patient's body should be treated with a poultice made of sulfurous powder to prevent the plague.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And if you have to use a cautery, apply it carefully and only when necessary.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then use the other tools for the task at hand, and then you'll have to call it a day on the feet.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And then cauterize the necessary areas on the foot to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if they are on their back, or at least you must use a cushion to support them, saying that the affected area will be treated in the same way.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if the patient is suffering from a broken bone, they must apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to treat a fractured bone in the head, then do so by using a cautery.
De las plaguas del col.	When the plague affects the feet, it is called gout.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague affects the body, but the treatment varies.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If a patient has gout, applying cautery to the affected area may be necessary.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not use medicine on the legs if you are not sure what is wrong with them.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient with a mild ailment, another servant will administer medicines, while the other holds their legs, or et cetera, as needed.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the pain is severe, treat it with cautery.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Mays if the disease is severe, the patient needs to be treated by a doctor.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Then if there is blood flowing from an open artery, it causes them to place their hand on the affected area.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	When joints are to be cauterized or left closed, use suture for the latter.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Mays if the disease is gout, cauterize and apply a poultice to the affected area, and use another method of treatment.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the affected area.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if there is another pain in them, then you can use this to make an opening.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Then apply heat to the body with another cautery.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there are pains in the legs or from the gouty pain, then know that the plague is a disease that can be fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is a recent illness, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you have applied a poultice to the groin, apply another poultice on the other side, to prevent its spread.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When the doctors have been busy for three days after treating the plague, they are exhausted; one is more likely to be cured by placing a cushion under the affected area.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the pain is relieved, then it's good; otherwise, the physician should treat the condition as a fistula.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	E if the doctors have diagnosed a wound on the foot, it will be necessary to apply a poultice to treat it properly.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When the intestine has been opened and the patient's legs are cauterized, then you should remove your hand from the cushion.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they are separated, we will stop the plague from spreading.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And other diseases that are treated by cauterization are those plagues that affect other parts of the body.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And for the plagues of the bowels.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The patient's illness, when on the feet, is called a gouty affliction.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then apply a cautery to the legs of the patient, because it is necessary to cauterize the wound.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And if there are small, sharp pains in the feet, they say it is gout.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E thus is the best translation: "And so the patient's bowels are treated in this way, they will be treated for their condition."
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you have to suture the belly after the others are done.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And then there are two other sutures that are specific to them.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I say, for every part of the body affected by it, you should apply a poultice to each one.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And then the doctor will tell you that he has reduced the hernia.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when the pain is in the feet, it is customary to call it ails.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Sometimes it affects the whole body with pain, especially the feet, which are treated by placing the foot on a cushion to avoid its movement.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you have loosened the joint pain, apply another bandage to the legs and apply pressure.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids with care.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And so the patient's legs are open and a cushion is placed under them, then you should place another cushion under the other leg.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And if they have a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, that's what doctors call it when it's really happening in the joint.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the body to be affected by gout or by other diseases, which are already severe in the feet.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus when the plague is aggravated, place your hand on their side to prevent further complications, et altre per le body's parts, but be careful.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the pain is widespread, place the cushion on his lower abdomen; if it is in his upper abdomen, use a pillow to support him.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the pain is in one of the two parts of the body, it is necessary to consider the location of the disruption and apply a cauterization technique accordingly.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line continues to give instructions on how to treat someone suffering from gout.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	When there are small inflammations on the legs, use a small cautery to apply heat to the affected area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa que s'usit per la dolor del dit: una puncta.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then apply another cushion to the other side, so that the patient's body is properly supported by two cushions, one on each thigh.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles are applied to the body, starting with a small incision in the legs and another on the feet, if necessary.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if it's necessary to treat the wound with a needle, one should use a cushion to avoid puncturing the skin too deeply.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And it is not good for them to have their limbs prolonged by swelling.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then you will know that the patient has a cushion under their feet when they are being treated for something, and place another cushion on their legs to prevent gout from spreading.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These are the kinds of stitches used on the legs.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second translation is: When joint pain is caused by the cold humors, it was called a "gout" when it is a point in the foot, but they are not all from the same cause.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then return to that part of the body, and apply cushions under their feet, as needed for the patient's health.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then apply your hand to their leg or foot to prevent them from moving.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And then apply heat to the men's legs and they will be healed.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if a man's body is affected by plague, he has already been afflicted by the plague, and another has been placed on their thighs, and another on their legs, and then his bowels have been disrupted by the plague.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was cured within fifteen days, or so, in the patient's legs after fifteen days they are healed
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And if the other doctors had declared that the patient was beyond help, then they would have been treated with a poultice in the thigh, where the ailment was localized.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of cushion stitching.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you must apply the needle to the patient's affected area, and use another cushion on their chest.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And if the needle penetrates to the tip, and it enters the joint and it is placed on the affected area, then apply it to the other part of the body;
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	If the intestine has been opened and you have placed a cushion under it, then use the following method to treat it.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if you have opened the affected area by yourself, the patient should be placed on a cushion.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And if there is a need to cauterize a patient's first line by opening them up, then you must place the cushion under their other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so the patient's gut was burned and cauterized, and the surgeon placed a cushion on their body and another on their feet to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin with a needle.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And so, a second type of cautery is recommended for him.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You will find that the needle has gone into the part of the body where the pain is located.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	The intestine is already closed, and hold your hand over the patient's abdomen to prevent the spread.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than common light stitching.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the text about the condition known as gout.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	When you cauterize a patient's abdomen, it is customary to place a cushion under their abdomen.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You already know that the pain in the legs is harder to treat than elsewhere.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the treatment for the plague will be a judgment on the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Then, place a cushion under the patient's affected area, and if necessary to treat them, use a cautery.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has already been affected by the plague, you have to make sure that they are treated by a doctor immediately when there's an outbreak in the region.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	This is a reference to gout being a disease caused by an imbalance in bodily humors.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Then use a poultice to draw out the heat from the body or something like that.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	When there is pain or swelling in the patient's legs, apply a poultice to them, and use a hot cushion for a poultice application on the affected area.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And the pain in the larger joints (like knees) is easier to cure than the pain that arises from the stomach or other internal organs.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The bubonic plague has left many dead in its wake.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	When there is pain in the legs or joints, use a hot bath to soothe them.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if they are suffering from a disease that affects the intestines or joints, apply leeches to their limbs to relieve them.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then remember to apply heat to the area between the patient's legs.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	If there are red blotches or swelling on the leg or legs of a patient that have been treated for gout, the intestine or intestines can be made to open in the foot and then you may need to cauterize the intestine using a cushion on the leg(s) and with other treatments.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then apply a poultice to their legs and a cushion to them, cauterize the surface and stop the suffering from spreading.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if a wound in the leg becomes infected, then you should treat it with a cushion for the belly and hold its hands over the area.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The text describes applying a poultice to the affected area, likely using the term "gout" in a broader sense of joint pain or inflammation, which could be caused by various factors.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And another place for the cushion is on their feet, which they must keep still, as long as the cushion is needed to hold them closed.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then apply that treatment to the affected area, but make sure the patient's leg remains closed during the process.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, it's possible that they are inflamed (from the burning) by a subtle/fine needle which causes pain, so apply a hot cautery to the area.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then use this method to prevent further complications from ants.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	When there are many plagues, it's important to remember that gout is only one type of plague and may require different treatment than other plagues.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The text suggests that the patient has an open wound treated by applying a hot poultice to its area.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	If you know that something is truly a problem, it is called an "ancient" disease.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if a wound is caused by a true fistula, which is a hard, painful lump, it is already treated.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	E in some men, the humor spreads to the arms; and in others, the intestines are affected.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this cushion is placed on the thighs, and another is used for the legs, and another for the stomach.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area, directly on the exposed tissue where the injury is, and cover the area with a dressing after the treatment.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When in doubt, consult the original text.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Here comes the first line of the text: It is said that if you have a fistula on their legs, the physician will know how to treat it.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if one needs to treat a patient in the body, it's done with a cautery.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, that which is a fistula in this manner requires treatment by knowledge (of medicine), not by this method.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If you are a doctor and the patient has a condition that causes pain in their legs, they should be treated by applying heat to them.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays es que leas a lahuas per lo c'ha una cosa subtil.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	Then you have opened the space between the legs of the patient, but if the fistula is in the body, it is necessary to cauterize.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then take care to place a cushion under the patient's intestine, for the other parts are about to be burned.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"Then inquire carefully about the location of the pain or any sores, for it is possible that a sore could be causing the fistula to appear."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And so the doctor treats them, applying heat to the nearby joint.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return to the patient and offer what you have learned about the nature of his or her ailment.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Then use a long instrument to reach the deep parts of the fistula and administer medicine to its opening.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if there are other physicians present, they have already opened the intestine or leg area to make a cushion for them.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	A good sign that they are healed is when the patient can stand on their legs again after the procedure.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Mays is likely a misspelling of "Maybe," which would make the translation:
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If a doctor needs to treat a patient with a condition in the veins or nerves, they should do so as previously described.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When the foot bones are affected, you must cauterize them.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	Then the physician cauterizes the affected area to reduce the pain.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it doesn’t heal, cauterize it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if it is necessary to remove the bone, they will be removed by careful instruments.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you have already opened the bowels of a patient, who suffers from an ailment caused by humors, apply another cushion to their legs, as it is necessary to treat such a condition.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Then apply the cautery to the areas around the injury.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Another way to say this, another way to say that, of the patient's body, there is need for Egyptian ointment.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if he applies a burning iron to the bones of his body, then the physician will apply a cautery to their location, so that he may cure the plague of those which have been infiltrated by the cushion of plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When the intestine is corrupted, it causes pain in the feet and ankles.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Then you may apply cauterization to a man's body, but make sure to use a cushion to protect them from injury.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then make sure to cauterize his legs and feet, so that the patient's body does not cause them to be inflamed.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	When the doctor has been given the name for the body part, they will apply a cautery to that area.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor will apply a cushion to the patient's legs so that they don't open their place.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the other sources for the medical treatise are in Latin, but also use Italian words for specific ailments.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then apply a cautery to the affected area.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then bring your hand close to the affected area and carefully apply cautery to the entire leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then the doctor would apply a poultice to the joint, so that the pain would be relieved by cauterizing the affected area.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you should apply a cautery to the exposed bone, or the area where the bone needs to be heated.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then place a cushion under the patient's foot and apply pressure to the joints.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then if you have to place a cushion on them, and keep the restoration in their cavity for a long time.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if the patient has been treated for a while (with) their illness, he will be ill from the second time to the third, and then will be completely healed.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And if a wound has opened up on the body, one would treat it by applying leeches to the area affected by the infection.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then if the pain is in the foot, it is often called gout; if they are in their legs, they are treated with a cushion under them, and if they are on the other parts of the body, they are treated lightly.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to make further points in the operation if the patient has pain from the operation itself.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so the patient's body is now in balance, their flesh not inflamed, and their bones properly aligned.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	When a bone protrudes outwards, it is customary to call it a bone spur.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then cauterize the area of the affected joint, but don't cauterize the intestines.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The word "serradura" refers to the foot being placed in a higher position than the body, which is typical of a patient suffering from gout.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If a wound is already discovered in the body and you must stop the bleeding, apply pressure to the wound with your hand.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if there is an injury to the legs, one should use a bandage to protect the injury.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the pain is in the joints, apply cautery to the affected area, which should be treated with caution.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When there is a pain in the legs, it is caused by a continuous imbalance of humors.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then bring the patient to your chest, and place another cushion under them.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	This text means: I have learned that for the first signs of pain in the joints, apply cautery to the area where the bones are located, and use a tool appropriate to the situation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you have to know that this is what the art of medicine is all about; when there is an opening in the body, it's convenient for the doctors to use a cushion on the feet.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And then you will treat the patient's thighs with a cushion, and you will find out what causes the pain.
Forma de serra:	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the legs, et autre on their feet, use these methods.
Forma de autra serra:	This sentence refers to a type of medical procedure using a heated instrument to address joint pain.
Forma de autra serra:	When your hand is placed on the affected area for pain relief, use a hot stone or other methods to reduce inflammation.
Forma de autra serra gran:	A form of large saw.
Forma de ray:	A sharp pain in the legs of the body is called gout.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	This is a very complex case requiring careful attention.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	A hot compress is used for pain in the legs,  a practice they call cauterization, to make the cushion feel pain.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	To make the translation more accurate, I need more context than just the phrase "Forma de razori" - that's Italian for "shape" or "form" of razor.
Forma de razori menor:	A form of treatment for pain in the legs, done by placing cushions beneath them.
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	When there is pain in the joints, one should use a cushion to protect the legs from injury.
Forma de lu:	When you use a hot cautery on the body, it is called gout in the case of gouty arthritis, which affects the joints, and another type of pain when it affects the feet.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of the body (likely referring to a patient), where there is an infiltration of humor:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	This is a tricky one! I'll do my best:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This is a description of a method for treating a disease, likely gout by its description as caused by "cold humors".
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	To apply a cautery instrument to the body in a way that resembles a tent.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply a cautery to the feet so that they are burned.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so for the second time I will try to guess its meaning:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	And if it is necessary to make incisions into the thigh, and you place a cushion on their limbs, carefully apply another cushion at the edges of the wound and the other leg, etc.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Then apply a sharp instrument to make incisions on the body, and apply a hot cushion to the wound.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The first sentence translates to: then he/she will be able to tell where the pain is located in the body.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And if there are cushions for the legs, then they should be used to apply pressure.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The cushion will be placed on the legs, or upon the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Then return the patient's leg to its natural position.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the physician sees that a joint pain is caused by humors in the limbs.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And if there are other things that cause pain, like a scorpion sting or a similar injury, the patient should be treated with another type of treatment.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if on their fingertip, or the area around the toe, the pain occurs in the joint but does not spread to other parts of the body, you may call it a cushion.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it's necessary to cauterize the area under their hand in the body.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you are cauterizing the patient's leg or arm, they should be positioned on their arms to prevent them from moving.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the other's illness has spread to the foot, burning it with a cauterizer will be necessary.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, apply a cautery to the affected area when the ailment is in the foot.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And apply a cautery to the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May you be experiencing the pain caused by the use of cupping therapy, or another condition?
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then apply heat to the area on their legs, but know that you must allow the patient's hands to be used for other purposes.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of cutting into a limb is that you apply a cauterizer to the area where the incision will be made.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if there are points made on the body, it is called gout.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays if you cauterize the blood it will be applied to the area; otherwise, the blood may flow out too much.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply it to the affected area if needed, and hold their hands while the cautery is applied.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This practice was used in cases of fire in the body.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And then the physician should place his hand on the patient's legs to prevent the pain from spreading to their feet.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	If one leg hurts from the severity of the pain of gout, he should be cauterized to prevent the wound.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lon pain in the legs and feet is caused by cold humors.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And so, if you have to reduce the swelling in the body below the skin, the surgeon's knife will also be used for that purpose.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if the patient’s leg has been opened by them, and a cushion has been placed on their legs, but they are still alive.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And if the patient has been afflicted, he will be healed by cauterizing the affected area.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And then apply the cushion to the body (of the patient) in order to reduce their pain.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On their treatment and prevention.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	And if it is necessary to put a cushion under another under the chest, and place a bandage on the cushion so that the patient will not suffer from a lack of a proper bandage.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the pain in the body continues to affect the intestines, it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	Translation: And if the pain in the feet is severe, they will be called to apply a cautery to the affected area.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Then if you are using a clyster to remove a blockage in the body, you should use a heated instrument for treatment.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Then apply a poultice of the herbs to draw out the inflammation and pain relief.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then let the patient's bowels be washed with water and honey.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And now place a cushion under those (suffering from gout) to stop them from feeling pain in their legs and feet.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then return the patient to their room; the cushion should be placed on the water, and the other on the legs.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian treatment, then they are to be treated by applying a poultice, followed by the use of a hot iron and a final application of a honey-water mixture, and if the excess is in the form of dryness and cinders, it will be necessary to apply a solution of vinegar and water.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if the bowels are inflamed and painful, place a clyster on them.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then apply a poultice to the legs.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the patient's foot is swollen, they should be treated by applying a cautery with a small, hot iron to reduce the pain.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	Then similarly place a cushion under the intestine.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if a patient's body has been affected by the evil spirits, then cleanse the wound or its cavity.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then prepare the arm with which the patient will be treated.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply cushions to their legs so they are supported.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And spread out the cloth on their side, as well as another cloth on their chest, so they are not too close to the body.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May this be applied to the patient's whole body, and another on their legs, and another holding the other one on the foot.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And know you that if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then you will consider whether or not there is pain in the patient's legs.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	Then apply the treatment to your patient in that manner, and use cushions to support their body.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if you are a man of science, you know the place between the thigh and the leg to be a part of the body where gout may affect someone in the way we are accustomed to seeing it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"Then use the other tools to help the patient if they are suffering from indigestion."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if you are treating the patient for an injury, place your hand on the sick part to prevent further complications.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	This passage describes the use of medical tools and practices.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes these herbs are used to treat gout.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if you are able to heal the corrupted part, place a bandage on the wound.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And they come to the patient's thighs and legs.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The first part of the foot treatment involves placing cushions on the body to prevent the spread of the infection, and another cushion on the patient's feet.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then if you don't want to use your own hands, use another method of cauterization.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is cold and damp, then apply a hot poultice to the affected area and warm it up.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if illness has already entered the bones, then you must cauterize them.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is swelling between the toes, apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When the pain is severe in the toe, you will need to apply a cautery on the big toe and treat the patient with appropriate remedies for the disease.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if they are ill, they say it's due to the heat of their body.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	A pointed tool was used to treat ailments, such as gout, by applying it to the affected area.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And if someone has a body part that is affected by cold humors, they are likely to experience pain in their feet.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are born fleshy, it is said to be gout.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Mays the pain in the patient's legs is difficult to treat; it requires careful attention from a physician.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays, in that case, if you want to treat a patient with a rounded burn on their foot, use the appropriate cauterizing tools for treatment or apply a poultice to their foot.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	So, when the intestine is inflamed, inflammation is treated by applying a cushion to the affected area, which is often painful, but can also be caused by a natural process of healing in the human body.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And if you separate the skin from the bones, you will cause pain to the one who has been injured.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if you have a strong pain in the legs, it is called by another name for the condition.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Then treat the illness caused by imbalances in the humors.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices can be found in many forms, but they often appear on the legs or feet of travelers.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then apply a tourniquet to their legs if necessary, for the plague.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And so the treatment for the ailment involves pain in the joints, and the other way to do it is to apply heat to the affected area by using a cushion.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	When applying a cauterization to the foot, the patient should be treated with a hot cautery.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then lay on him a bandage or cushion to make the humors stay in.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E itera la cura per sanguinaria per lo corpo del patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	If the patient has pain in the leg, they are to be treated as follows: first, you should heat up the affected area.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the body, one should use a lancet to make incisions in the area where the pain is located.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then place the cushion on their legs, and then cauterize the blood vessels to that area as needed.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when you're done, apply cauterization to the other parts as needed.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And you have already made your bed for the patient, as long as the pain is in the legs, then place them on their cushions.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then you must apply a hot iron to the three parts of the body: the foot, the knee, and the chest.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then carefully elevate the foot and another applies a bandage on the second wound.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then apply the cauterizer to the upper part of the body, and place your hand on the lower part.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you are experiencing pain in the joints, especially if it's sharp pain in your feet that feels like it's spreading, the use of a hot cautery on the affected area can help.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And if it affects the foot, and you have to make incisions, then apply a cushion to the area where the incision is being made on the patient; and place your hands on their legs.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the pain is gone, the illness is subdued.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the pain is in the joints, then it is called gout, if there are other cushions that are needed.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Guard yourself from making such mistakes, for that is how to truly help them.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Causing pain in the feet, which are the parts most affected by gout, is a sign that it is the patient’s own fault.
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de la humors are already in place for the patient's body to be cauterized.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	A person who has a bad mood should avoid treating others harshly.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the legs.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease arises in hot countries as gout, which is produced by an excess of humors in the legs, is also known as "gutta" by physicians.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is caused by the other parts of the body.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And then the opening of the foot is made to be placed in a cushion.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	E senhal de la l'adveniment de la sua inflammation of the vena caused by cold or dampness; e le use this method to treat the affected area: e if you are treating a patient with a strong attack of pain, and the cause is the advection of blood in a limb, it suggests that the patient has an imbalance in their humors.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you have treated the foot, apply bandages to hold it in place.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are pains in the legs or joints, it is necessary to use a cushion and apply heat to the affected area.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain is severe, you should apply a hot cautery to the affected area, which would be treated with a cushion.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	If a doctor deems it necessary to treat the body's ailments, he should apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from these other veins they are applied to the body for pain in the legs or feet.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	Then you must treat the area where the intestine was opened with that poultice.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	When blood flows to the legs, it is customary for it to cause pain in the joints.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if this is what we have said about the treatment of gout.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when treating the condition of a worm infestation of the skin, it is called "Dejections due to cutaneous humors".
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	In some places, they call it a disease of the humors, but others call it gout, which is caused by an imbalance of the four humors in the body: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if there are bad humors in the stomach or intestines, they are treated by applying a cautery to their feet.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When there are pains in the body, the doctor will raise your hand to the head, to keep the pain away from the patient's legs (and the doctor would also hold their hand) while the patient keeps a cushion between their legs and another on their chest.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And if you wish to cure that which is on the foot, then use this method.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is pain in the body that are affected by the fire of the cautery, you must know that it is a cushion for the patient's liver.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return the patient's intestines to their proper place, and place a cushion on their feet.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the matter of the pain in the intestines caused by gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness moves through the body, affecting various parts.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you see, sir, that I have seen the pain of the second type in your legs, which are caused by other things than gout.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw that if the pain was in the veins of the leg, she would place her hand on the area to prevent the intestine from being exposed.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then apply cautery to that area for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then place a bandage on the patient's other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And place the cushion in the patient's body so that it is placed on their foot.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When the knee joint has been treated in this way, I have seen it work well for some patients.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	The patient's legs are being treated as if they were a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if you have already opened her up, and are thinking about applying a cautery to her body.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the intestine, do so carefully.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The “cushion” in Translation 3 refers to a cushion of herbs or other medicinal substances placed under the affected area to draw out the pain.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then, if you do not apply the other cushions to the patient's legs, it is customary to call it the second cause for using cushions in treating illness.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On treating gout.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are treated differently by doctors depending on their type, whether they have sharp points or are blunt, as well as three angles that are sharp,
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And thus if you are using the word "extraccio" to describe the removal of an affected part of the body, it seems the author is describing a situation where there is a potential for complications.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And when the patient's body needs to be cauterized, one places a cushion on their legs, so that they don't move and thus cause harm.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you see these signs, let the patient be given a name to the wound by the arrow, and another by the other signs, but only if necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If you are in pain from the plague, we will use a poultice to treat it.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the vessels that are near to the lungs are already full of foam and pus.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if it is the foot, then you should apply the cautery to the small intestine, e.g., another, not to the whole body, but only to the affected areas.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the arrow is in the stomach, then it is a sign that the cushion of the body is ill-placed.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	This is a tricky one! It seems like the sentence about the metrical translation you provided is actually a bit off in terms of meaning.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If there is another cause for the arrow to be removed from the bladder, the patient's legs will be cut, it is said that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The patient's body was affected by the venom or poison in the vein.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will show you the treatment for the illness caused by these arrows.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This refers to the cause of a man's ailment being in his nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When the patient has a pain in their legs, place cushions underneath them, and when applying cautery, be careful to avoid burning the skin.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Juizeu was diagnosed with a gout attack in their legs, they were taken care of by doctors, but if you are experiencing a fever, do not hesitate to seek medical attention.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if you have made a poultice for the feet, then apply a poultice to the patient's chest, and so the cautery is applied to the joint in order to relieve pain.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And if you want to cure a man by applying another arrow to his body, place a cushion under him and hold his body in that position.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if you have a wound on the back of your leg, then apply heat to the wound.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And if the woman has a pain in her abdomen, she should be treated by a skilled physician.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if there are other wounds on the body, apply the cushion to those wounds and keep the patient warm.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And you placed a cushion on the man's right leg, and he already had his bowels aching and his body was full of pain.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And if you have to use a cautery tool on the legs, it should be done after three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found the other arrow was for the body, and I placed a healing salve on them.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a plaster to soothe the location where the wound is.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to treat an ailment that affects the feet, it should be done in such a way that the cushion does not touch the skin directly.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then one should carefully place the cushion on the patient's legs or elsewhere.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And so you apply that treatment to their legs, which will be done with another medicine for the thigh area.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	When you apply pressure to the bandage on their legs, it will be applied to the skin.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And if the cartilage in the nose is damaged, they say it is due to a cause that is known as gout.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	E in this way, the patient's body will be purged of those humors that are hidden.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if the pain is severe, they will put you on a diet to reduce the inflammation.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not harmful to the body unless they are lodged in a joint.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to apply the cushion on the legs, then place it upon their chest, and make sure they don't move too much.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if the body's humors do not subside after a few days, it is considered necessary by doctors to use cauterization.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or to apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey the orders given to the surgeon, who will then use a subtle tool on the patient's legs for the operation.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow reaches the bone in the head, then death is certain; otherwise, it is customary for them to be treated with extractions.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not fired at the body, but rather lodged in the foot, it will remain there for some time.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The above English translation is inaccurate; it should be translated as: "If the pain persists or worsens, it is necessary to consider other causes, and not just blame it on the patient's stomach."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Mays la cònscience of the doctor is needed to cure le malaute.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if the arrow cannot be removed by the hand, they are to use heat to draw out the poison.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the legs for pain relief, use it if you wish; otherwise, you may use it on your feet.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And then if you must extract something from the patient's body, such as a bullet, use the tongs to remove the object.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	When it is not possible to cure the disease immediately, let it be treated for several days.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And so, if there's pain in their feet, they are treated by the doctor for that.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you can to cauterize the intestine or cushion where your hand is placed.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so that the pain in the legs may be lessened by the use of fire.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Then apply cold compresses to the affected area.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Then, if the pain is severe, apply forceps to the affected area.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is opened up in the bone, then you should apply cautery to that area.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And so it continues to be treated for alcus days.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the pain is in the foot, apply a cautery to that area.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	The physician will now treat the affected area with a cauterizing tool called a cauteri.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	When the arrow is pointed at them, they will be relieved if you apply something to their foot.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If your body is affected by a sickness that causes swelling and pain, then you are treating its surface.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, or near the leg, so that you can treat it.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	A form of tongs is used to apply the arrows to the affected area.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the pain be found in their limbs, let them be treated with fire by the surgeon.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And if you have a wound on the foot, apply a bandage to the affected area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This form of pain is known as "pain in the legs" or "the other kind of pain".
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of the body's shape at the legs, their surface, or the position of the leg.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And so that the patient's foot may be relieved from pain, it is necessary to apply a cushion to their legs and other treatments to address the underlying cause.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	And about bloodletting from the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And if there are other causes for the pain, such as inflammation in the veins, then apply cold poultices to the affected area.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	And for the patient's bowels to be saved from being affected by the other.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And if there are three veins in the foot, one for the wild gout; the other for the domestic gout; the third for the hip joint, which is a place where the pain of the sciatic is located.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	When the veins are inflamed or painful, apply the other treatments.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Then the patient's blood will be drawn from them by the doctor, and a bandage should be applied to the area around the ankle, and another to the spot on the foot where pain occurs.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet from the patient's thigh.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And apply a cautery to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the patient be adjusted by the two aforementioned cushions.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place your hand under the patient's legs to ensure they are properly healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already begun in the book, the treatment of them begins with their legs being treated by a cushion.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When pain occurs in the foot, two things are usually done to address it: a cauterization and applying a cushion under them.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	You can understand the meaning of what the patient feels or experiences: You have already seen if the patient has pain in their feet, another person must be present to feel their pulse.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And for the codena you should apply a cushion according to your need, and if it's necessary to make incisions on the legs, then use a fleubotomi.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the patient's legs are swollen or inflamed, apply a poultice to their feet for one hour.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already they are remembering the pain in their legs and feet.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And if it is necessary to bleed the vein in the forehead, that is what they will call a phlebotomy by doctors.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the nature of the patient's illness be it as it may, the quality of the treatment of the ailment depends on what kind of disease you have in mind.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	And keep the vein closed off from the touch, for it is painful.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And so you must apply heat to their feet when treating those suffering from the disease of the gout.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When there is a need to treat an eye infection or inflammation, it is customary to use cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is important for preventing infection.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then apply a bandage to their arm, using another bandage for the thigh.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if it is necessary to make a treatment for a fever, it should be applied to the area for an entire night.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the treatment for fever in the face by fire cupping is known to be a treatment for fevers in the nose.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And if the patient's body is opened up by means of bloodletting, apply a bandage to the area.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	This text describes how to perform a surgical procedure for treating pain caused by gout.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Mays le apply pressure to the foot with a cushion.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Then the quality of the health of the patient will be better for the physician.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And apply a cushion to the affected area in small amounts.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And if the patient's foot has been treated for a while, but the pain returns, it is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And you have already placed a cushion on the patient's chest, while they were still suffering from the effects of a cut to the veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The type of wound that causes pain in the feet is called gout.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If the patient has doubts about the nature of the pain, then a cautery should be used on the body.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And apply a cautery to those veins which are located in the lips, or other parts.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary for doctors to cut veins on the lip, when necessary, in order to treat gout.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And if the patient has gout, they will be treated by the physician for their ailments.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on the affected area, it should be done in such a way that the incision is clean and the wound heals properly.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then, for those parts of the body affected by the cold humors, you should apply it (the cushion) to the area.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the patient has an attack of gout, apply heat to the affected area; if they are being treated by cauterization, it is a common practice for doctors to place their hand on the limb of the patient.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that is why a medical practitioner must be present during these procedures.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This is a form of bloodletting, also known as a bloodletting method.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And apply heat to the body through the veins and nerves when they are affected by an excess of humors.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method for treating gout (a type of surgery) in the old way.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And you must apply a cauterization to the delicate veins if there are signs of delicate vein problems in the patient's foot.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Then apply a cauterizer to the veins, arms, and legs.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And if you want to be safe, one should apply the cautery to the patient's foot, but only if necessary.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there are signs of a visible abscess on their limbs, then apply a poultice to draw out the infection.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The bloodletting was done on the arms to reduce pain in the arms and legs.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Then, since the patient has an illness related to the limbs, a cushion should be placed on their legs if they have pain in the area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, place a cushion under their head.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the patient for several days with the use of this other cushion.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	When your blood has been chilled by cold, it is possible to get gout, so keep the affected area warm.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the leg, use a cushion on the thigh, but the patient needs to be positioned in such a way that they do not have a burn injury.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the pain in the legs will be difficult to treat because of the cushion on their foot.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The bloodletting should be performed on the arms, as we said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	This one is difficult to adjust to English directly but it can be interpreted as "And if it is hidden, a bloodletting will be performed on the thighs or other areas, which is usually a difficult cure."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if it is necessary to bleed a vein, one should use a cushion on the thighs.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	Leeches are applied to the head for bloodletting.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	If you wish to cauterize a patient's legs or feet, then use a pointed cautery; otherwise, do not.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And if the pain is in the foot, it is because it has been affected by a certain condition.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Mays empero means "But in men"
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if there are complications, they should be treated with great care.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first line means: "The other cushion is for the patient's illness" and refers to the bloodletting practice being performed on the leg, rather than the arm.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then make the necessary incisions for three days to remove the excess fluid from the body.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The time or place for performing bloodletting is not important.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The practice is to cauterize the patient's legs and feet, which are held down by cushions.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot or elsewhere, use another cushion for the feet.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And if you wish to treat those ailments with surgery, then it is necessary to cauterize the opening or the patient's body.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then consider applying a hot poultice to the affected area.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the legs, then place a cushion or cushion-like object under them.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	So perform phlebotomy on their feet, for that is where the bloodletting should be done.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	The animals have already been treated for animal ailments in the animals' limbs on that day.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if it's necessary to cauterize something, it is done by using the traditional methods.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Therefore, let the physician apply leeches to the patient's affected areas.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then place a cushion on the arm of the patient's leg, and apply the other to their arms.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the pain occurs in the legs, it is called constipation.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if there's pain in the legs, use another poultice to bring down the swelling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the patient's leg is swollen, apply the bloodletting to the veins as needed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if you cauterize the vein, then you hold a hot iron to the skin to make the incision bleed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the patient has a wound that requires lancing, let them be lanced, or if necessary, treat the inflammation with a cauterization.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area to bring relief to the patient's pain.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if you place a cushion on their legs when they are swollen, don't worry about the pain.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	When there is inflammation in the body, it is customary to apply a poultice to the affected area.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And they are best treated with oil by other means.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, in all wounds, a poultice of oil should be applied to those who are being cauterized.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	E if the patient has a large swelling in the location where the cautery was applied, apply a poultice of herbs to the affected area.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And apply heat to that vein (or other veins) using a hot iron.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you wish to stop the pain, use the poultice made of myrrh.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The basilica is where the surgeon places his hand during a fleubotomia.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so apply the cushion to the affected area, to stop the pain in your body.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And let the wound be cauterized so that it may heal.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And so, for those who are curious, we will translate the word "extra."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if you have to open the body to treat black blood, place your hand on the affected area.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if there is need to draw blood from the body, it is customary to perform venesection on the patient.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if you have pain in your legs, apply a cushion to them, and keep it covered.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to open the vein for surgery, it should be done by cutting, not by burning.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This practice, known as bloodletting by the ancients, was done to stop bleeding in the body.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then place a cushion under the patient's leg to prevent it from being affected.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, if necessary, place a cushion under them.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Then, if the patient has symptoms, you should perform bloodletting on the legs.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use for the treatment of syncope, the other causes are to be treated by opening them up.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If you want to treat a patient with a poultice, it is customary to call it gout.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays that the patient's arm should be bled for seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting, it is necessary to perform a second.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the second sentence:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays that when there are humors in the foot, the pain will be relieved by placing a cushion under the feet.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you are applying cautery to the patient's arm, apply it gently so as not to cause further pain with excessive force.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient's blood is drawn for treatment, it is customary to place a cushion under their legs.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	Gout affects the veins in the feet and causes pain.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	Then apply a hot poultice to the other arm if they are already suffering from an ailment caused by cold.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And if you have placed a cushion on their arms or legs, then apply the poultice to them.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the nature of bloodletting is to apply a cushion on their legs for healing.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And if there's tightness in the joints, which is what they call "strengths" (fleumbo) in the small intestine.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	You are placing the patient's body on another person's chest, and you are opening the cavity where they have a small intestine.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	E si es that the patient must be held back from the heat, then put your hand in the water.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	When the days are hot, they say you should put your feet in hot water and that's how to cure them.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And so apply your cauteries to the feet, and a bandage on their legs.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	When the right side of the body is affected by pain, it is customary for doctors to call it a case of jaundice in the right arm.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And its nature is to be a pain in the feet; if you want to treat that, apply warmth to their feet, and place a cushion under them, etc.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if the body's humors are too cold, and the pain spreads to the feet, then the patient should be treated with a cautery on their legs.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if it is necessary to repeat the hot water treatment, it should be done by placing a cushion under their hands, and another on their legs, so that you can see if the blood flow is stopped.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly if it is necessary to make a cut on the foot, one must be done below the knee, another on the leg, and another on the foot itself, which is the correct practice of the physician.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the left side be treated with an incision on the vein, and the left side is related to the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for the other parts of the body, it is done the same way.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And if the patient has an old wound or injury to their leg, use a cushion for support.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the pain that comes from the humors being present in the body is called "la qualitat" by doctors.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so you will cauterize the opening in their legs, and another will be used for the cushion.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	When the patient has pain in their legs, then place a cushion on the patient's knees and use a hot instrument to treat them if they have a fever.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if you need to apply cautery to the legs, apply it carefully and gently.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Mays if it is necessary to make points for the release of the humors from which the patient suffers.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, they should repeat the procedure on their arm; and another on their legs.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is similar to gout, then it should be called as such.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And if the sciatic vein is open, it is called sciatica.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the young person's veins are opened to let out their blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the disease that makes them suffer will be known.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when you apply the treatment, do so across the width of the body, as in the case of a cushion being placed under them.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And if the patient's foot becomes painful, leave the leg alone.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And when you have placed the cushion on their legs, let them be kept away from the body's nerves.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then apply a bandage to the leg after surgery.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the treatment of flatulence and the use of cushions in medicine.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And for corns, it is from the metatarsals to the toes.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The text suggests using cushions and other tools to treat the pain.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And if there is a need to treat the body with cautery, one must be careful not to burn the patient's feet.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if you are experiencing gout, apply cauterization to the affected area, which requires a cushion for the cushion to be applied on.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	The text describes applying treatment for gout, which is likely to be a medical condition related to pain in the limbs.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And for those who are not suffering from excess humor in their body or the other from which the pain originates, you can apply a cautery to the affected area.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when the air is cold, apply commands to the body.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if the patient's neck is affected by the pain, another place to be cauterized is the nape of their neck; otherwise, the head is affected.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This pain in the legs is caused by phlebotomy from the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And if he is a man who has a cold humor, put a cushion on his chest.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And it's by fire that the illness of the bones is known to be cured.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And if the pain continues in the legs, be careful to apply heat.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	This medical treatment uses cushions to treat pain through the application of alcohol and other techniques.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the pain is caused by the other or the cushion placed on the affected limb, then you should use a hot compress.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Glands are treated by physicians for pain in the limbs.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the cauterizer to treat the patient carefully so as not to cause a blood flow to the legs.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the lips, they should use a different type of cautery than when treating other conditions.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if it is necessary to apply spatulas to the feet, it is best done by a skilled practitioner.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And if you wish to draw blood from the two parts of the body, those are the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon to cauterize the flesh where the incision was made, because the pain may be relieved by placing a cushion under the patient's arms.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And place a cushion under the patient's legs.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you are skilled in the art of using a cauterizer, be careful with a gentle touch; otherwise, the pain will be severe.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Guessed Translation:  When applying poultices to all parts of the body, use small ones for the thighs and legs; and use a bandage for the treatment of his/her knees.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	For otherwise, if the cushion is placed on their legs, they are weak.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from them the young man has a cushion placed under his legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And if the cushion be placed on the body in such a way that it is applied to the patient's legs, e.g., the pain be caused by the joint being affected by the feet.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then apply a hot cautery to the cavity between the legs.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then apply a cushion on the patient's legs, gradually opening the intestine, and gently draw back the patient's limbs.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If you want to avoid having your body be afflicted by illness, you must cauterize the area where the pain occurs.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And tell the one who applies leeches to use a sharp tool to make more cuts if necessary.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there's swelling in the legs, apply gentle cauterization to the area.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When pain occurs in the legs or other parts of the body, it is customarily called...
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is too thick, perform a bloodletting on the third time you see the patient, as they may be suffering from the ailment of gout.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And then apply a cautery to their legs slowly.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you wish to draw out the pain by means of bloodletting, apply a cushion to his chest, use these other things for that purpose.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And here's the depth of the bloodletting, which is done only on the feet.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	When there is a need for treatment with a cushion, apply your ointment to protect the skin from the burning of the fire.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if it's a large intestine or colon, you can apply cautery to the other parts.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints and caused by cold humors, it is called gout.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The pain in the feet is caused by cold humors.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those who have large amounts of excess fluid (phlegm) in their body, they are to be treated with herbs, poultices, or cushions.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	You must treat the body with a hot cushion, and for that you need to be careful about applying the treatment.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	And you should apply a cushion to their legs and a hot poultice on the area to be cauterized.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the onset, consider if the patient is suffering from fever or pain in the limbs.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then apply heat to the body to draw out the humors.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if it is necessary to treat someone's feet, they should be treated with the same care as those who suffer from gout.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if the patient has a fever, they are to drink less.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E if they are necessary to treat the body with cauteri.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Perhaps it means: If the patient has an ailment that causes pain in their liver or another part of their body, then use a poultice and apply it to their liver, and so on for other ailments.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if you have to cauterize the foot or other areas for that matter, use the hot cautery on them, as well as those areas further up their leg, where the pain is most severe.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then he placed cushions on their legs to support them.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa when you burn a cushion to soothe their pain.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these applications should only be done with suction cups.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then apply the cautery to their legs.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The patient's illness is caused by hot humors, so apply a cautery to their legs.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es un tipo de coyssi palpably large, while other things are done to their legs, the other should be placed with the foot held down by a cushion.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located so that the other persons can see the patient's position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is on the legs of a patient, another fire-place for cautery.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if it is a severe case of inflammation; for example, when it affects the feet.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And they have put cupping glasses on their legs, and you place them on their feet.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of making a mark on the body with fire is that it is better to cauterize with wood than with hot wax.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	The doctor should place their hand on the area where the bloodletting was done to stop blood from flowing out of the body, and avoid the other uses of the word "tract" in the text.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And if the patient's legs are affected, repeat the process for the other leg as well.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then return the patient's intestines to their proper place if they have pain.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the way to treat it: use a cupping method to draw out the wind from the body, as this will make it better.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The patient's blood was drawn to treat the pain in their joints.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And if the condition is found in the patient's feet, they are called gout, because those joints are where the pain has been placed.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then if the patient's legs were spread apart, they are to be treated by applying cupping in the evening when there is pain at the time of day.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Then apply the cushion to their legs, and so on.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it's possible for the patient to be treated with a venesection, just use a cushion.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if there is still swelling after applying vinegar to the chest, you apply a cold compress to the affected area.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient has leg pain, apply leeches to that area.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	When blood is dried up, you apply cauteries to the affected area.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if you must use leeches, do so with care.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are used on the joints, they should be placed with fresh blood for them to be effective.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you are finished, apply aloe vera to the area.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the treatment of the disease called a tertia.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary for understanding dislocations in the body's joints.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O son the foot pains caused by excess of blood in the feet.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And so, when they are ill, the physicians treat them by applying cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	E si tu another placed a cushion under their legs.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then I have already described what is in my knowledge about it.
Capitol primier.	This refers to the beginning of the chapter in the original language's text.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And the rest of the body must be treated for pain in the legs and feet.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This text is a medieval medical treatise describing the use of cautery for treating ailments.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then apply a cauterization to the body where necessary, and another should be placed on the legs, for example, under their feet, if you are treating someone with a dislocated joint, or as they call it, a "dislocation."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you wish to treat them by applying heat to the joints, let it be done with herbs, and another treatment on the affected limb, which can be used for other ailments.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And so then apply a cautery to the affected part, and another cushion under the patient's chest.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	When gout is caused by internal coldness, place your hand over the area to prevent it from spreading further to the bones.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	If you have pain in your joints, which are swollen due to an excess of cold humors, it is gout.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs or feet, it should be done in the same way as the bones are treated with cautery.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	This man's leg was broken, but he needs the cushion to be placed beneath his leg as well as beneath his arms so that his hands can be kept warm.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And it is necessary for the patient's body to be treated with a hot iron cautery.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Mota diversitat de fractura on the patient's body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	When a patient's legs are injured, it is important to consider the specific type of injury and how it relates to the location on their body.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen a fracture in the leg, which they treated with a special method.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota, who is typically skilled in applying medical treatments to the body.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E another fracture is caused by the ancient Greeks.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if it is necessary to put the cushion back in their place, they will remember the pain they had suffered.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And if the patient has a joint pain, we call it gout.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The pain in the legs, and if there is swelling or pain in the feet, it is known as pain caused by gout, a common ailment.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there's no visible swelling or pain in the bones, you must apply a cushion to the area.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If your legs are swollen or have a slight crack, it's possible they are being affected by a more subtle ailment.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if you wish to treat a case of swelling, this ailment is called sciatica by doctors when it is in the legs, but it is not actually sciatica, and it should be treated with a cushion placed on their feet.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if the patient needs to be treated for a boil, let them stop using the word "gout" unless they are experiencing pain in their legs or feet.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And if the pain in the bone occurs more often when bloodletting is performed on the feet.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply a second cushion to the patient's legs, and on their legs.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If gout occurs in the bone or foot, you must apply cautery to two parts of the body; one on the injured area.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And so if you apply cautery to the intestine, it is necessary to cauterize the opening in order to cauterize the skin.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Then carefully place a cushion under their legs to prevent further injury.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then do you see that the patient's intestines are affected by the ailment, place a cushion on their legs to alleviate the pain.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then stop the pain from spreading to other parts of the body by applying another cautery.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The patient's legs are to be treated carefully in order to avoid pain during the process.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The flow of the passage is consistent with the idea that the speaker is describing how to treat the intestines in a medical context.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small, use a cloth to collect the blood.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Then you must apply heat to the thick parts of the body, such as the legs, with a cushion, which will not be enough to cover the whole foot.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And if there is pain in the joints of the patient's leg or foot, they should be treated with a pointed cautery on their affected limbs.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the area where the injury is, apply the point with a heated cautery iron on the affected area.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gently apply heat to the area of the fracture.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take one bandage to tie around their foot; then apply another bandage to the broken area.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then the physician should examine the patient for other causes if there is no other cause for the pain.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then, when using a cautery, place it on the affected area carefully so as to avoid burning healthy tissue.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And if they are made of wood, then they are wise.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	Then apply a bandage to the area to cover and protect the wound.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then you use a sharp tool to perform surgery on the patient's body, which are thick and strong.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And if you want to apply a cautery, use the cushion for a deeper incision on the foot.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	Then apply cautery to the affected area, and another cushion should be placed under the patient's legs.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Then return to the patient's abdomen.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You see, if the pain in the affected limb does not subside after a few days, you'll need to take their temperature.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This sentence seems to be describing a method of applying poultices (emplaustres) for medicinal purposes in a way that mimics the language of ancient medical texts.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And for the pain in the legs, the way to apply it is the same as for the pain of the other ailments.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you have already opened the space between the legs, then use a small cushion on their knees; but do not apply cauterization to the foot unless it is necessary for the patient.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Then use a poultice of a specific ingredient for this purpose, as it is needed when there are other signs of injury to the body.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This describes how to treat a patient suffering from a herniated bowel or hernia.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Then apply a cushion under their feet.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if you have to use a cushion, place it where it will be applied.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	It is customary to apply this poultice to the feet for restoration, and another cushion on their legs.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other methods for treating the ailment: apply fig tree sap and poppy seeds.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take an altea root, crushed, and mixed with honey and water, as needed for a poultice to treat a bone fracture, apply it to the affected area. If you wish to use it on other parts of the body, then take your hand away from the affected area.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if he is scalded, they are already called upon to treat him/her.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	When treating an ailment, one should consider the nature of the affected part.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	If you have already been infected by other diseases, it may be difficult to determine; but if the patient has a wound, treat the wound accordingly.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	The doctors call this pain, which they describe as a result of inflammation in the joints caused by injuries, gout, just like they would if it was a broken bone or other ailments we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	And thus begins the treatment for pain in the legs: apply a cushion to the area of pain.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If one has to deal with the pain caused by a bone that has been broken for several days, they should consider the amount of time since the injury when determining the treatment plan.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	Then apply pressure to the point where the pain is felt most strongly by the patient.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And so put a cushion on their leg, submerge the affected area in water for one hour, then apply a poultice to the affected area to soothe it; leave that poultice on their legs until after an hour.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is a stricture, you must first treat the affected area carefully.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then you should apply cautery to the affected area to avoid further complications.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the joint pain is gone, they can be called gout if it has been three or more days since the injury.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E ayusta en la body's other parts, you are accustomed to apply your hands in applying the cushion.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	This Latin-like sentence translates to "Yes, you should avoid placing a cushion on the fracture site" (assuming 'Mays' refers to 'Maybe' or 'Perhaps').
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If you're writing about a restoration at the beginning of the body auter, do it in another place, e.g., the limb was injured, or the patient has suffered a sprain and needs to be treated with hot compresses, but also for other uses, the books are for another purpose.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	For I have seen that the doctors are wrong to call it gout, but rather a pain in the foot.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of all fractures, the second chapter discusses those that occur in the leg.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	And the causes of fractures are diverse, as well as their effects.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And for the treatment of these two conditions, the patient needs to be given a hot poultice or compress on the affected areas.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This bone may be broken or fractured in one or more places; another way to say it is that the bone is called something else when it's a fracture in the leg.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	A fracture is a break in the bone, which is called a fracture of the bone on their feet, or legs.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if there's a fracture in the leg or foot, that's what you are here to treat.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply a heated iron to the affected area, or to similar areas on the legs.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if the pain is caused by these types of fractures, then apply cauterization to the separated parts.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And let the patient be healed by your cushion.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And then you know, all the types of fracture are known by the doctor's examination of the injury.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And if a wound is made on the bone, the pain will be felt in the feet, but they are kept warm by another servant.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Mays in the Latin-based languages you mentioned means "in the case of" or "concerning". The sentence refers to various symptoms related to a condition, likely indicating that "mays" is a term for an ailment affecting those parts of the body.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And when you have done so, they are to be treated in such a way that the treatment for the patient will be effective.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	In this case, the physician would typically call this condition gout.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you are a man, then use a cushion on the legs to prevent gout from occurring in the thighs.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	E si has been applied to the patient's body, then the pain in the legs should be treated as others are, but if the pain is on a limb, place it directly on the area of the injury.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if the patient has a cushion under their thighs, another on their legs.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you want to cauterize the flesh, keep the patient's body warm, for the disease will spread.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two types of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so the one way to treat them is by making an incision in the bone.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply the cauterized needle to the affected area.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And therefore, it is necessary to know which parts are affected by the disease.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And if the foot is injured, it is necessary to apply heat to the area above the knee and below the skin.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and firm, you should perform the procedure on them.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	This document prohibits the use of the term "circle" or "circle-like" to describe anything other than the pain caused by gout in the foot.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you should use this method on those parts of the body which are affected by the cold and damp humors.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Then, to prevent further complications, you would apply cautery to the area around the broken bone.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	E.g., When a wound is made on the foot for a medical procedure, the doctor would apply a cauterization technique to prevent complications.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you should keep in mind that which one's body is being cared for by the doctor.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so if you have gout, you must use cushions to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the area between the patient's legs, placed a cushion on their legs, and another on their chest.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is necessary to open the wound on the foot so that its opening can be seen by the patient, then it should be done carefully.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then return the intestine to its place with hot cautery, and put another cushion on the legs or joints, so they don't protrude; then you have a short-term pain that comes and goes.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And apply a hot compress to the area of the pain, treating it as gout in the legs.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When you have already found the cause of the ailment in a patient's body, and apply it to their legs, they will feel relief from the pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	When the bone is broken, the physician can use the cushion to apply pressure to the area where the wound is located.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And then apply the razors to remove the excess blood from the body.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	This is the place where the physician should apply treatment to the body, and they will use another to cauterize their legs or feet, e.g., a hot iron.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And thus, you have caused all those who are trained in this art to be amazed.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And now place a cushion on their legs, for the patient's sake.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When pain occurs in your second toe, you must apply a hot cautery to the legs, as well as the feet, in order to relieve it.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And lay a cushion on your hand to prevent the pain from spreading.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then administer these medicines to the patient, for this plague is in the legs.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And if you have applied a hot cautery to the head, the wound will be clean; but if it is the other way around, it is evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E therefore you must consider that the pain in the first place, e-t-on the foot's sole is treated by applying heat to the area with a cushion, and if needed, with other methods involving heat.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then if there are no other ailments, apply that which is placed on the legs, and that which is placed on the body.
Capitol .iii.	And so, when the intestine or other organs are affected by gout, les which is the disease that causes pain in the joints, and then apply heat to the feet.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On treating a broken foot.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	And if one of those bones that make up the body is broken, it is a practice to call it by the name of gout.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If a member's body is injured, then apply a cushion to that area.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if you are doing surgery on the legs or thighs, it is called the "other" by the surgeon.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If a joint is fractured in the most sovereign part of the body (the head), then do so in the way that the patient's head is protected by the cushion.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then you must use a tool to draw the parts.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible, restore the cushion to its position on the first day of a fracture.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	E put a cushion on the area where the pain is located.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And if it is necessary to make a poultice for a sickness, apply it to the afflicted part; let someone apply a poultice to the leg and place their hands on the area.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes the nose itself becomes congested, which is why a doctor should apply their hand to the patient's nose when they are treating a cold, in order that phlegm may not block the breath.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to use a cushion; instead, you can apply heat directly if needed.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there should be another time a swelling on the body, apply wax to the nose or legs.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there's a need to drain the blood from the chest, use flour and a poultice to draw it out.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	When joint pain arises from cold humors, it is called gout by doctors.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	Then apply heat to the nostrils, so that if the patient has a sickness in their legs, they will be relieved.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jaw is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	Another if there is no cushion under their feet.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so on, if the fracture is in the right leg, you place your left hand on the left side of the body.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	Then apply a gentle pull to bring the jaw back into alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And you have already placed a cushion so that it supports the bones, or rather on their legs, and on those bones with care for the next step.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And you should always prescribe rest for your patient.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you are concerned that something may be wrong with the patient's health, you should already have a plaster on their thighs for three days.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And if the body's bones are not displaced by that plaster cast, then it remains there, healing the fracture within three weeks; but if it is a plaster cast that is applied to this fracture, which is customary to call a fracture in the foot.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And then if the pain returns, treat it as we have described for other cases.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if there are fractures in the body, you will use a cushion to treat them.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the patient has a straight, narrow foot, then apply the heat to their leg in proportion to the need for cauterization.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the plaster to the affected area, and if necessary, further treatment for their ailment.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This is when a cushion should be used for the cure.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The bone in a leg or foot is broken in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Then apply a cauterization to the affected limb, or use a poultice to treat the pain in the patient's foot; which will be difficult for them to experience.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And if the patient is to have the operation performed on them, two ministers must be present, one to hold the leg and the other to hold their hands and prevent them from moving the affected limb.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent further injury.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if there is no cushion for them to sit on, you can apply a cushion under them; and apply another to the chest.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot apply cautery to the patient's shoulder, another cushion must be placed under their arm.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And then you will apply heat to their bones, starting with the bone near the upper part of the chest, and place your hand on the patient's shoulder.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you are treating an injury to the feet, place a cushion on their legs.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's body, you must use the cushion because the intestine is being treated for pain.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if you have a need to apply cautery, use a heated tool and place it on the intestine.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Mays the pain be felt in the legs, it is possible for the patient to have a diseased joint.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if you have opened the bone to extract the plague, which is the name for the doctors' treatment of the swollen joints.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there is little disruption, you can use a cushion to treat them.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if necessary.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the patient's legs are cauterized, they are said to be afflicted by a pain in the leg or foot.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so you will know if the patient has broken bones or other injuries.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the pain is in the shoulder, which is what happens with a painful condition called 'titillic', then apply it to the chest, where the patient's hands are placed.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if there is a problem with the ligaments, then don't open them up for at least twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply the bandage to the patient's body, and place the other on their legs, and the last one on their feet.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize and comfort them, they are cauterized and comforted for 28 days, and comforted by you in 28 days.
Capitol .vi.	The pain in the feet, if they are caused by an excess of cold humors, is called gout.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This is about restoring the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the location where the patient's illness is located.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the joint is broken, one must apply a bandage to its location and provide care in accordance with the nature of the injury.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then, apply a cushion to the area of the affected part of the body; and sometimes, you will need to put a poultice on a wound, and sometimes you may need to use a table as a surface.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If you are experiencing pain in your spatula, which could be caused by a lack of balance of humors, use a cautery to treat it.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then place a cushion under them.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot in its entirety, which you see has become soft, to be made strong and healed by the other, which you see has become inflamed, you must apply a cautery to the affected area, and place a cushion under the person's legs.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, and they will be supported.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The first spatula is used for the treatment of the lower leg, and then the spatula is used on the other parts of the body to treat them.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when the burning is over the body from which it is customary to call them by the name of gout.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you must treat them, make sure to use a hot iron on the surface of the affected area for the treatment of gout.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the treatment of foot injuries.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot has been treated with a cauterization tool.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then apply another cushion to the legs and be careful not to burn them.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, then place your hand on their chest and do not let them move; instead, tie the other side of the body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Apply a poultice made of wool or linen and use a specific type of bandage for wounds on the feet.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if the pain is in the feet, it is called a cure for the feet.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And for the restoration of the coasts when they are damaged.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Here comes the first line:
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And when joint pain occurs in the legs, it is customarily called arthritis on the feet.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	Do as the doctor's instructions say, if they are treating a cushion of the joint pain.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And then if the pain is in the bones, apply a cushion to the area as described.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And if you are suffering from pain in the legs, they will be called gout by its use of the word "legs".
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Gout causes swelling in the legs.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And if it is necessary to make points on the body, there will be pain in the legs, and the pain will be severe.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they apply leeches to the patient's limbs to treat their swelling.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place your hand on the patient's body to prevent them from being inflamed with pain.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if you have to use a hot iron to burn them out, so that the pain might be relieved by cauterizing.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area so that the plague can be treated.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if the intestine is inflamed, then apply a hot poultice to the area.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the injured part, apply it to their leg(s) once they are healed.
Capitol .ix.	This is the ninth chapter.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This refers to a surgical procedure for treating a wound or hernia in the spine.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the limbs, it should be applied to the legs and spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	E if you are experiencing pain in your joints, it is advisable to use a cushion on the legs or chest of the patient.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you are treating the pain in the foot, the pain should be treated as gout.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you want to know if they are suffering from a disease called spondils (a type of gout).
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	This translates to:
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if it's not due to any of those causes, then the cause is less likely to be the cause of their pain.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if the intestine or cushion should be applied to the area where the pain is felt in the legs, then it is called gout.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply a poultice, use one of the comforting and stimulating kind; apply it to the affected area, and place a cushion on their legs for warmth.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's foot due to an injury, it should be covered with a bandage.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If you need to set bones or use cauteries on the limbs, you should do so carefully.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a poultice to it and cauterize the spot where you feel the pain.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the treatment for gout.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if the joints are affected by cold pain that causes inflammation, then apply a poultice to the area where the pain is, and place a bandage over the area.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Then you are placing your hand on the patient's body over the fracture to hold the patient's hands.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	When it comes to the patient's legs, if you need to cauterize, it must be returned to its natural position after being treated with a cushion.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then place a cushion on their chest to ease the pain.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E then apply a hot cautery to the patient's legs or other parts.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The patient's condition is called gout.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	From the provided context, the text appears to be describing medical procedures or treatments.  The first guess for the sentence in question is:
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Then treat the feet as they are painful.
Capitol .xi.	The following are three possible translations of "Capitol .xi." into English:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	This is where you would normally place your hand on the patient's legs and apply a cushion to their leg or thigh, to help with the healing process of a fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	When the surgeon has completed his work on the shoulder, he will then apply a cushion to the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then you restore the joint to its usual place.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Two extremities should be placed on their hands to prevent them from moving.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if it is an open wound, the patient's leg should be treated with a different type of cautery.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if there is a need to adjust the patient's treatment for severe pain, they should be treated in accordance with their condition.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if there's another ailment, and place a cushion on their leg, you must apply this one to the body part where they have the other ailment, applying to the wound or the affected area, but not to the foot.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to make sure the patient has no humors in their legs or feet, apply leeches to their foot.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the muscle is injured, treat it with cauterization to prevent the injury from worsening.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Then if the wound is near the foot, another bandage should be placed on that spot.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice on their joints.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays, if needed, you should apply a poultice to the affected area and keep the patient's blood humors flowing freely, and use a hot needle to treat their ailment.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	A cushion should be applied to the foot for relief and a bandage on the wound.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then you should cover the wound on the patient's legs or arms, so they don't move to cause further pain.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Perhaps you've used a hot poultice for pain relief?
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you place a cushion on their legs so that they don't move it too much, because if it is moved too much, it will cause pain to the patient's body.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then place a strength on their legs, and then put another on the hands, which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And then you have put in place the cushion for your feet.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when it is necessary for the patient to experience pain, they are going to be burned by a cautery.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see a pain in the legs as well as a place for the patient's feet, then treat them accordingly.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply a cushion to the legs, as described, if you think a cautery will be needed for the patient's condition.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And you should consider the patient's leg in all its parts for three days, so that the pain may not worsen.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays three days should pass before you release the cushion.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	The patient should be treated in a relaxed state to ensure their stomach and bowels are comfortable.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And the cushion will keep the intestine from being inflamed.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Then place a cushion on their legs, so you can gently hold the patient's feet.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The first line means: "If the patient has pain in their foot for more than 40 days"
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe, it will take two months to heal.
Capitol .xii.	The other cushions are for the legs or the feet.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a bandage or sling to the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The patient's legs are to be covered in cushions.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so the patient's pain is treated by the use of cautery on their legs or feet.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The doctors will say it is a mild case if they are able to fix it back together easily.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fire is broken, that is, the bone is fractured in the case of gout.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And two bones are being broken in the legs.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs or feet, a cushion should be placed under the patient’s legs when performing surgery.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When the fire is hot, you must apply a cauterizer to treat it with more force.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two focals are together, then you must cauterize them.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you are going to use cautery on a patient, apply it to the affected area, which is usually in the leg, and place a cushion under them for support.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And for the rest of the treatment, let the other cushions be placed in front of them, as needed, in order to treat their ailment.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And another has placed a cushion on their chest, so as to provide support for them.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And place the bones back in their original positions as best as possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if your body's shape is out of place, use other methods to help put the pain in its proper place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you hope to heal the patient through cauterization, apply the treatment we previously mentioned, using a hot iron on their legs and a cold treatment elsewhere on the body.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	So if there is a wound on their legs you should apply a bandage to the injured area.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The patient's condition is such that they are likely to have gout at the beginning.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you will know that the patient has been healed by the stars, as it were, when they are well-disposed, or in good condition.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Et si el dolor tornava a sorgir in las parts baixes del cors, pausa una mica la cushion on their knees.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And when the bandages are applied to the patient's limbs, they should be soft and smooth, not rough or harsh.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the leg and the foot as one.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if you apply a cautery to the body, it is necessary to use a hot cautery when it's needed for a wound.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the cushion be placed on their legs.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Translation: Then, even if the patient’s pain is alleviated by the use of a cauterizing tool on the legs, the physician should still be cautious.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for a few days to treat it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays (If) the pain is caused by something other than gout, it is customary to apply it to their legs or thighs.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And put another cushion under them to help them sleep in peace.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if you know that the intestine will be healed or not in a few days, it is important to do so as carefully as possible.
Capitol .xiii.	The text shall be written down later in a more complete form.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if the patient has pain in their limbs, then use a cushion to support the legs.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the pain caused by the gouty inflammation is in the joints of the foot.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if a patient has gout, they should have their pain treated by placing a cushion under them on their legs.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the doctor applies the cushion to the affected area.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a poultice and bandages to the affected area; if necessary, use a cushion and wrap it with linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When the wound is deep, cover it with cloth to protect the patient's legs; otherwise, cauterize the wound.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if you are making points on the body, then it is necessary to make them in the right place; for example, on the legs or the hand should be used, and let the patient's foot be covered with a cushion.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if the injury is outside, apply cauterization to the affected area, like applying it to the injured leg.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the bone is broken in the toe, apply a cushion to the foot and then elevate it to avoid further injury.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	When other fractures are made in the body or on their fingers, it is called gout.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	E consider the following for your treatment: e to prevent complications — am coveys a cushion under their legs, but they are not to be used in case of a problem.
Capitol .xiv.	The physician may use various methods to treat the patient, but they must be careful to avoid excessive bleeding.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of a broken bone in the leg.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones are broken by the cold in the other parts of the body.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient's condition is so severe that they are experiencing pain in their feet, which doctors call a "lively" version of gout.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then apply a splint to the broken bone, so as to hold it in place.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When the doctors see that the other parts of the body are affected by the disease, they call it gout.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Aprop es que la dolor no ye en el otro lugar.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the physician should apply a cushion to the affected area and treat the patient accordingly.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	Mays the swelling subside, then treat the wound on your patient's foot.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a bandage to secure the patient's leg; and place a cushion on their chest.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And when one has opened the space between the bones (of the leg), one must carefully place a cushion there.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And if it is necessary to apply a cauterized tool to the affected area, and that's what you should do.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then the patient's bowels were opened and cleansed by means of liaments (ligatures) applied to their legs and another on their feet.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on the legs of the patient so that one cushion supports each foot.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area to treat the infected body part.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you shall cauterize the leg bones, which are the ones that will be affected by the inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And another use another cushion on their legs, and one more to hold them together.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	>But in that manner you restore it, if they are restored, only then can you call them a cushion or other remedies for gout.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if he has been ill for more than forty days, or less, it is necessary to consider the nature of his illness.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	This refers to restoring something to its proper place.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	This is the first part of your problem, which translates to:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply cauterization to the leg, but only if the patient has a fracture or injury in the affected area, for which you are using the other cushions for.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then the patient's intestines are to be brought back together, but only if it's necessary because of the pain they caused.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And thus he must apply a poultice and use it to treat the affected joint.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then they are considered to be the cause of pain in the legs, which you can see are covered with cushions, as needed for those who have been injured by a blow.
Capitol .xvi.	This is a Latin text, so I'll provide the English translation as it relates to the meaning of the provided Latin-like translations:
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And treat the patient's leg with a cushion.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The first part of the text translates to:
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if you are treating one of the species of the body's two parts, then it is customary to treat them with one hand on their arm.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if one or more members are present in the patient's body, they are to be treated with cautery on the affected limb.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient's leg or foot bones are affected, those are the most common areas for pain to be felt.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is bone pain, it is customary to call it gout.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then place cushions on each leg to prevent them from becoming further inflamed.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the leg has been wounded, it is better to be treated by a doctor.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When the body is in pain, one must apply the cushion to the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, apply cushions on both sides.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place a cushion under each foot to prevent the intestine from being affected by the cold.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then place a cushion under them, as needed to support the leg.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And physicians often call a fracture a disease that affects the legs, but also sometimes use the term for other ailments.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then cauterize the patient's affected area, if necessary to stop the spreading of gout (a cushion of inflammation) then you must apply the cautery.
Capitol .xvii.	When the pain of gout affects the joints of the limbs, it is called "podagra" by doctors.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And then placed a cushion on their legs.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Then there are no longer to be found fractures in the foot.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then you have already prepared the body for the operation.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on the elevated leg and apply pressure to the affected area.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area and hold their legs open.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then place a cushion on them, and keep their legs wrapped up.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if it lasts three or four days, then you will use cauterization on them.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	This is a common area for pain to reside, but the intestine must be kept in its place.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place your hand on the affected area to prevent gout.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	This is a difficult task as you've provided only a single, fragmented sentence. It seems like there might be some typos in the text.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And so that the patient does not forget to be cautious about the causes which lead to this condition when they occur in others.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	This treatment for wounds on the feet is best done by someone skilled.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When a woman's bowels are inflamed, it is known as a female-specific condition.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And thus the midwife will put her hand on the woman's knee to check if she is experiencing pain.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place a cushion on the patient's body and let them urinate freely.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And so for seven days or thereabouts, they would apply it to the patient's legs.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you're treating them, use a canula to drain the excess fluid from the wound; then apply a cushion to the area.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When it heals, it's already been treated as it should be.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if a bone is broken in the leg, you should use a hot cautery to treat it.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And es una coyssi (it means "and a thing") et the body's humors are not hidden in these fractures, but rather these fractures are usually caused by an imbalance of the humors near the bone.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, et cetera.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Then let your hand be placed on their leg.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The first line translates to: **It is convenient for a patient who has already been diagnosed with a fracture in their foot**.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then if the patient has a cushion to protect them from the plague, they should be treated as for the other types of humors.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And if it's necessary to open the wound on their leg, let it drain and form a poultice.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	When there are boils on the thighs, let them be treated by applying a hot cautery to the area between the third and fourth days, but wait until the seventh day to drain them.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Mayst thou apply a cushion to their legs.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays es the patient for whom you are making the points; a member of the medical profession must hold the joint in place.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, this is how they should be treated:  "The patient must have a cushion placed under their hands."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Apply heat to the affected areas; for other cases, use another tool specifically designed for that purpose.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then, carefully place the cushion under their legs.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then you would cauterize the other one.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if the patient's legs are elevated above their body, the pain will be felt in the limbs and chest.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then you can apply your hands to their legs for healing.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then cover the broken leg area so that the wound doesn't become inflamed.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	When it is difficult for you to reduce the swelling in the patient's foot, then use a cushion on their legs to support them.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located?
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the bone is returned to its natural position, it will be painful for the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And if you are treating someone for gout, make sure to apply a cushion soaked in vinegar or something similar to the affected area.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And if you need to apply the cautery, leave the bandages on the legs open.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area to protect the patient from the plague (which is what causes gout to be so painful).
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if you have to apply cauterization, make sure to use a different technique for the legs.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then use a hard cloth to press against the affected area in order to prevent further injury.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When a doctor sees an inflammation or pain in the body's parts, that he treats to restore the condition of the body to its natural state.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Therefore, apply a poultice to the affected area.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	You've already tried to treat the plague, but now you have to apply it again to the patient's arms and another person has to be present to hold the patient's hands.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And if you have to remove something from the body that has been caused by humor, you should apply a hot compress to the affected area.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When a doctor has to make a decision, their judgment is based on experience and knowledge.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And so you can treat the pain with a hot compress to open the pores of the skin on the foot.
Capitol .xx.	"Then, apply cautery to the affected area."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The treatment of wounds in case of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This phrase describes using their hands to treat the patient's ailment by placing them on the legs or other affected areas.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	and apply poultices to the affected area or use cautery if it is recent pain that affects the joints, and apply a cushion on the new growth to soothe the pain of the recent growth and apply a cushion
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	E aprouve the pain of a lead poultice applied to the legs; a pain that is often experienced in gout.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays is the name used by doctors for those whose intestines are inflamed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Then restore the bones to their proper place in the leg, and then put them back in.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	And if there are many causes for the pain in the chest, they have to be treated carefully, because the problem may be caused by various factors.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	This line should be translated as:
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area so it doesn't spread further.
Capitol .xxii.	Another translation for "Capitol .xxii." is "Chapter 22".
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And when bones are broken, treat them surgically and another cushion on their chest, so that the pain may be prevented from spreading.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If a doctor has allowed the patient to have their broken bone treated, make sure that the bone is not broken in a way that would prevent it from being healed by a cautery.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a very difficult task as I need more context to accurately translate. The phrase "Mays ja so statz" suggests "in our time" or "today", but without knowing what "motz" refers to in the context of this treatise, I cannot provide a complete translation.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And there are many remedies for recent foot pain, such as gouty pains that are treated by the application of poultice made from herbs.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And so if there are no other remedies for the pain in the legs that are available.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if the person has been diagnosed with a cautery wound, you should apply a poultice to it, while a cushion is placed on their thighs and the patient is given something to soothe the pain.
Capitol .xxiii.	The body is being treated for gout by applying a cushion to the legs and using another method to hold the patient's hands.
De sermo en dislocacio.	This is Latin for "on speech and dislocation".
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation in the legs can be painful and cause large, debilitating injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when there is a dislocation, the other two are for cushioning the affected area, while the third one is used to reduce the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, you should apply a cushion to the legs, so they don't open up on them, and do the same to the body, with another cushion under their chest.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When the bloodletting is done on the foot, it's covered by a poultice.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And place a cushion on their legs, and for them to be treated by other means.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	E si est'e que se per yeu to make an incision in the foot, you must first reduce the dislocation according to the method used by physicians.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And then apply the cushion to the affected body part.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Apply a cushion to the jaw while applying treatment.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	E' una forma de gota.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the pain is less severe, gout is less likely to be the cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If a dislocation is complete, then it is necessary to apply a reduction to the joint.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then cauterize the dislocated joint with the doctor applying pressure to keep the patient still.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When the pain is severe, warm compresses and water will be applied to their legs and hands, then apply another poultice of the same.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so, when you need to treat the pain in their foot, use a cushion for that purpose.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if he suffers from pain in his legs, he will have to be treated by someone who can handle the pain.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if you are administering to the sick, they are already in need of a cure.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to keep two mandibles in place for some time, lehoras you will cause anger and pain in the patient's feet, and other remedies are needed.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you have opened the body (for healing) it is important to use appropriate methods for closing the incision.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And now place your hand on their shoulder to help the patient's body be protected from injury.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fork in the road is not always a sign of a choice to be made; sometimes it is just a place where the roads continue onward.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And if the patient's foot is swollen, then they should be treated by a doctor.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And thus the patient will be treated for their illness.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply that cushion to their legs, and hold them in place.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the sickness be with you, may your hands be upon them.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if you are a doctor, command the patient to be still and rest.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And then that servant will be returned to its natural position.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop (This phrase translates to "and then" or "and in turn," which would make sense when combined with the translation of the following sentences.)
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that it is by the action of the gouty humors that the other meaning of the word "gout" applies to the condition of the foot known as "gouts".
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it be dislocated by the back; and the second be it placed under their hands, another cushion behind them, and another on the other side, so that it may be set right.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And in many cases, gout causes pain en la parte of the body, where there are few muscles, it is difficult to treat.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Some men experience pain when they have gout, which is treated with cautery.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you have already cured the other ailment, but there are others.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	Then treat it as a dislocated joint, you should place your hand on their foot to prevent them from moving.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply cold compresses to the affected area, and avoid contact with the skin.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, make a small reduction if it's a fresh dislocation and the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister carefully tends to the cushion's althoug the patient's legs, he/she gently elevates their leg and places a cushion on their knee to rest upon.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps if the pain is in their legs, it's best to use a cushion for the patient.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then you will apply wool bandages to the wounds of the legs and feet.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place a cushion under the bed of the patient's foot, to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if leavings are light, they may be used to apply pressure on their legs.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so the patient should be laid down;  the cushion placed under their body, and a pillow upon his chest to protect the skin, but the other methods are too painful for him.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling by making incisions, they should use cautery on their legs.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Then apply a cloth to the wound on the legs, to prevent them from becoming infected.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then apply the treatment to the affected area, leaving the cushion for the patient's legs and another to their foot, ensuring the patient feels comfortable.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if you need to apply cauterization, do so with a cushion placed on their scale, for example, the other leg is extended to be treated.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the filling is placed on the patient's legs, apply the poultice for seven days, but if it is not cured by then, use another method to treat the disease.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if the patient's illness is mild, they are already comforted by the treatment.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then use a cushion to support the patient's food while another person supports their legs and the physician attends to them.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	See Translation 2.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if at the end of seven days, if the pain persists, it is treated as other ailments are.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The meaning of the text is ambiguous, but it likely refers to treating a dislocated joint or body part using a cautery tool.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if that other pain in the intestine needs to be cured, apply a bandage on the area after cauterization.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And when the illness has subsided, allow the patient to move freely again.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	This refers to setting a bone or joint back in place after it has been dislocated.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	And another way to say this is that the joint of the body allowing movement is dislocated, and you are able to return it by manipulating the bone structure around it.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then call upon the other servant to apply heat to their bowels as a poultice.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	This is a recipe for making poultices for gout, which was a common ailment in medieval times.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the pain is in the legs, then the patient has another word for it.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if it doesn't reduce, you should use strong force to pull it back.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And they have two ministers to their body.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the arm or leg, apply a bandage to their limbs.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician applies force to the joint with his hand, he will help those things which cause a loosening of the tension on the joint to be put back in;  and he placed a cushion under the patient’s legs.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then apply what you can to relieve the pain in the patient's legs and feet, which are swollen from gout.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	You have already placed a cushion under them, so if there are no other signs of illness in the patient's legs, they must be treated with a cautery.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	This refers to the process of applying a cushion and possibly bandages to a person's legs and thighs, which I believe is an old-fashioned way of saying: "When dealing with a painful joint, such as in the case of gout, you should apply a poultice and keep it from being disturbed for several days."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you need to treat a patient for the disease, the first step is to apply a poultice.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And another [person] we place a cushion under them, and then apply another to their legs.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then place your hand on their arm, for when they are in pain, it is already the way to apply a cautery.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want to stop a patient's intestine from protruding, you should use a cushion on their legs, which will prevent them from feeling pain in their feet.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Another cure for those suffering from dislocation.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the foot has been injured, it is customary to place cushions on it.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if you are a doctor, and there is a need to reduce a dislocation in the leg, that is to say, that he puts the bones back into place, so that the other cushions do not have to be used.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	When first aid is needed for the foot, the doctor should apply a cushion to the affected area to prevent further injury.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so it is good if you have already treated them for their ailment; otherwise, let it be, because they are already being treated by others.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	And then the other parts of the body were to be treated; in particular, the injured leg needs treatment.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And if they are experiencing illness, apply a cushion to their feet for 5 days.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to relieve the pain, and gently massage the affected area.
Capitol .xxix.	In the first chapter of the medical treatise, we learn that the condition known as "gutta" was often referred to as "gout" by physicians.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And so, concerning the treatment of dislocations of the fingers, it is thus done.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	And sometimes the bloodletting is done on the legs.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	Then apply a poultice to the affected part.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then place your hand on their head to prevent them from swelling.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then he placed a cushion under his knees.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it's necessary to give someone a hot bath, the person should have a towel nearby.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And so, if the patient has a dislocated body part, apply it to their chest and hold it there, keeping it in place.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And if it is customary to call it gout when it happens in other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Here is the translation of the given text:
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the other's perspective, this sentence refers to treating a person for a condition affecting their spine (specifically, a dislocation).
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then if you can't find a cure in your knowledge, then use a hot iron to treat the patient's body and another to apply heat to the affected area.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the other four legs are also affected by the swelling, which affects the patient's will.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is known as "the cold has seized" the ailment.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Gout is when the body's humors are cold and cause pain in the joints, especially in the feet.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in the past, doctors have found many ways to treat it, but they are long gone.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And if you want to treat the foot, then put your hand on the patient's foot.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Then the pain in the feet is due to a cold humor, and those who are suffering from it should be treated with cautery applied to the affected area.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And then use your hands to hold the patient steady.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if a doctor applies cautery to the foot, they should place a cushion on which to rest their hand near the head of the patient, where the other is located at the joint.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then the minister will burn the leg and put a cushion on their legs; the other leg will be operated on by a second doctor, while the patient's body is heated by the first.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And so it is on the head that the cushion should be placed under the patient's body, and their legs should be kept from being affected by gout in the other ways.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you are suffering from gout, apply the cauterizer to the affected area.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor, having adjusted the patient's legs, then sits by their side while holding them still.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if the body does not have that much space, it is called an improper form of the ailment.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And so the patient's pain in the table is caused by something else, a cushion to protect the skin on the leg.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want to heal them, apply a hot poultice to the affected area, and use two cushions for their cushion.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When the patient's body is affected by pain in the legs or feet, it is called podagra.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in the extremitat are three lengths of the same length.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then place a cushion on the patient's body to be treated with the cautery tool that is used for such purposes.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And so you must apply the treatment for gout to their legs, as well as use other methods.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how you prepare for a surgical procedure.
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice of flaxseed to the affected area.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to heal from a delicate ailment, use a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If the pain persists despite the treatment, apply remedies to the affected area for a prolonged period, as long as it takes to heal; leeches can be used for this purpose, applying them to the location of the ailment.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When a joint has been treated for dislocation, and the pain persists, be careful when using this medicine, as it may cause death in the patient.
Capitol .xxxi.	The patient's legs are being cauterized.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	And then if there are humors in the joint, a doctor would treat it as a dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Laoranza’s, which is only possible with the use of a cautery on those parts, are called laoranza by doctors.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	Then apply the proper placement of your hands on the body can be applied to four areas.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And if the foot is swollen, apply a poultice to the major joints, and if the pain is in the limbs, treat them as one would treat the larger joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And if a bone in the leg of the patient has been dislocated by the pain, you should set the limb back into place, and then put a cushion under it, so that the affected area will be supported.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if the first sign appears, that's when you should apply the cushion to the patient's body, and the other treatment for the other ailments.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When joint pain arises in the body, and pain arises in the foot, which was not caused by the above-mentioned ailments but rather by something else, then they should be treated as if the patient had gout.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The pain in their limbs is caused by the body's bad humors, and they should be treated with a cautery applied to the leg and a cushion placed under the patient's leg to prevent swelling, and if the patient has any pain in the area of the knee, it will be known as a symptom of the dislocated part.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May's reduccio be that which you consider.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Mays in that case, you should apply cautery to the affected area and keep it covered for recent dislocatio or other injuries.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	And if you need to apply heat to the affected area, it's best to use another cushion on the abdomen; a skilled healer will know where to place it.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let there be applied to the patient's legs or feet a cushion behind them, and another in front of them.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And he should place his hand on the patient's body, which would be hanging to let the blood flow freely through the body.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of pain affects all four limbs.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to the place we have indicated, it is necessary for them to be burned.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	When pain is applied to the thigh, they should be given a cushion for le comfort.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And if it is necessary to place another cushion on their chest, the first thing to do is return the intestine to its place, and then you can put a cushion on it.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And if you have already opened the body part to be healed, then that type of pain is called gout.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout occurs in the toes, it is treated by cauterization, apply a strong bandage to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be known that there are four humors.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient, it should be done on their legs, and two assistants are needed.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so you should use a young man to place a cushion under the patient's feet, because the intestine will be relieved.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area, as instructed by the doctor.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then one must have two parts of the body to be treated: the one who is ill and the one who is being cauterized.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The other name for the doctor's cure for gout is called "other" in English.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if it is hot or swollen, apply a bandage over it carefully; if it is cold, they will be able to tell you have done it correctly by the way the patient's body reacts.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	When there are too many doctors, it is customary to call it gout if they can't make a diagnosis, so you need another cushion.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the leg, use the right hand to apply a cushion on his other leg.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E si la malatia es de natura de l’eyssament, e se causen per causa dura:
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When joint pain occurs in the body, it is customary to apply a compress to the affected area.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And when the pain is in the feet — if the patient has a cushion under them, apply heat to the area until the affected areas are healed.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And compare the leg to the other leg.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And when the body has been infiltrated by something that causes pain, then you should let it be left to fester, it says.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And so you see, if there is any cause for swelling, apply your cushion to the affected area for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their legs, the patient should be treated for a few days until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body that lead to pain in the joints, particularly in the feet.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And then treat the dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The patient suffers from a condition that causes pain in their feet, which doctors call "gout".
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The patient's foot has been dislocated, but they are able to be moved and repositioned.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	Then to treat it with two poultices: one on the body and one on the chest.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When your leg is exposed to cold, apply heat to the affected area and place your hand on it to prevent further pain.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply a bandage to the patient's affected area for three or four days.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	E'n lacus
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If a pain in the limbs arises from the use of cold cauteries, it is called a “cold” by doctors.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Another option for translating the text could be: "And if you want to apply a treatment to the affected area of the body (if necessary), and if the patient's condition requires cauterization, then perform it with a pointed cautery."
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply another poultice to the area where the joint pain occurs, but only after the patient has been put on the couch or bed.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And that which is called a cauterization is when the physician cauterizes the affected area.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The patient should be treated with cauterization if they have mild gout.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	The translation for the text you provided is likely: "But in the treatment of the patient who has been dislocated by another (a cushion being placed on their legs) while a doctor attends to them."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the big toe, you must do so on their right side, while holding their left hand.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then apply your hand to their legs, and let it be applied to the body in two places, the right one being the area of the pain.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And if a vein or artery is treated as described above.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And if it is necessary to make cushions on the leg, you should do it with a cushion.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And then, if you return to it in two days, that will be enough.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si a tu be careful to cover the wound if you have to make incisions on the legs of the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs, and if the pain arises from the body's humors, which are causing illness in the area where the bloodletting should be done, you should hold a cloth over the area.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if the patient's leg is opened up, then the cushion is placed under their foot.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then apply the bandage to the affected limb, so that the pain in the feet doesn't spread.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you have a strong desire for something, and your stomach hurts, the doctors say it is called gout.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two days if the pain is caused by cold humors.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then place a cushion under their legs to support them.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	This describes someone who has been diagnosed with gout.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if they are affected by an abscess, then it should be treated with a poultice, but only after the inflammation has subsided, because the heat will make the pain worse.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	This treatment will show you how to fix a dislocation in your finger.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When a person's leg is injured, treat it with other cushions on their legs and feet.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if you are a doctor, treat the patient's pain by opening the wound with a needle to drain it.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent the inflammation from spreading.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient has been cauterized, let them rest for three days.
Capitol .xxxv.	This sentence appears to be from a text in a language resembling French or Italian, which is likely the context for your ".xxxv." prompt.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Some joints are dislocated and others are affected by plague.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When the cold humors are on the legs of the patient, death will be the result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	A good physician will know by the symptoms of the illness if they are dealing with a true case of gout.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply the cushion to their legs and feet.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	The patient should have a hot compress applied to the affected area if they have a cold humors.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if there is dislocation or fracture in the bones, then you have to treat them with the remedies we use for gout.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs and foot to prevent the pain from spreading.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi fine, the patient's condition is such that a physician should be called.
Amen.	Amen.
